















p r >/, r r>*« 



V, ^y?y ‘''MiPMh'}. 

^ _ra r f \:mrrjrjrv''fin< 



:.';S:Uf; 



- •'3 -"':; ■■ i"-f '*-/ '^.■•»;''^'j 






k*.". . •-.t 

>»rn 



-:-Cr.’'.jrj'"-' 



K ..;- ' 



r^- 






-' *■ f if' .'•-•' '^’C ■ »* 



,;r' 



’. - f yv-v,y/>v -••>>;’. 3 '/; V ■ - - 

: vr; J!;^’v.j;j/:. •<-:-; - : :p, -v- 







MANILA 

bureau of printing 
1924 






EDITOR'S NOTE 



Tq apprise the world of affairs concerning the Philip- 
pine Islands we are publishing a series of pamphlets 
under the general heading, Philippine Information 
Pamphlets. We offer £is the first of the series a com- 
pilation of the addresses of Hon. Manuel L. Quezon, 
President of the Philippine Senate, the most salimt 
features of his utterances being presented to enable 
the reader to grasp what he has said and sustained 
in relation to our campaign for independence. 

President Quezon is gifted as it were with the ability 
—and this is admitted even by his bitterest opponents — 
to touch upon the transcendental and delicate problems 
of his country in that frank and direct manner distinc- 
tively his own. His words are stamped with the author- 
ity of the chosen leader that he is of the Filipino people. 
To quote him, these are “no perfunctory words,” nor 
are they empty rhetorical vanities. They are a com- 
pendium of his political philosophy expounded in these 
last fourteen years of his public career and in great 
moments when he had to plead for his people’s cause or 
vindicate his people’s rights. 

Our series will be published principally in English. 
Occasional numbers in Spanish will be printed for the 
benefit of the Spanish -speaking world. The paging of 
the pamphlets will be arranged in successive order for 
such readers as may wish to have them bound in volumes.- 
Each number will be supplemented with current poli- 
tical events for the information of those interested In 
Philippine politics. To defray the cost of printing a 
minimum price will be charged for each pamphlet. 

The Editor 



CONTENTS 



The Hope of the Filipinos 

The Declaration op Independencel — 

American Imperialists 

Philippine Neutralization - 

Step Toward Disarmament. - 

International Agreement — - 

Inducement to Capital 

Poor But Free Rather Than Rich But Subjects — 

Entitled To Know Future — 

‘‘Philippines for Filipinos” • 

Good Government for One People May Not Be Good for 
Another r — 

The Philippine Islands — ^What They Are and what They 

Would Be 

Danger of Foreign Capital 

Proof op Filipino Ability for Self-Government..... — 

Filipino Cooperation in Government — — - 

Revolt Against United States a Dream...- - 

The Golden Rule * - 

Inequality of Rights 

“Taxation Without Representation Is Tyranny 

Only Filipino Government Will Suit Filipinos Best.. 

Freedom Delayed Makes Filipinos Discontented. 

Local Americans Don’t Mingle With People. — — 

Technical Men Needed 

Opposition Alienates Good Will of People - 

Campaign of Abuse —-*"*• 

Conditions for Freedom 

Relations Between* Ruler and Ruled-.... - 

A Free Philippines 

Trade Agreement With United States - - 

A Defense op Harrison - 

Much-Needed Piece of Legislation — ; 

Matter of Plain Duty — - 

A Holy Cause 

Date of No Consequence — * 

The Philippine Bill 

Freedom and Misery 

Meaning of Preamble — - 



Page 

9 

Id 

11 

12 

12 

13 

13 

14 
16 
17 

19 

20 

22 

22 

24 

24 

25 

26 
26 
27 
23 

29 

30 

30 
80 

31 

32 

32 

33 
33 

35 

36 

36 

37 

39 

40 

41 

42 



6 



CONTENTS 



Page 

General Aguinaldo 43 

Freedom op Religion 44 

Government op NoN-CHRistMN Tribes 46 

Moro Tribute to Filipino 46 

Pledge op Independence 47 

Control of Pacific 48 

Nothing But Freedom. 60 

Autonomy and Constitution 61 

An Age-Old Desire. 52 

Spirit of *76 Re-bom 62 

Policy Toward Independence. 53 

Risk Must Be Taken... 64 

Prestige of American Flag 56 

Philippines True in Peace and in War 56 

The Japanese Menace 66 

Clarke Amendment...., ’ 66 

Attack on Belgium. 68 

No Fear of Aggression. 60 

Japan and Philippines 61 

Diplomatic Question 62 

^lEMN Pledge of a Great People. 63 

Legislative Declaration 64 

Profoundly Grateful......... 66 

Towner's Tribute to Quezon. 66 

Parting Words to Congress 68 

The New Philippine Senate 69 

To Build Up, Not To Tear Down. 70 

New Rights, New Responsibilities 71 

Experience of Other People... 72 

Selfish Interests....... 73 

Much To Do; Work for All 74 

Tiffi 76 

Must Not Distort Truth .1. 76 

S^-^Sove^ignty..,.., 76 

Education and Free^m 77 

New Colonial Policy, 78 

Wealth Increased...., - 79 

Defensive Devices....,........^ 80 

New Nations Recognized. 81 

A Ck)NSTiTyTiONAL CONVENTION 83 

Thing Mpst Essential... 84 

Constitutional Assembly. 86 

Physical Power pf Nations 86 

Strategical Reasons.. 87 

UNITED) States Coastwise Law... 88 

Oim Loyalty Unshaken.^............. 91 



CONTENTS 



7 



Conception op Democracy 

With Strings or No Strings 

Protection Combated 

The English Language 

Source of Pride 

No Backward Step 

The Philippine Problem 

Free Trade Beneficial 

Harding’s Answer 

Responsibility and Authority in Philippine Government. 

Intent of the Law 

Philippine Senate 

Reorganization Act 

Influence of Electorate - 

Current Political Events - 



Pagre 

93 

93 

94 
96 

98 

99 
101 
102 
103 
105 

107 

108 

109 

110 
111 



THE HOPE OF THE FILIPINOS 

[From a Speech in the House of Representatives, Washington, D. C., 

May 14, 1910] 



PVom, what I have said it can be seen that the affairs 
of the Islands are not in a very encouraging state; rather, 
the outlook is depressing. The Filipinos, however, are 
patiently and hopefully looking forward to brighter days. 
We are aware that you have not gone to those Islands for 
your own profit ; we are aware that you have not gone there 
to subjugate us, but to emancipate us. 

The lesson of your history — the most brilliS'Ht history of 
all the nations of the world — ^is inconsistent with any other 
motive in your dealings with the Filipinos than that of 
making them free. This great Republic, founded and 
reared by liberty-loving people, cannot undertake any task 
not in keeping with right, justice, happiness and liberty 
for all mankind. We have an unshaken faith in the future 
destiny of our beloved Fatherland since its fate was com- 
mitted to your care. - it. j n 

We firmly believe and sincerely trust that the day Wl 
soon come when this Congress, composed of the represent^ 
nAT OE atives of a God-fearing people, will g^e- 
EREBDOM rously give to us the blessings of that freedom, 
which has made you so happy, so prosperous and^ so great, 
and which is after all the keynote of the happiness an 
prosperity of every people. When that time comes— rand 
let us hope that it may happen tomorrow— the d^ 
the ever-glorious Stars and Stripes were raised in the Fhi - 
ippines will eternally be the best-celebrated day of our 
national life. {Applause.) 



THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE 
[Prom a Speech at Tammany Hall, New York City, July 4, 1911] 



There is no state document so well or so extensively 
knowu as the Declaration of Independence, nor is there 
anotiier more important to humanity. The reason is that 
it was written for the benefit of all mankind, of all nations 
and of all races. In the words of an American statesman, 
the Declaration Written in Philadelphia in 1776 has been 
the most sublime evangel promulgated since the history 
of Bethlehem. Like the shot fired in Concord, it was 
“heard round the, |vorld.’’ It was heard with fear in the 
tyrant’s palace, it was heard with rejoicing in the poor 
nian’s hovel. Reverently I believe it was heard with hap- 
pin^s in Heaven itself. 

Since the Declaration of Independence, because of the 
Overwhelnaing influence of its doctrines, republics have 
founded on the ruins of despotismi, constitutional 
governments have been bom in both hemi- 

countries where 



■II 



ISPiUEtlCB OP , . 

nOGTainEs ®Pheres, even in those 

absolutism seemed to have become most 
finnly footed. Nay, even in the Philippines where the 
jpeoplte’s clamor to be free is so deeply felt because the 
desire to breathe the wholesome air of freedom is innate 
in the human heart. We argue in the very words of that 

Immortal Document. 

In tmth, we maintain that the American occupation of 
the Islands is incompatible with the Declaration of In- 
dependence. 

One hundred years ago this proposition would not get 
a single dissenting vote in this “land of the free.” (Ap- 
plattse.) I 



PHILIPPINE FREEDOM 



11 



But now, strange as it may seem, you will .find here illus- 
trious citizens and distinguished statesmen who will tell 
you : “There is nothing in the Declaration of Independence 
that prohibits this country from governing an alien people 
against their express will.” 

Of course, I do not refer to those imperialists who avow 
that in the consideration of colonial problems they do not 
care a whit about principles, their only concern being their 
pockets. They are not worthy of mention on 
occasion. This day is too sacred to 
talk about men whose code of morals is 
nothing but Big Business. (Applo/use.) To them the 
Declaration of Independence is a scrap of paper, worthy 
only of dreamers whom a utopic world knows by the- idle 
name of patriots. No; such men should not be mentioned 
on this solemn occasion. After all, if there are any 
imperialists of that brand in this country they ought to be 
of such insignificant minority that they pass unnoticed. 
If there is one he should have no right to call himself 
American because no one can with propriety call himself 
American if he denies or scorns the principles which make 
up the immovable rock on which are founded the insti- 
tutions of this country. In denying or despising the 
eternal truths of the Declaration of Independence he w'ould 
betray the most brilliant pages of his National History. 



I) »el 






If 






PHILIPPINE NEUTRALIZATION 









[From an Address B^ore the Annual Convention of the Anti- 
Imperi^sl Lei^e, Boston, Mass., January 9, 1912] 



At Philippinea are a potential apple of dis- 

IB tfe Pa^iflc. The iKJlicy of indefinite retention by 
ybl,, i®deelaf!ed intention, leaves everybody guessing, 
indBi^Bg yourselves; 

Now is the aecepted time, while the horizon of the future 
is disblutel^ to ask Japan to sign a treaty agrees 

ih|r to the heutralization of the Philippine Islands. By 
will show her hand. 

■ftefe is no reason why the powers would object to con- 
verting the Philippines into permanently neutral territory 
i^e ssMe kind of an agreement that protects Switzer- 
iaii^v . , ■ . 

©hee su>re of a foothold in the international law of the 
tweniddh centuiy, neutralization will represent a mighty 
stride in the teection of disarmament and arbitration. 
STii' spectacle of the smaller nations devoting 

.|iT ^‘ayjfr/AyrfeTT !p themselves, in assured perpetual tranquillity, 
to the development of their economic, phy- 
sical and intellectual resources, submitting their differences, 
if any,/ to Hague Tribunal, will be a stronger argument 
for ^strletina of armaments and like submission to arbi- 
traHon of Ihhir differences by the Great Pow’ers than all 
the diplomatic discussions that could be had from now till 
Poomsday, 

In brief, the ^eat need of the hour is to give the Phil- 
ippine Islands their independence as soon as practicable. 
12 



Mu 



im 



mm 

mi 






1 













INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENT 

[From Remarks Made Before a Hearing of the Insidar Affairs Com- 
mittee of the House of Representatives on Philippine Indebted- 
ness, Washington, D. C., February 21—25, 1912] 



It matters little even if We could not sell these bonds §t 
all. The most pressing need of the Philippines is th^ 
freedom. The present conditions of affairs there are dis^ 
couraging. Nobody knows what the United States is 
going to do with us. It can give us away, keep us 
forever, change the government we have now and make it 
more autocratic. We have no rights of any kind, because 
rights which are given through the voluntary concession 
of a legislative body — ^in which body the people who are 
given those rights are not represented— according to your 
celebrated statesmen here, are not rights at all for the 



simple reason that they can be taken away. ^ 

We, the Filipinos as well as those in this country who 
are in favor of giving the Philippines freedoih, have ^e 
idea of protecting the Islands by ^ inter- 

international agreement, to my^ mind, will 
serve to create confidence among foreign capitahsts to come 
into the Islands for investments therein. 



13 



POOR BUT FREE RATHER THAN RICH 
BUT SUBJECTS 

[Prom a Speech in the House of Representatives, Washington, D. C., 

May 1, 1912] 



The future of the Philippine Islands is still hanging 
in the balance; the morrow is as yet shadowed by the clouds 
of uncertaiuty. Twelve years of American occupation have 
not as yet answered the question constantly asked by the 
Filipinos with anxiety akin to prayer. What is there 
beyond the horizon? The policy of Congress with regard 
to ihe Philippines has been so far indefinite, noncommittal. 
Prom the very title of the act of July 1, 1902, which created 
the present Philippine Government, we are informed that 
the government therein created is merely a temporary 
govefnment, the title of the act being, "An Act Tempora- 
rily To Provide for the Administration of the Affairs of 
Civil Govemnient in the Philippine Islands, and for Other 
Purposes.” 

Though leaders of the Republican Party, ex-President 
Roosevelt as well as President Taft and many others, have 
invaslably stated that the ultimate purpose of the United 
P ftTTTT ts M- i® to ffive the Philippines independ- 

and though the Democratic Party by 
its last three national platforms has com- 
mitted itself tOf the policy of granting the Philippines 
independence as soon as a stable government has been 
estahhshed there^ the fact is that every attempt to induce 
this J^ation to egress its policy authoritatively, that is 
to say, through Congress, has been of no avail so far. In 
spite of this seeming discrepancy between words and deeds, 
the Mlipinos have taken all these utterances at their face 
value. We have put our faith unqualifiedly in these, decla- 
im 



PHILIPPINE FREEDOM 



15 



rations, and the §upport that this Government has been 
and is receiving from the Filipinos is due wholly to their 
conviction that the Government they now have in the Islands 
is provisional, that it is merely temporary, and that the 
more enthusiastic support it receives from the people the 
sooner it will be substituted by a Philippine independent 
government. 

Now, Mr. Speaker, in order to avoid such a condition of 
affairs — and thus Congress will be forced to do what it 
would otherwise not do — ^we want, before allowing anybody 
to become interested in any shape or manner in the develop- 
ment of the Philippines, to be informed as to whether or not 
the Philippines are forever going to be a colony of the United 
States, a State of the Union, or an independent and free 
nation. 

It is not only due to the Filipino people, but it is also 



fair to the investor. It is due to the Filipino people be- 
cause they are entitled to know their future; they are 
entitled to be informed what the ultimate 
country will be. It is fair to the 
investor because he should know beforehand 
all the circumstances and conditions under which he is to 
invest his capital. Perhaps it is true, as some people have 
affirmed, that should the United States Congress declare 
that the Philippines will be free in a not distant future, 
such a declaration w’ould postpone the development of the 
Islands because capital would not care to go where a new 
government is about to be established. Mr. Speaker, I do 
not believe that such would be the case, but if it is so I 
am perfectly frank to say that eager as the Filipinos are 
to see their country develop* commercially and otherwise, 
they would rather wait, they would rather not have capital 
in the Islands than, because of having it, see their free- 
dom postponed. 

Let it be understood, Mr. Speaker, so as to disabuse the 
mind of any candid person, that we struggle for our. liberty 
not precisely because we dislike — ^much less hate— •American 
domination, no; but because we love Philippine independ- 
ence. 



If SFETOHES OF MANUEL L. QUEZON 

T&e future of the Philippines, therefore, when you face 
the problem as it is, shorn of all the oratorical words of 
‘^‘henevplent assimilation,” ‘‘altruism,’’ and the like, stands 
hetween these two alternatives : either they are to be perma- 
lently a “possession” of the United States, governed from 
vnthout by a government whose powers are not constrained 
Constitutional limitations, for the Supreme Court has 
ateeady di^lared that your Government in the Philippines 
is above the Constitution;; or they are to be divorced en- 
tirely and completely from the United States. 

^ between these two alternatives, Mr. Speaker, every 
patrintie Espino WiU certainly decide for the independence 
of Me connlay. If to be free we must keep the Philippines 
omE.¥ BiGHT nndeveloped, if to be free we must refuse to 
admit foreign capital into the Islands, if to 
be free we must be poor and remain poor, we 
will nn^nimonsly and unhesitatingly prefer to be poor but 
free ral^r th^ to be rich but subjects! I would be 
ashasatd of my; comitry, 1 would be ashamed of myself, if 
was not the definite attitude of all the Filipinos in every 
waHc bf life* ^d every gentleman on the floor of this 
^pSe who has in his veins Anserican blood, who has in- 
hetifed from his = forefathers the love of freedom, who has 
learned in Ms boyhood from the lips of his mother that 
liberlS^ is fbe most sacred right of human beings, has to 
a/diinit ^at Snch attitude is the only right, dignifled and 



“PHILIPPINES FOR FILIPINOS” 



[Prom a Speech in the House of Representatives, Washington, D. C., 

May 16, 1912] 



When I called the attention of the Insular Committee 
last year to the fact that the Philippine Government was 
permitting the acquisition of public lands in the Philippine 
Islands by citizens of the United States, which, I contended, 
was prohibited by. the Organic Act, the Secretary of the 
Department of the Interior of the Philippines, Mr. Dean 
C. Worcester, took issue with me on the subject, and made 
the following suggestion, which reveals his trend of mind 
on Philippine affairs: 

“It would be rather remarkable, Senor Quezon, if a sover- 
eign country would refuse to sell its own lands to its own 
people. That would be an anomaly, would it not?” I an- 
sw'ered, “Not at all. It is altruism on the part of the 
sovereign country to keep the lands of the acquired terri- 
tory for the people thereof, and the refusal to sell the 
lands to the citizens of the sovereign Nation indicates that 
there is no intention of permanently annexing the acquired 
territory.” 

Why, Mr. Speaker, that which Secretary Worcester calls 
an “anomaly” is the proof that the United States is but 
occvFATioiT temporarily in the Philippines and that it 
TEMPORART has acquired the Islands, not to exploit them 
but for the purpose of helping the Filipino people and of 
guarding their interests. 

A few days ago the gentleman from Wisconsin (Mr. 
Cooper) in the course of his remarks on this bill said that 
the provision of the Organic Act creating the Philippine 
Assembly, which was so bitterly fought on the floor of this 
House, is the very provision that helped this Government 

18441 O. W. 2 17 



SPEECHES OP MANUEL L. QUEZON 



to. accomplish whatever success it had in the Philippine 
The gentleman might have added that the pro- 
, . liniion of the Organic Act which excludes everybody from 
icquirhig public lands, except Philippine citizens, is the one 
provision that told the Filipinos in deeds, not in words, 
that the policy of this Government in the Philippine Islands 
is a policy of self-denial and altruism, or, as it has been 
y officially termed, the policy of “the Philippines for the 
i’ilipinps.” 



GOOD GOVERNMENT FOR ONE PEOPLE MAY NOT 
BE GOOD FOR ANOTHER 

( 1918 ) 



It has been frequently said that American occupation of 
the Philippines has been a great benefit to my people. I 
am glad to admit that it has been. I had the honor last 
year of saying the same on the floor of the House of 
Representatives and expressing the gratitude of the Fili- 
pinos toward the American people for what good it has 
been to us. Still those benefits, great as they may have 
been, can never make the Filipinos forget that they are 
not governed by themselves but are under foreign rule. 
We contend, moreover, that an independent Philippine 
Government v/ould have been more beneficial to the Fili- 
pinos than any kind of American Government. 

That which is good government for one people might not 
be good for another. That is a good government which 
be«t secures the happiness and prosperity of the peopic 
whom it governs. To accomplish this, a gov- 
ernment must know the needs of the countiT^ 
and miust not only feel its responsibility to 
the country but must love it as well. We give the Amer- 
icans credit for trying to do their best in the Islands 
to make the Filipinos happy and prosperous, but the wisest 
American will never know himself, and the most altroisfic 
American can never love the Philippines as much as the 
Filipinos love their own country. It is, therefore, mani- 
festly impossible for an American Government in the Phil- 
ippines to be as successful as a Philippine independeht 

19 



aOVERNHENT 
OF PEOPLE 



SPEECHES OF MANUEL L. QUEZON 



Government will be. “No man is good enough to govern 
another without that other’s consent,” said Lincoln. 

* » * * * * 

When we were told that the intention of this country 
was to emancipate and not to subjugate us, that the history 
of the United States was an eloquent testimony of her 
mghteousness and justice, that the granting of our inde- 
pendence which would be given us as soon as We showed 
Our qualifications for self-government was only a question 
of time-^we sdelded and surrendered, awaiting patiently 
^d hopefully the day when this Government should fulfill 
that promise. 

• * * « ♦ * * 

But it is said that should the United States leave the 
Islands tomorrow they would immediately become the prey 
of hungry neighbors, while IE there was the prestige of 
AnsKirAiT American flag it would serve to keep 

PhSSTiGE other countries out. Granting that it is 
true that the American flag is enough to 
prevent any country from interfering in the affairs of the 
Bhilippin^, why cannot the United States leave the Islands 
tomotrow and Say to the other nations of the world, “Leave 
the Bhilippines alone and let them work out their own 
destiny?” You have done it for South America, and you 
have not yet seen any case in which this country has been 
led to war because of this policy. 

It is net heeessary to discuss this question to its full 
extent, f Ou all know that the independence of the Phil- 
ippines can be easily assured by international agreement 
neutralizing them, as Switzerland is neutralized, or by 
American protectorate. That we should be free is a self- 
evident propo'SitiQn to any American mind. It is rather 
strange that a. Filipino, who by being such is supposed to 
have very confused knowledge, if any, of democratic institu- 
tions, should address an American audience on the subject of 
the right of every country to be self-governing. Every one 
of you has learned from your mothers when you were boys, 
in the schools when you were students, and today use as the 



PHILIPPINE FREEDOM 



21 



£Tuide of your actions, the principle that the right of every 
nation to be free and independent is a God-given right. Let 
me, therefore, leave to your own judgment, developed as it is 
by free education, and to your own feelings formed as they 
are by your boon love of liberty, the decision of nay cause. 
You could not help saying that the Filipinos are entitled, 
as much as the Americans are, to their own independent 
government, and that th^ are so entitled, not away in the 
future, but today. 



iii®li^|iiilJi»pI&J5. ISI^PS— WHAT THEY ARE AND. 



i8lil 






W'i. /■■ "■/';'■"■■<'■■■- '■■>, 

i.iPS;#il‘?i*S5-: 

•Silm&tfic i i. i.',: 



^AT they would be 

( 1918 ) » 



pfeQide cannot be content so long as 'their 



m 



to be sold to some other nation, 
pelf etpity as a colonial possession, or disposed of 
btef planner Ihan tiie one to which they aspire. 
0000" ^ say tiiat ttie material development and 

|f/(i : p^Spei^^®^ ^e Islands are today seriously handicapped by 

lUid doubt regarding the policy of this 
toward theni? 

' ip^ says that all we need to rapidly develop the 
nalnral ^ yesource^ the Philippines is capital. Capital 

iS jlj^^ V oonservative; it does not go, it will not go, 
wield gOveranaent with a definite policy has been 

other hand, the Filipinos themselves 
aldioill^ed t©' the investment of large sums of foreign 
i^pito in tie lest that very procedure should 

expuse Or a pretext for postponing — or even 
Ibl day of their national in- 



I: ' ' 



Were lie Tiilippines independent tomorrow or were they 
,g|vei a plOWiSe of Ipdepehdence at an early date by Con- 
gress, tie Fifipiios Would welcome, if not try very hard 
wa®a os ^ Wdcei, the coming of capital. It is not, 
iSif ^i®ref©re; that the Filipinos are unprogres- 

' sive Or that they desire to continue anti- 
gnatei methods ih their commerce, their industries, or their 
afrieeltdte» bat it is because they know so well the history 
of the WOtld to this respect and knowing it they fear — 
add fear^the introduction of large amounts of 

22 .. ' 



PHILIPPINE FBBEDOM 23 

foreign capital into their country until their. poUtical future 
has been clearly and authoritatively defined. 

. It is true that high officials belonging to the Executive 
Branch of the Government, both here and there, have at 
times defined their ideas of what they conceive to be the 
policy of the American people with regard to the PMl- 
ippinee. But the expressions of the Executive Branch of 
your Government, however sincere or well founded, cafl 
never be regarded by the Filipino people or by the rest 
of the world with that respect and fe^ng of secuiii^ 
which would result from a definite declaration by Gon^eso 
upon this subject. 



PROOF OF FILIPINO ABILITY FOR 
SELF-GOVERNMENT 

a ^eech in the House of Representatives, Washingrton, D. C., 
in Answer to Remarks of the Gentleman from Kentucky, Mr, 
'SSgmJ!?', and the Gentleman from California, Mr. Kahn, Jan- 
nary 28, 1913] 



jyit me tell you what I think whenever a gentleman speaks 
el the achievements of the Government along educational, 
^mmercial, industrial and political lines in the Philip- 
Td me these achievements are the best proof of 
tte ahihty of the Filipino people to govern themselves. 
B^Cry improvement in the Philippines has been made be- 
i^Use We gave the money, the brains and the labor that 
#d it, 

_ fist hvery member of this House understand that Filipinos 
evej^ pait of the Archipelago are longing to see their 
country Ifeee. It is not true that only those of Manila 
afls’ in favor of Philippine independence. The Philippine 
composed of members coming from the different 
islands,/ been petitioning Congress year after year to 
reeothi^ the independence of the Philippines. There are 
in the,' Jyssembly only two mienibers from Manila and very 
few* i^om the surrounding districts. 

24 



REVOLT AGAINST UNITED STATES A DREAM 

[From a Speech Delivered in the House of Representatives, Wwh- 
ington, D. C., January 27, 1913, Denying the News Circulat^ by 
the American Press That General Aguinaldo Was About To Head 
a Revolution] 



V ' 

Mr. Chairman, I do not care to speak of these harrewing 
incidents except for the purpose of convincing the House, 
if that be necessary, that it is impossible for us to again 
think of such a thing as engaging in an armed conflict 
with American troops, even if there were some r^sons for 
revolting against the United States, because we now oo 
well what the result would be. Such being the case, hoW 
could any sane person conceive of us revolting when there 
is no reason today for so doing? And I hope that there will 
never be any reason for so doing because the admini ra 
tion shortly to come into power in the United Stat^ is 
pledged to grant the Philippines independence. I hope 
that if the Filipinos ever go to war they will go ° 
in support of the United States and not agains e 

States. (ApploAise.) , 

And it is very easy to accomplish this. It is very easy 

to make every Filipino ready to die for the American ^g, 
LOVE FOE if you will only heed their cry and ^ve 
• AMEBiCA them what they are asking for an gi g 

for— their independence. {Applause.) 

If this is done, and if the time should ever come when 
you should have a war in the Far East, gentlemen, you 
will find every man, womap and child in my country fight- 
ing for you and for your flag. (Applause.) 



25 










"THE GOLDEN RULE 'f! 

the Hotise of Bepresentatives, Washingrton, D. C*i 
lyiiyS#"/.' ^ P^ary IS, 1918] 

0' y ■ - ^ — ' 

the pity of the - American people. W| 
them. We only want them to comply 
unto others what you would that 
hhfco- jrou.” The gentleman from Nev^ 
repeated in the beginning of hisi 
vJ0£'>‘ once told me, that he sought for his 

that he. does. not-wU.nt for my people.' 
says, how can he countenance thl„„ 
Shilippines of American sovereignty!; 

the will of the inhabitants when 
inteud to permit his own country tdi 
for one minute? 

J’ilipinps shall be as free as the,;; 

“ot as free as the Americans’ 
^0' Same privileges and the same 
political,, ri^s' that they do. They have 
flag. 'We have none. They have 
y 1 ''^'! Governnient, adnainistered by men 
— v^l^t We have not. And all 

them is that 

the, ^^#emah f^ Yotk and air his colleagues in 

: i^e'^^ee of B^resentatiyes and in the Senate vote for ?! 

a- bill (granting ihde to the Philippine IslandSi^^f 



“TAXATION WITHOUT REPRESENTATION IS 
TYRANNY” 

[Part of Reply to Cardinal Gibbons in Controversy on Philippine 
Independence, February 27-March 3, 1913] 



Youi* Eminence said that although the Philippine Isl^ s 
are not for the present enjoying ihdepeiid«iee, they hny^ 
freedom and liberty. I beg to remind Your Eminehee p 
the fact that the customs duties in the Philippines 
levied by the Congress of the United States, anfi thst t|ie 
internal revenue, land and other taxes have been levxe 'y 
the Philippine Commission. In other words, the 
the Philippines have had no share in the imposition p W 
taxes. It is an American maxim that taxation nu 
representation is tyranny. on 



ONLY FILIPINO GOVERNMENT WILL SUIT 
FILIPINOS BEST 



s Speech at the Economic Club of Worcester, Mass., in the 
Course of a Debate in Which Mr. Quezon, Prof. Hart and Mr. 
E&W Took Part, April 22, 1913] 



Ftoffii i^ese facts you will readily see that I know my 
peoiile as iutkoately as it is possible for anybody to know 
them. And, speaking: from my experience, I say to you, 
solemmy and sincerely: 

First. That the Filipinos are unanimous in their desire 
to govern their country. 

iecond, That they are capable of governing their coun- 
try, though they may not be able to establish precisely 
such government as may suit my friend Mr. Egan, but 
Surely a govermnent that will suit them best, better than 
any other i^d of government that you or any other people 
may institute for them. 

If, therefore, the wish of the Filipinos is to be considered' 
in the teal settlement of the policy of the United States 
ndth regard to the Islands, there should be but one policy 
to fee adopted, to' wife— to gfrant independence to the Phil- 
ippines, 

28 



• FREEDOM DELAYED MAKES FILIPINOS 
DISCONTENTED 

[From a Speech Before the Philippine Society, New York City, 

June 10, 1913] 



♦ Jl: 5^ ❖ * * 

Now, gentlemen, I am sure that I am correct when I 
say that nothing short of Philippine independence 
now’ or promised to be granted within a comparativwy s or 
time will satisfy the Filipinos, and every ® 

doing this makes the Filipinos more unhappy and isc 
tented. And my knowledge of the feding of my peop 
cannot be successfully challenged. I have been fortuna 
enough to be associated with all classes of Klipinos. 
have mingled with the poor as well as with the rich. More 
over, I have witnessed from my childhood tins growing sen- 
timent of nationality and desire for independence. I 
been reared by that same feeling. When I ejgiress e 
feelings of my people I am sure that I am not wrong because 
I am expressing my own feelings ; and when I express nay 
own feelings I know that I am expressing those on my 
people because mine have been inspired by the national 
spirit that pervades the atmosphere throughout the Isls.nds. 

The trouble with many right-minded Americans is that 
they refuse to take notice of what we Filipinos say. Be- 
cause they have lived in the Islands for a short or long 
period of time, they feel that they know all 
second-haud about the Filipinos when they re^y do not 
nTFOBMATioiT know ' ansrthing or know very little about 
them. And if they would ask themselyes 
how they have acquired their alleged knowledge of the is- 
landers they will find that theirs is but second-hand infor- 
mation, no matter hoW long they have lived in the Islands, 

29 



SPKECHES OP MANUEL L. QUEZON 



bemuse American residents in the Philippines do not mingle 
intimetely \rith the people, specially if they are men oc- 
cupying high positions in the Government, in the Church, 
vdiether Protestant or Catholic, or in business. 

_ if yon want to know how we feel and what we think, 
you must take our words for it. You cannot learn it in 
any othej? way. Do not always attribute to us selfish 
motii^s. 

^ ^ 4: jjs 4* iii 4t 

There is really only one class of Americans in the Islands 
v^Ose phonal well-being may be jeopardized by the grant- 
ing of Philippine independence. These are the employees 
^ ^ in. the Philippine Government. But even 

fieaSfiqAi these, they will not necessarily be all affected, 

' lipf nniofn because an independent Philippine Govern- 
. ■ ment may find it convenient to retain their 

servigeSi For instancej the school teachers, engineers and 
other technical employees may be needed for some time 
yet as th^ were needed in Japan for- many years. As to 
the" ethers who have to be dismissed because Filipinos can 
take their p!kc^ there can be found some •way of protecting 
i^eir mterests when 'they leave the service. The other 
qilmef icans, priests^ missionaries, ministers or business men, 
1^'ye no real reason for fearing that their respective condi- 
tions would sulfer in the least by the adoption of a policy 
franikiy looldng toward early independence. Why should 
the America priest, minister or missionary need the back- 
ing of ^GOyernfflent to make cott'verts to his church in the 
Philippiffle Islands f Why should an American merchant 
need m€ pres^ee of his flag to do business with us ? 

Theif OppositiQn is ill-advised. The success of their re- 
spective TOdei^l^gg good ■will of the FilipinO' 

people^ nnd th^/ are rapidly alienating them with their well- 

l^t me utter a word of friendly caution. This society is 
now c0mp<«i®d of . those who are interested in the Islands 
in iSeveisai dsparitles^ avowed purpose is "to create' 

n inb^^ syteipathetic uuderstauding between the Filipinos 



PHILIPPINE FREEDOM 



31 



and the American people.” If as individuals you wish to 
succeed in your enterprise in the Islands or as an organi- 
zation you propose to accomplish your proclaimed purpose, 
do not allow yourselves, individually 
o^Zbuse through this organization, to participate 
directly or indirectly in this campaign of 
misrepresentation and abuse of the Filipino people. It is 
not only your patriotic duty but it will also be to your ad- 
vantage to give the American people a true conception of 
the Filipinos so that the day of final adjustment of our 
mutual interests and rights may no longer be deferred. 

Be sure that American enterprises in the Islands, 
whether philanthropic, religious or commercial, can succeed 
only on the basis of just treatment of the Filipinos by this 
Government. And just treatment to us means but one 
thing: the recognition that we have as much right as 
Cuba has— as the United States has — ^to indepraident na- 
tional existence. 

♦ He H* He H* H» ♦ 

Their ambition to have a national existence has been the 
overwhelming force that has made them strive to acQuife 
education, to better their sanitation, to increase and accu- 
mulate wealth and raise their standafd of 
living. This same force has been the Wapo 
and secret cause that has made possible the 
work of three generations done in a single decade. 0o not 
allow the present administration to carry out its aVo#^ 
policy of granting Philippine independence; disappoint io 
this manner the Filipino people ; let them knovr that no ohe 
of the living will see their country free — ^and you Will 
them as a body politic. Their enthusiasm for advauceiflent 
will die out. . They will not do as much business, for what 
is the use of wealth if we cannot look at our fellowmen as 
equal to equal ? Their children will lose the eager intetest 
they now have in learning, for what is the use of knowing 
the rights of man and of people if you cannot enjoy them? 
An educated man is more unhappy if he is not free than an 
ignorant man under the same conditions. But let us have 



32 SPEECHES OP MANUEL L. QUEZON 

iindependence and our progress will receive the greatest: 
in^ulse. 

Conditions? You may impose what you will for the| 
granting of that boon. There is nothing that we are not| 
prepared to do or give to accomplish our national ambition*; j 
Do you want to make the Philippines the 
CQHniTions scene of your religious activities? You; 
you will be perfectly welcome to do so. We| 

shall guarantee full protection to your| 
priests and ministers. Do you want our market for your| 
goods and do you wish to use it as your base of supply forJ| 
your Oriental trade? We shall give you every facility 
you hOed. Do you want to develop our natural resources?! 
We shall open to you our mines and our forests, and shaUi!:,, 
t yoii our labor. Is it not better for you to deal wii^l 
u$ as friends in whatever field we may meet ? 

/ ^A^d we can be friends only if we are not your subjects./ 
fhere can be no friendship between the ruler and the ruledv|: 
ThePe can be no friendship unless there is mutual respecti | 
you cannot respect us while we are treated as your; 
^0d^« These are no perfunctory words. Every Ameri-/ 
familiar with conditions in the Philippine IslandS|/ 
kso^s ■^th what hardly concealed contempt the natives i 
treated by the Americans there. The attitude of supe^ 
liority, which is natural in an Anglo-Saxon, is augmented | 
^ the feeling of political mastery which necessarily is feltg 
aidtauiiistrators. And this is, of course, offen- 
and it is an offense that reaches thej; 
a man^ soul. This evil can only be remediedj/ 
% ^ of the right of the Filipinos to be freej 



A FREE PHILIPPINES 



[From a Speech at the Cleveland Chamber of Industry, Cleveland, 
Ohio, April 10, 1914] 



If the Philippines were free there would be fewer, and 
ultimately no, American office-holders in the Islands. 
There would be more difficulty for certain American trusts 
in “cornering” our products. But it is also true that the 
American people would not have to bear the burden of forti- 
fying and defending the Philippines — an undertaking which 
costs not a cent less than forty million dollars yearly, mil- 
lions which although rich people like you can well spare, 
should be spent in this country or left in the pocket of the 
American taxpayer. Your separation from the Philip- 
pines will at once relieve you of the only weak point where 
you could easily be stricken in case of war. 

There are those, however, who assert that by holding 
the Philippines you get the benefit derived from having a 
market for your surplus and a field wherefrom you can buy 
your needed tropical products. Wl^ you 
TRADE should lose our trade on account of our na- 
AGREEMENT tional freedom is more than I can compre- 
hend. If our trade is profitable to you now, 
why should not it be when government ties between us are 
cut? Is it perchance because while under your control 
you are taking undue advantage of us? No, certainly not. 
It is because our trade- is regulated by laws mutually bene- 
ficial to us. Why cannot the same trade regulations be es- 
tablished by treaty between the Republic of the United 
States and the Republic of the Philippines? 

If you give the Filipinos their liberty there will be no- 
thing that they will not gladly concede to you. You wiU 

18441 O. W. 3 33 



34 SSiBOHiS OF MANUEL L. QUEZON 

lave only thoir trade but their gratitude, and you will 



iiii5 

MSii'ikMi': 



tie last touch to the work you began in 1776 for the libera- 
0f mankind. America’s flag may then cease to fly 
4yer bur piibMc buildings, but her influence will be our in-^ 
and we and our children will bless the day whefl 
gntped ^e Bay of Manila. 



d-. 

:m«, ■ : 

"'J d : : 

dSmyMd'...r 

mmmm.-,. 



A DEFENSE OF HARRISON 

[From a Speech in the House of Representatives, Washih^Pt 

July 29, 1914] 



Because he is imbued with the spirit of ^eniiiiie fr®e 
Americanism, he has the love of the Filipino people. W 
are seeking to lead that people along the path of prospfentyi 
progress and individual freedom to ibe goal of natiOiw 
liberty, you have entrusted that noble enterprise to^ the 
right man. If it be your wish to subjugate the MliJ>ih^» 
to exploit them, and to give their resources into the 
of a few concerns, you have placed the gpvemorslup ^ ® 

hands of the wrong man, and Mr, Harrison should be. re- 
called without delay. oc • ■ 



■ 



MUCH-NEEDED PIECE OF LEGISLATION 

fp^om a Speech in the House of Eepresentatives, Washingrton, D. 
September 26, 1914J 



Mr. Sp.eaker, nothing imposes a greater handicap upon 
the pro|)er advancement of the Filipino people than this 
ladi of definite policy authoritatively stated — ^that is to say, 
by the Congress, We do not no-w possess that peace of 
i^d so essential to our happiness. The country suffers 
froffl a constant political agitation that, if it does not para- 
l^e, at least interferes with the even course of our mate^ 
ahd intellectual development. 

iiilhd thiS: intense agitation will never abate until we are 
Mstired^ as the Philippine Bill does assure us, that we 
Siiay look forward to the day when independence shall be 
granted. Again, if I may be permitted to 
iESlffin or make the suggestion, the Congress is bound 
DUTY to Settle this question not only as a matter 
plain duty to the Filipino people but 
because the; American public should be notified whether 
thi^f tepresentatiyes have chosen to follow the imperialistic 
Policies of the Old World or have decided to stand by the 
i®fte#onored American policy— that of equal rights and 
eoual opportunities between small and large countries. 

fhas is a duty, Mr. Speaker, that every member of this 
MoUSej s-^ardless of his political affiliation, is bound to 
discharge. As for the members of the majority, they are 
by virtue of their platform particularly bound to consider 
and to pass, th© iphilippine Bill at once. 

$8 



A HOLY CAUSE 



[Prom a Speech in the House of Representatives, Washington, D. C., 
September 28, 1914] 



I shall not oppose this bill. I should have preferred the 
former Jones Bill, which contained a fixed date when in- 
dependence was to be granted, and the Filipino people would 
have preferred that bill. In fact, I did eversrthing in my 
power to have that bill reintroduced and enacted. I did 
more than that — submitted to some of the powers-that-be 
the proposal that Speaker Osmena, in consultation with 
the leaders of our party, both in and out the Philippine 
Assembly, had in mind as the best measure for Philippine 
independence. I could do no more. 

Is it desired that, having failed in that effort, I should, 
rather than accept this bill, suffer the old order of things 
to continue in the Islands, so that if another President of 
the United States should be elected-^nd 
FIXED DATE should deem best to do so — ^he could reap- 
AED wo DATE point a majority of Americans to the Phil- 
ippine Commission? Is it desired that, ra- 
ther than accept this bill, I should allow the Philippine 
Commission to continue in existence, with the exclusive 
power of governing one portion of the Archipelago and 
with the right to dispose, of its own free will, of the funds 
raised from the Filipino people for that portion of the 
country under its exclusive jurisdiction? Is it desired that, 
unable to get a promise of independence with a fixed date, 
I should let the Congress of the United States stand ab- 
solutely non-committal on this most vital question affecting 
the future of my people? No; I could not do that* I 
will not do that. I should betray the confidence of my 
constituency. I should fail in my grave task. I should not 

37 



OT MANUEL L. QUEZON 

ge an imperative duly. Moreover, I should be ia 
i^aitdr were 1 to follow such a course ; and rather than do 
ahy ^ these things I should tear to pieces my commission; 
1 ghonld feSi^ and, with a conscience free of remorse, re- 
my native village. 



^he however, is that the immense majority of tail 

: ^^ple are for this bill. They have taken the s«^ 

^4 piiWbWc view that, since the former Jones 

; ,'^ co^d not now be enacted, it would have ba^ 
Me height of folly, it would be a usel^J 
l^^siapid kind of political suicide, to defeat trai 
S|/Moy hiave instructed me to support it and to do all 

Two hundred and forty-seven 
liupieipal, coun^^ four assemblies of municipal presidents, 

■ ■ t^pro^nciai boards, seventy mass meetings, and the na- 
: M^i^al rdEecutiye Coffinutt^ of the Nationalist Party, whiM 



Me, ^O^^ party Philippines, have all endorsed 

k hijb only th^^ in Manila and two or three 

_ are against it. In compliance with these 

^^afef of^ quite as truly as in accord with my 
- am |0r this bill. 



I want to say to those Filipinos who Mus 
' ^ who/beeause of these arguments are not disposed 

; ^hieh con no fixed date for independ- 

redemption of the pledge to grant the PhU.* 
, Md'epehd^ not depend on the detail whether 

^ not any fixed date therefor. The ri^ 

dh^tio® of l^tprM purely and exclusive^? 

Up Oh good f^th of the people. Should Me 

^mnrieg®; people be unwilling to redeem a promise made to 
; hS» M® would help matters in no respect. 

Were IhejFilipiho^ Ju position to demand by force 

M© iPeifoymmiee by Me American people of their promises,. 
I sh01dd^say Mat a promise with a fixed date for its com.« 
p^te^On Wotfd perJmps be better than one without it, for 
We Mould Men ]^0yiF when the day of reckoning would 



PHILIPPINE FREEDOM 



39 

begin. But as we are powerless to enforce the redemption 
of the promise in one case just as we are in the other, the 
date of the fulfillment is, from this point of 
of no, or of very little, consequence. 
We have learned through the hardest of 
lessons that we can gain nothing by force from the people 
of the United States, and it is well-nigh time that we 
should know that nothing would more assuredly defeat OUr 
hopes for the future than any attempt at the use of violwice 
to secure the recognition of our independence. We are 
absolutely at the mercy of this powerful Nation, and we’ 
can only appeal to the sentiments of justice and fair dealf 
ing of the American people if we are ever to reach the 
goal of our ambition. 

Mr. Chairman, I wish to take advantage of this oPPbt* 
tunity to give in all earnestness a word of advice tO ©7 
own countrymen. They should have faith in this coun- 
try, and should demonstrate it by their deeds SS 
by their words. The fixing of the date or the estaJ?|t®ft^^: 
of the conditions for the granting of independence is S P^ 
posal which I favored in the former Jones Bfil. | 
still favor it now were it possible to embody it 
but such a provision is demanded by considerations^ 
connected in any way with the possibility of bad faiW sn 
the part of the American people. (AppZitiwSeO 



THE PHILIPPINE BILL 

From 9 Speech iii the House of Representatives, Washington, D. C., 

October 1, 1914] 



Mr. Ghairman, I hope I may be permitted to be frank 
tdthout beinir offensive. The American people have been 
too long beguiled by speeches telling of the wonderful 
ihaterial and educational progress that has been made 
uhdor your guidance in the Islands. Such assurances 
have b^n put forward within years past, not for the pur- 
pose of paying the American Government a just tribute, 
an 0b|6ct ndth which I am in accord, but with the per- 
nicious and concealed interest to becloud the real issue in- 
yolved in the Philippine problem and to leave the public 
aiind a| ease as to its moral aspect — the question of right 
and wrong^that is at stake. 

I repeat, and I mean every word, that intellectual ad- 
vanceinent, public improvements and material prosperity 
alone will not make the Filipinos happy and contented un- 
sao your rule nor induce them to concede the 

necessity of that rule. If any man thinks 
that he can purchase the Filipino people 
withs material prosperity and intellectual advancement, and 
so make them forget their rights as men and as a nation, 
he is utterly mistaken. All these beneficent things to meet 
our wileii'es must be accompanied by a definite promise that 
we may look forward to a future time when an absolutely 
independent government will be granted us, and must in 
the meantime be coupled with the immediate establish- 
ment of goveftmient which shall afford us power to deter- 
mine how the present development of the country shall be 
carried on. 

40 



PHILIPPINE FREEDOM 



41 



Ah! Mr. Chairman, if to our misfortune we must be 
forever destined to be ruled by a foreign power, better 
would it be to leave us in misery and in ignorance! The 
demands of starving stomachs may prevent 
our souls from realizing the ignominy of 
slavery, while our ignorance would prevent 
us from knowing what freedom means, and, therefore. 



from desiring to attain it. Can you not, Mr. Chairman, 
sympathize with us? Ask. the bird if it prefers a golden 
cage to the air and the sunshine; or ask Patrick Henry to 
explain his choice between liberty and death. (AppUmise.) 

Mr. Chairman, it should be easy for you to underst^d 
how we feel. Forget for a moment that you are a citizen 
of the greatest and most powerful Commonwealth upon the 
face of this earth. Close your eyes to the present and, 
heeding the testimony of the past, go hack to those days, 
fortunately for you long since gone, when instead of pos- 
sessing a country extending from the Dominion of Canada 
to the Rio Grande and from the Atlantic to the Pacific 
you were confined to the region east of the Mississippi 
River, and when, instead of 100,000,000, you were but 
3,000,000 souls. Remember how your forefathers fel 
when they were as we are now struggling for freedom. 
And, finally, bear in mind that the love for liberiy i® 
human hearts has not decreased, but on the contrary, hS® 



grown as human civilization has advanced. * 

Sir, you who at one time were under foreign rule an 
who were to be kept in that condition of subjection on e 
ground that you could do nothing for yourselves, that you 
were too ignorant to establish any suitable government, or 
too unpatriotic to be permitted to take care of yoUr own 
country, you can sympathize with us. You cannot blame 
us if our hearts bleed when we are told that the United 
States Government must forever remain in the Philippines 
because we are so incapable or so unpatriotic as uot to be 
intrusted with our own affairs. So long as these words 



sound in Filipino ears we should not be men were we com- 
plaisantly and calmly to assent to permanent American 
control in the Philippines. {Applause.) 















^h-S ^:}- 



SPE^lCEfi OF MANUEL L. QUEZON 



1^# 



Mr. Chairman, some say that this preamble is worthlej^s 






actiKdly a part of the bill, and is ther^j; 






fele force. If so, then there should not be mucH!: 






opEe^on to it, for if left in the bill it caftl 



■ dO' ..nO' ■ harm. As for myself I value thia'E 



- ' ' ' Pre*®Me for. its full worth. It is the one 

" " ' " 

retain your sovereignty over the| 



that win permit the Filipino peoplej 

fhey can lift their heads so long^l 
|a?^p^eSs subjection. It is the one feature of the| 



j I l||Pf 

full of hope and expec^J 
;. of the bill that will permit 



to look at your flag, even while it floats 

' 44S@pa»Qra«im 



and edifices, as the ensign not of! 



domination of 






nm, 



as .the symbol of the generous purpose 
to help a smaller nation that strives^: 

^ goal, to stand some day soon uponf;||j 
forward thereafter unaided and 'fill 



the Democratic side.) 



4" 



''' 

'3)1' '’’fMM, wl'E'' .7:1.',' """ ' 



S3' 



si 






i3p Vi '■■■' "E S- 






' ' " ?! ' 






3ir) , 



‘V/ 






, c 









GENERAL AGUINALDO 

[From a Speech in the House of Representatives^ Washingfton, D. C.| 

October 2, 1914] 



Agui- 



I want to say another word about General Aguinaldo. 
As I said before, I know him personally, I had served under 
him. As the gentlemen of this House are aware, Affui- 
naldo at one time wielded great power in the Philip^ieS. 
During the revolution he was the Supreme Mihtary Chie:^ 
with the powers of a dictator, just as the Presid^t b 
the United States would be here in case of war. He had 
the physical power to do what he chose with 
of the then independent Philippine Government. cn e 
was captured by. General Funston, after havins 
this undisputed authority for more than two 
naldo was as poor as he was when the war starte . 
plazise on the Democratic side.) ^ 

Mr. Chairman, I do not wish to make invidious 
risons,, but I want to ask you how many revolutionMy 
chiefs in other parts of the world who have b^n : 
position of General Aguinaldo have ^ , 

. _ what Aguinaldo did ? HoW many , 

willing to go back to their homes n® P® 
ever after having had in their possession so V 

that they could have appropriated without ^ 

naldo is not a rich man today. He is a modest ^ 
has not accepted any position from the r 

ment, although it is authoritatively ^ . 

offered a good one. He is not even in 

Why? He wanted to show the world that he . ^ 
his country,, not because of any desire for 
or power, but out of patriotism, and th^ W en _ , _ 

not fight any longer he could go to his home an^ 
peaceful and modest life, the life of n 
ing upon his farm as he is doing 'now. ° 

has demonstrated that the Filipinos who had toown how 
to fight know likewise how to wor^ in time of peace. I 
need say no more. (Applatise on the Democratic side.) 

43 



FREEDOM OF RELIGION 

^ Speech in the Bouse of Bepresentatives, Washington, D. C., 
October 6, 1914] 



1^ spite of the fact that the Islands during the 300 years 
Q_ Spanish domination had had only one church — ^the Ro- 
Gatholio--which was also the State Church of Spain, 
the framers of the Constitution 
Qt the rhilippiHe Republic were all Catholics, one of the 
that Constitution guaranteed freedom of wor- 
et religion. 

May I call the attention of the House to this remarkable 
eveal whieh indicates that the Filipinos are, as it were, by 
^©p^Kataient, a liberty-loving people? The history of the 
2"^ country which has been for centuries 

influence of a single church — which church 
political institutions — ^has suc- 
-^§ j la establishing religious freedom without bloodshed, 
of r after page of human history tells of the martyrs 

bv This country of yours was founded 

in.i;i ir would Sooner give up their homes than per- 

^ dicta^ whom they shall worship. Crom- 

tfe £ Wmself the instrument of Providence to destroy 
tSit SaS>r* claimed that Christ was 

m ^ 



GOVERNMENT OF NON-CHRISTIAN TRIBES 

[From a Speech in the House of Representatives, Washington, D. C.| 

October 12, 1914] 



We are told, Mr. Chairman, that the Moros hMe the 
Christian Filipinos ; that they have emphatically reitera'ted 
that they would forcibly resist any attempt at a govern- 
ment of their territory by the latter; that they love 'Hie 
Americans, are happy under American rule and aro beg- 
ging to be permitted to continue to live under that rule- 
What are the facts? The fact is that While it is true 
that the Moros have attacked and killed some 
was long ago that they did so, while up to two years before 

nEnioTOTTo been in the habit of *tta<^ng 

FAHATICISM killing American soldiers. Why, Mr. 

man, the number of the American ttoops 
killed by the Moros in their resistance to American ^ 
trol exceeded by far the number of Filipinos tb®t ^ 
even attempted to kill in past years, not tO say of > ^ 

they actually succeeded in killing. That Filipino n^ 
have become a part of the trophies of the head-hunt^S^^ 
times gone-by is undoubtedly a fact; but, unfortnnj^’ 
Spanish and American heads have also been *sken^tO^ 

up these trophies. What is the concksion-^O Oi^P^ . 

conclusion — ^to be derived from these premises? ^ 
Christian Filipinos were never singled out as the mos ^ ^ 

sired victims of warlike Moros and head-hunting 
that the Moro aversion to the Christian is a 
religious fanaticism. It made no differsmce to these Mo- 
hammedans whether their victim was a« American, a 
Spaniard, or a Filipino so long as ho bore the mark of 
the cross. With the savages their head-hunting occupa- 
tion was a part of their superstition, ahd the color of the 
head mattered not. 



45 




46 SP 3 BEGHES OF MANUEL L. QUEZON 

* : ' • * « # 

A Bpeetaele doiibtl^a astonishing to men who^ t 
does the gentleman from Iowa (Mr. Townee) is 
heing offered since 'the reorganization of the Moro 
Ihe provincial boards have been 
ttOBo ini 3 |tfTE charge of the subprovinces, and 
■TO composed of 

Mohammodan as 

^merican as treasurer. 

hates- to have a anyt hin g to do with the 

much he (hsiihes any other government than ^ 
<^neriean-<xmtf oiled government, we can judge 
the Moslem third member 

® Zamboanga delivered 

S^^mmment,, of which he is a 

^ to. Caipenter. i 



a Filipino as governor^ o 
third member, and an 

How nearly true jt is that 

a strong, purely 
from the 
of the Province. 

onThe inauguration of the p^ 

- i member by appointment, 
i ii^ call the attention of t e com 

for the Moslem' 

a.’nA^l thiSlss that it is. impossible ,*„„^jcjpate 
Id live together in peace 

Os-^ governmeiit is foolish and la hatr^ 

a more emphatic denial of the a jjj« 

state?® ehriatian Filipinos th^ 

«»fman, a Christian FiHpmo and a Mo^ 

fact afone 

givpti ®* Iheir common province, and tms TriiiniTio 
hot OB? %videhee that the Moro and ^pgrate 

in lOg^her peacefully but also can cooperate 

® *0e .pjihMo good, _ . 

'■ ■ - ■ 









/I:. 



S?;3fef||®f 



PLEDGE OF independence 

[Prom a Speech in the Hou«?p , • ? ' 

se of Representatives, Washington, 
October 14, 1914] > I 



«ho precSl^“ 

of oelf-g„vor™«^‘“« ^ 

by every tyrant. No ruW ^ 
to Mieve that his subiecfq^ 



"fhe speech of the c-en^ ^ want to-he 
drfivered before 

Bouse of Commons iT^ J %''■ > 

cmors were struggline- 5f? . 

H« British lawmS^ W 
Ainerican colonies did « 

^re merely 1^!!^ tb^ * 

be led^stiy hy P^WIl^llill# 

wont to exploit and ensKtt 
'..Why, Mr. Chairma^"^ 
lipino people, having 
ihdenendPTif +Tto ^ defied,-, because 

iBdopendont. the groatost and Mott 

ElvowmoN rj;^ ^*w>Wine-'iVij^i!l|^* 

jsroT A JOKE' ^dey would unavoidg^#'',^SIPSM 

«-he.ond 

inothers and sisters 'were 









41 SPEECHES OP MANUE5L L. QXJEIZON 

place of the fallen, until the whole nation came very near 
being annihilated? Does the gentleman from Washington 
believe that that war was a joke, and that we w'ent into 
it as a matter of amusement? 

« 4^ iff 4* ❖ ^ 

Mr. Chairman, again and again the people of the Philip- 
pine Islands since the first American commander landed at 
the City of Manila have been told by the representatives 
of tMs Government in those Islands that the United States 
was M the Philippines for the sole purpose of helping 
the Filipinos establish the foundations of their independent 
national life. Those promises have been reiterated by the 
CJhief Executives of the Nation in their messages both to 
®e Filipino people and to the American Congress. Mr. 
Taft, Mr. EooSevelt and Mr. Wilson in official documents 
t^t are recorded in the archives of this Government have 
each) and ah made such declarations. 

Ihe Mlipino people have taken the words of those offi- 
gIMs at face valuei, regarding them as the words of the 
JiiBeiican people themselves, whom the Presidents I have 
^ enumerated represented when they made 

declarations. Today the Arnerican 
Congress is asked not to ratify but to repu- 
diate those words and those declarations. And on what 
gromid? On the ground that you need the aid of the Phil- 
ippines that you may emsrge victorious from a supposedly 
fojftheominig fionflicfc‘‘^Comniercial on armed- — ^f or the control 
of the Pacific. 

IS^at effect, Mr. Chairman, would the action of this 
Congress exeit upon the Filipinos should the advice of the 
gentienian from Illinois be heeded? The Filipino people 
would at once tnhe the defeat of the preamble of the bill as 
a convineing proof that this Nation would repudiate the 
promises it early made whenever it might be to its in- 
terest to dO’ so. After such a repudiation had occurred, 
how could any man ever expect the Filipino people again 
to have Gonfiidenee in the American Nation? What would 
he the advantage to. be gained by the enactment of a law 



PHILIPPINE FREEDOM 



49 



establishing an autonomous government in the Philippine 
Islands if the Filipino people wuld not feel secure in the 
free and everlasting enjoyment of that autonomy, or if 
they must forever fear that, inasmuch as you repudiated 
your promise of independence made when you did not think 
the Philippines a commercial or strategic asset but changed 
your opinion on this subject when conditions made it con- 
venient, you might in like manner establish another kind of 
government whenever you thought it best for your purposes 
to do so? Ah, Mr. Chairman, without confidence, without 
faith, always fearful of what might happen in the future, 
how could anyone expect the Filipino people to be contented 
and so ask them to remain under the American flag? 

18441 O. W. 4 



NOTHWO BUT FREEDOM 



T^Ita Mphonk Conference, Defending the Jones 
SfU<9nd SoT^npF Berrison’s Administration, October 16, 1914] 



■II 



1 affi iateirefted in combating from this platform 
piusbn ^ Mr. Manp ibat you can repudiate your early 
||gdte of ind^ondence by voting down the preamble to the 
lonoi Iffl, Md at the same time make the Filipino people 

I TYiATit 



m at tne mine time maKe tne r 
by grantmg them autonomous government m- 
lofar M their domestic jrffairs are concerned, thereby 
Ihe^ People from their desire for independence. 
V Jtafeg and tentlemen the Filipino people do want and 



.Ui, the Filipino people do want and 
urge rodipeadmice of ^e United States now. I think 
w®i always and forever want and urge independence. 
»a« ® however, dispassionate enough to ad- 
a possibility that I may be wrong m tlm 
. last prediction and that Mr. Mann may be 

mghf. ®tit if the fiiipino people are ever to prefer Amer- 
ilii sover^ty to their own, as Mr. Mann forecasts, it 
not be when the preamble to the Jones Bill has been 
low®, but, on the contrary, only on condition that 
B. iNE bei Voted i® the Bill. If yo“ inform the Filipino 
^ople that they shall have none of their so much longed- 
f I# , tedep endimee they wiU the more crave for it. It is 
anolher Osyse of tgibidden fruit, ladies and gentlemen. 
f(md, Y 



But i»^herj ftere % tids other important reason. The 
i^liipino peOpie are now ©n the road toward their freedom. 
POU have gEhwed- them to take some first steps even at 
he time' their snbjiugation by military- force had just 
li^n acOO^E^bed. The bill of fights is now as much a 
idvilege' of FWlpphie eiidsenShip. Tou have given them 
n elective ASSeaibly,, tyrr , Mann proposes that they 
60 



PHILIPPINE FBEBDOM 



61 



be given more and larger governmental powers. The pro- 
gress toward freedom never stops when once begun until 
it reaches its culmination. The Filipino people will never 
be satisfied with any concession from the United States short 
of their complete freedom as a people. Such being the 
case, they will not be satisfied until you shall have placed 
in their own hands the decision whether or not they shall 
be politically independent from the United States. 

The theory that a nation may be dependent upon another 
and yet be free holds true only when such dependence has 
been brought about with the consent, and by the free ac- 
cord of the dependency. No matter how mucTi of mdividual 
liberty or of self-government in domestic affairs a peope 
may have, that people if subject to anoto, not by je^on 
of their own will but by sheer power of the latter so that the 
local government they possess is merely ^ 
part of the sovereign, are not free in fac or in . , 

The Filipino people can truly be free 
sovereignty only if this nation shall say to th . 
may be an independent nation if you chwse, ^ 

retain a political relationship wlth^us,, if you 

AUTOnoicY AND prefer. In either case you ^ 

CONSTITUTION own autonomous government witii . . . > 
constitution M you 

and wc shail claim no oW that ^ 

wTe^ tS'pe'ople of the Islands shall 

those rights that belong to them by ^ remain undw 
nation and a people, they may decide to remain under 

4.1, A • « ^ j 4. Mr MaHH a true prophet, 

the American flag and to prove mr. f f ct, 

but never otherwise. 



AN AGE-OLD DESIRE 

CfTQm an Address Brfore the CosmopoUtan Club of New York, 
December 9, 1914] 



It is A truism that every people in whatever part of the 
world prefer their own government to that imposed by ano- 
ther power, even though their own government may prove 
the wei^r. 

* =!■ * * 

It is not dhe to any spirit of enmity between my people 
and this country that leads them to ask for independence; 
It is^rely the ei^^ of the desire which is found in 

] of the Filipinos, Americans and every liberty- 

o^^g peopleMihe desire to conduct their own government 
m their own way. The spirit of '76 is today in the Phil- 
ippmes the spirit of 1914 

52 



POLICY TOWARD INDEPENDENCE 

[Prom Mr. Quezon’s Testimony Before the Senate Committee on the 
Philippines, December 14, 1914-January 9, 1916] 

What have you been doing in the Philippines? 
been educating the people; you are giving them' education ; 
eud in your schools you are teaching them individual aa 
political liberty. Together with this education 
them autonomy, first in the municipalities and later , , 

provinces ; then you created |in Assembly, and 
control the Legislature, because they have a 
the Commission. If you are going to be consiSten > , . 

must come the day when, in the gradual advance o 
policy you will reach the point where aW 
ers will be placed in their hands; and since it is , . 
ceivable that when they have assumed full ® 

government, you would still prefer to retain ^vei»i^^ 
over them, with the responsibility to protect tnem_ 
foreign aggression without any authority, ^ unwed so 
conclusion is that this policy, which has been toi 
far, will naturally lead to independence. ^ 

* * ^ ^ ^ aTni)l6> 

fair and sensible interpretation of that . 

which is the interpretation that the Filipino ,^Tjnited 
give to it, is this: That it is the purpose ot xne _ — . 

States to grant to the FhihPP®^® ^ 

cause they have believed that ail the tiihe ’ ^ 
been saying it all the time— and if . i,een 

subject were to be the final say this would no ^ 
the bill before the Gongress at this time, it w^ou ^ 
been an immediate independence bill^but when in tne 
opinion of the Congress We have: conducted the government 

RS 



" 










SFEiOH]^ OF MANUEL L. QUEZON 






provide in tins bill in a way that will justify the 
f^foneMe pegttfn^on that we shall establish and maintain 
;a ildriy des&tik jgOvennnent, a government that would keep 
pfSit aftil prote^on to ttie rights of the people. 

the United States, when it does 
jpgnt iPhillf pine independence, should depart entirely from 
Is^ndi an4 retem no responsibility whatever for the 
1 have heard it stated by several gentlemen 
Ae IMpinos speak of independence they mean 
want be allowed to do in the Phil- 
IS th^ while the United States Navy is 

s thi harb.@7 (jf Matiilfli keeping foreign nations from' 

i|r, ^^^an,, in faifness to the Filipino people, I want 
fcl W® do not think of such a thing as that — ^we 
nlt^ 'lav-i thought Of it. it is true that many of us 
have heO& idfVocaMng neutralisa'tion of the Islands as 'the 
oi guaranteeing Philippine independence, but we 
never thouGrht of making such neutralization a con- 
ihe f no uon of our independence. 

, WordI* ©jjr independence is not to depend upon 

f a:^ mu^ less upon any protection 

Ae Slat^. We understand that if we want 

4 , independence we must assume its burdens, 

' We must take the risk and the responsibil- 

4 " iMes. We are not the first people to have 

tlien the |ilk Of b and if we really prize 

as We iOt askould be glad and courageous 
^0 eoneeQuenci^ of the situation, 
fflt any prOtBctorat^^ get independence, 
i wmt it beeailse it ■would be unfair and 
Btoited' States; and we wnuld not want it ; 

: lOa® never he nfforded without impair- , 
;«!!!! f re'^edOm of the protected States, and 

weareihote 'eonicerhed! about thesubs'tence of freedom than 
J^e WOf® iffidOp if we are going to havein- 

We wait real independence and not merely 




PRESTIGE OF AMERICAN FLAG 

[From Remarks at the Opening of the Philippine Exhibit St 
Francisco, February 26j 1916] 



The granting of independence would ih itseK 
strong a sentiment of gratitude on the part of the FUWBIQ 
people toward the United States that you wo4u ^ha^ 
created in the heart of the Pacific a nation true mi its ai^ 
legiance and friendship to you both in peace and in war. ^ 
to the prestige of the American fiag, what better ^ 
can you have than that which will come to 
suit of an act of international justice and gem^e^lw ' 

.66 



THE JAPANESE MENACE 

il'rom & Speech in the House of Representatives, Washington, D. C., 

May 1, 1916] 



Yoti are writing history today, and it lies entirely within 
your power to determine what that history shall be — ^whe- 
ther it shall be one worthy of the past of this great Republic, 
a realii^tion of the noble purposes for which it was 
founded, or a bold and frank departure from what you 
have asserted to be American ideals and American prin- 



, ,j The, people of the Philippines are in suspense; their eyes 
afe .now anxiously following the proceedings in this cham- 
her,, the very life of their country hanging in the balance. 

Shall justice at last be done to them? Shall 

the untold sacrifice in blood and treasure 
, * I ' ‘ made in the past now bear its fruit? Shall 
after centuries of subjection, be after all permitted to 
lift 'Up.viOur heads and face mankind as an emancipated 
People, placed upon the sapae footing as those who are al- 
ready the inasters of themselves and their country ; or must 
We stilt Wander, a people without their own country or 
imth hopes in the future? The answer 

if yeu^B. 



Sir. ©hstitwian, would be a lack of candor for me to 
fay that the ©larke, amendment constitutes, in my opinion, 
the best and wisest way of disposing of the Philippine 
CLAaiaf fUMtion. I think I could propose a better 
Sitution, or* at least, one that would better 
'saieguatd the interests of my people and be 
more satisiictery ter^enj. Hut, as a practical man, I must 
deal with eondiMtns; anti' soi, there being no other pro- 
se: 



PHILIPPINE FREEDOM 57 

posal for Philippine independence which could possibly 
have any chance of getting through, I am for the Clarke 
amendment body and soul. (Apptow®® ^ Democratic 
side.) 

The substantial merit of the Clarke ^endment lies in 
the fact that it provides for the establishment, within a 
short period of time, of an independent Philippine Goyera- 
ment, a government that vdll be of, for and by the Filipino 
people, absolutely free from any foreign control and 
ference, a government which it ia our fond^t ^bition 
to have as it is our God-given right to establish, the only 
kind of government under which we can live happi y aU' 
contented. {Applause.) 

fit 4t 

4* « ♦ « * 

Mr. Madden. Will the gentleman yield? 



Mr. Quezon. Yes. . ^ 

Mr. madden. Suppose the Filipinos were gi^en fteedo ^ 
now, but before they had time to build up an 
navy some European or Oriental country should un 
to take them away. To what civilized country wou 
look for protection? . , I 

Mr. Quezon. Mr. Chairman, I was just saying ^ 

was interrupted by the gentleman from «otiMeman 

Mn) that, in my opinion, the 

is not likely to become real, but if it shou ^ pro^ 
the gentleman that we would look to .^“’^.^^li^tever 
tection; we would fight as best as we could wi _ 
means we had; we would unhesitatingly con ^ 
more to our love for freedom the best bloo 
our land {applause) ; we could do nO ^ . j^g 

Mr. O’Shaunessy. Will the gentleman yield for j 
supplemental question? 

Mr. QUEZON. Yes. . 

Mr. O’ShaUnessy. Has the .j,.,, 

dence in the nations of the world to helieve _,, 4 . * 

be left alone after you are free and independent 
strong army and na^? 






'/ ■ /V 



* 



A f i''^' '> 

|/f^4r,r/'" I' 






K, ,,. <'5 

/ii„'^-jij,‘h:'i' "' 



gp^HSS OF MANUEL L. QUEZON 



(^1 



?(^|f^N. iir. Chairman, I have no more confidence! 



ifm 



)-'f 



‘i'", 



"I' / 



La Ws continent with but 3,000,000 people (ap~ 





'''))/ 

/A - -^ ' '| 

''V ' " 



i® !^( tiaftaois of , the world now than had those patrioticllg; 



who in 1776 dared to establish a Republic ini 






f■Sii 

Ml-" ' „ 



A/ / 

'l, 



; but my people are just as willing-^|A; 
ag desirous of taking their chance-^!fi! _^^^_ 
®8;jAe,'^Ufl:derSi of this Nation were, and I hope in God*a..li^^' 
^ successfuU- "i^at would have hee^:^Qi§ 
'^iif®ta^''fSUf''O0uSlaT toda^ had your forefathers beenL^l^^j 
as timid, as fearful , of other nations, as the gentlemaii.^^®" 
tobsl; J^ode ;Ma®d., (Mr. O'Shaunbssy) would wish iia !f||| 

' /' ■ oW^&\ 

> ^e tho gentleman unplies the assertion that |'U|m 

ao small country should aspire to be independent, for it||J| 
l^iply ^1 toe giatobed by a stironger power. If this theory fiicfii 
he true, tiie mouth of every Irishman patriot should be '»!|:;|;; 

®l08^ s^ce his noble ambition would simply memi j ■jSii 
a change of master. But that theory, fortunately for man- !|v|| ! 
toad, is unfounded and not supported by facts. Look, ■ if 
^ ttoil^id, and other small counj- 

jfe how long they have been independent. 

iJoes anyone question that they will remain so for years- to!i!|®:| 
/'-'A ' Alf'Ac- 

_ the latest onkance of an unprovoked aggression, u 

toecause hmr conquest was sought, but ■!;l) ;■? I 



of a belligerent army through her ter- |j||| 

A-P' 



j, \i ' 



ritory whs deemed vital for the success of' |!g|-;- 
j that army* and,, I dare say, the attack upon^lp., 
than any other cause, wiU '|||| 
^rm^y in this war, since she so shocked the moral 
world that she alienated sympathies which 
use have been hers. It. will only be, so we '|:si||^ 
arq toJi-^^d |,i|^]jj|^e it to be true — after the full inde- v/A; 

have been restored and after 
has been fully paid for the damages she has suffered 
that the peace of lurqpo will come. . :1|!^ 

Mr^ Chaiimhh, it has been very unfortunate for 




PHILIPPINE FREEDOM 



and yet. in a way, the world at large may be censol^ 
that such a horrible incident should have 
its consequences make us feel that it never w^ be^W 
repeated. With the lesson in Belgium before.it no na ^ , 

no matter how strong it may be, G®V^ 

itself in the moral predicament in which the Germ 

emment is now placed. (Applattse.) mies- 

Mr. O’SHAUNESSY. Mr. Chairman, just 
tion. Is it a fact that the poliUcos, so-called, J 
pine Islands believe that when they we 
dom they will be supported in it by j^^^+x,atthev 
o( the united States, or is there any nnderste ndn«aat ^ 
wiU be guaranteed in their freedom or that something mn 

be done for their neutralization? vsiiTiinos Who 

Mr. QUEZON. Mr. Chairman, there may inde- 

believe or hope that when 

pendent the Army and Navy of the United S _ ^ pgided 

back of that declaration, eithw foiv a 
of years or forever. - ^ 

course, I would not refuse the aid ef *^®^iered to us 
and would accept it gracefully if 
in case we were at war. But I would no _ 
tainly I would not make the iud®peudence^ot ^ such aid 
Islands dependent upon the understendr r always 

would be given us. My attitude on ^ ahouM rely 

been this: If we want to b® ludepe - ? 
upon ourselves alone to maintain . attitude <sf the 

ment. So far as I know, this i$ aiso^. (ApplaTise.y 
immense majority^of the I am one 

It is true that there we phiUppine Islands 

of them— who would like to see _ . ^ take 

neutralized, and we hope that the ^ with other 

nations to the effect that when t^^^ government, inde^ 

granted their “‘i®^®"^®”^ by all the 

pendence shall be recognized ana _ 

nations of the world and not interfered with. But neither 



^ SFEECHES OP MANUEL L. QUEZON 

me: we so much concerned about the necessity of neutralize 
ing the Fhlli^pines as to make the granting of our inde- 
pendi^cet dependent upon the success of a neutralization 
trea^. 

S Chairman» I have no fear, when your protection is 
withdrawn from the iPhilippines, of any sudden invasion of 
our country by a conquering army, not because I have any 

no fnan on in the altruism of the other na- 

tions but because I know they are selfish. 
Just let me show you how the self-interest 
of the j^eat powers will serve to protect the Islands from 
foreign aggression. The nations that are strong enough 
to lake the IPhilippines by force are England, France, Geiv 
manyj Austria, Italy, and Russia in Europe, and Japan in 
Asia* 

England is satisfied with the maintenance of the sfatzts 
qitg to Asias^that is to say, with retaining what she has 
and net having others get more than they now have. She 
does not seem to have any special reasons for wishing to 
pessess herself of the Philippines. On the contrary, there 
are tore- strong reasons why we should have no fear of 
England, First* because after the attitude which she has 
taken to this war-^holding herself out as the friend of weak 
natieis^lhe couid not Well adopt a policy of conquest to- 
ward' sueh: a nation; second, because England would nO 
more think of oftending the American people than the 
tJtoled Slates would think of offending the English people. 

fh^e two English-speaking peoples are now friends and 
Wil^ remato so. It is evident that if the Philippines are 
made todejpendent because, in their love for justice, the 
Anieriean people felt it their duty to allow us to set up 
our owMi government, it would necessarily be offensive to 
the people of the United States to learn that another coun- 
trjf hadi destroyed the new government. Thia> does not 
ntoan that they would' have feeling of resentment against 
the nationi Which ha® thns acted toward us. So England 
will not totel^ere with an independent Philippine Govern- 



PHILIPPINE FREEDOM 



61 



INTEREST 
OF JAPAN 



Austria is out of the question for she has no colonies 
in Asia and has shown no desire of late of acquiring 
How about France, Germany, Italy and Russia? The in- 
terest of Japan, as weU as that of England, 
will protect the Philippines from aggrossion 
coming from any of these countries. ^ 
there is left only one nation, and that is Japan, the 
nation which is pointed out as the greatest menace 
Philippine Independence. ,. 

Mr. Chairman, I have no doubt that if the Phi . 
Islands were given to Japan and the Filipinos ^ 

acquiesce voluntarily in this transfer of ^ 

would become patriotic Japanese, Japan would be ® ^ 
take the Islands. But Japan will make no ^ „g,jire 

not a drop of blood, nor spend a cent of money o a 
the Islands once they are independent. whiGh ^ 

There are only three objects nowadays tef- 

nation undertakes the conquest of another 
ritorial aggrandizement, commercial expansion* or . 

JAPAN A-uxTi i^ecessity. Japan at present does ^ ;jias 

PHILIPPINES territory in ®^pire more 

of recent years added tp the ®mP _ 
territory than she can easily manage. B®®mes, 
territorial expansion she is looking toward of 

instead of toward the south. So, for a tP 

gaining more territory alone, Japan not the 



6ci,aaaaai 3 iiiuxe terriTOry aiuiic, eiaparix vtia* d|0& 

conquer the Islands. As for commercial 
trade of Japan with Europe, China and "^yjjppines, 
will not be helped by the possession of the 
for the Islands are out of the way in aU ^ggded 

for strategic reasons, the Philippines are no ^' -^q ppS- 

by Japan than they are for commercial reason^!- 
sible enemy of Japan, after the United SmtOS has 
Islands, would come by way of the ^ gpecial 

fore, I can see no reason why Japan wossld have any 
desire to seize the Islands. action 

Again, England could not look with favor bn the _ 
of Japan in taking over the ArGhipeiago for that 



8^161^ OF M^JfUEL L. QUEZON 



f too, near Japan to be safe or comfortable. 
C&aJiniim, this talk of the Philippines being grab- 
Japan the day after you had left us alone is ab- 
solnt^ litfoundedi and no one familiar with the interna^ 
Monal situataon in the Far East would take it seriously. 
i&mUme m ^e BmocraMc aide.) 

lir. MfL/t i BB of kUnnesota. I understood tne gentleman 
to take tl^ position that there is no danger of Japan con- 
jfhe in case the Philippine Islands are 

indop^^^^ free. 

the purposes of this next question. 

Ihe ^nMeman think there is any possibility that 
Japan would go fe, war with the United States for the 
P^ose of getting the Philippine Islands if our sovereignty 
r^atnbd;? 

ji^t is a ve^ delicate question for me to 
^ a matter for American statesmen and 
p^ege amte^en to settle. {Applani&e.) I have my 
bwn opinion as to what would be the rela^ 
between the Philippines and Japan if 
V : - j indepmident, but I should not care 

jjijg position of telling this House things 
i’ele^ons between the United States and 



. Si-.: 

,'#0| 



If the gentleman thinks that Japan would 
ii‘ ^flipinos in order to get the Philippine 
that Japan Would fight the United 



Mandi 



~ A'U.a - - wv/vaxvs 

Wt ^Mippine Islands? 

I tbink I 



and #ke 



of d sn giiir to 



liie Wm East, 



can 



from the standpoint of 
- ^Wullppiii^ gj^g an independent nation 
a ^oteny p States. The 

naidon would not be a sourcO 
. under American 

Well he a lueu to Japan^s interest in 



^ iilm democratic side.) 




SOLEMN PLEDGE OF A GREAT PEOPLE ' 

[From a Speech in Ae House of Representatives, Washington^ ©. . • , 

August 18, 1916] ' ' L' 



Mr. Speaker, the bill which is now 
cally the same as that which passed the House « ^ 

^ves on May 1. last, connnonly Im^ 

Therefore, I feel justified in predicting and 

report will be adopted. The long, conttnu 
sometimes very bitter contest to enact iriend 

thus have come to a successful end, an ^ 
human liberty will have reason to ^ 

This bill differs from the bill jj. two 

the United States on February 4, 19 » i 

On the subject of independence the ^ „ ^ea not^^ 

definite than this bill, since the ®®”**^ ‘^„jgt>end^ncc; 
that the Philippines shall be 8'’^®”^®^ ,-«dtepend^ce to 
also set the period within which tha yjiylSvbpVto 

be granted ; that is, from two to coa^ontosid'^ 

agreed upon in the report to the House ^ ^ the f toMd' 

not undertake to determine tv,,* tt'doto 

when independence shall he 

to be the purpose of the people of e ^ as a ^hl'p 

the Philippines their ^dependence . 

government can be established the P 

With regard to the P*’°''^toionS j,y the Filipino 

the Philippine Government aad i ^ore logical than the 
people, this bill is more liheraV a““ - and tought fOr the 
Senate BiU. ^ % m Senate Bill, 

namely, the enough to see and. frank 
known to you, but I am fair . „ form this bill is a 

enough to say that even airection. 

remarkable progress in vne r*e 68 



SfEKSKES f>F MANUEL L. QUEZON 

Fc» iBore than three centuries the pec^le ^ the 

were under the rule of Spain. During a o ^ 
period of time th^ were held by the Spanish overnmen 
ayosFfeffly as subjects and were given no part in the govern- 
thent of their country. The laws of the realm defined as 
ireason* pimishable even by death, any attempt to ree ^ 
Islands' though it be by peaceful means. Eighteen y 
^0 the sovereignty of Spain was succeeded by tha o e 
^ffliled States'. During this whole time, excepting on y 
feel three y^rs, the Philippine Government was practically, 
almaost exclusively, in the hands of American officia s a^ 
pointei by the President. The policy of the United States 
^Ss mide^ed. Ho one knew whether we shall be per 
Waaently held as possessions, sold to some other power, or 

granted independence. . . 

^ Wank Gbd, those conditions which were becoming every 
Woye and more intolerable will soon disappear, never 
Upplame.) 



^ V ^ 

we iialre a legialative declaration that it is 
Of the people of the United States to grant the Phii- 
iiidepeiidehce '^as soon as a stable government can 
^ established” in the Islands. To us these 
are no empty words— -they are the solemn 
. pledge of a great people. (AppUMse.) 

fbir the speedy accomplishonent of said purpose the 
i^ople are intrusted with greater legislative power 
^d i^Ore qdininistrative control over their domestic affair^. 

SOW iook to a future roseate wifh hope. The dark 
^Oldg of uncertainty have been dispelled from our horizon. 

have been the least and the last factor in 
r - ^®airg. Hereafter we shall be the first and most 

ta^of. ilefetofore things were done by the 
hot only without the consent but on 
SaSy Qcgasidus^ opposition of the Fili*- 

>i®o> POopfe. Hereafter nothing will be done without our 
fflu^h) less' in dehance of our opposition. 

very decisive 






PHILIPPINE FEEEDOM 



people. It marks an epoch in our national hist®:^. 
(Applause.) We are convinced that the promise of inde- 
pendence contained in the bill will be faithfully ful^edy 
for we know that we are dealing with a Nation to the 
truest sense jealous of its honor and its good name. iAp- 
plause.) We are positive that when we have fully d^on- 
strated that we can establish and maintain a government 
that will protect from lawlessness and from violenco pS 
own citizens as well as those of other countries who hvO 
or sojourn in the Islands, the American people wiH Gonsont 
to the setting up of a PMlippine Republic which Will be a 
glory to the United States and a blessing to us. ( ApptoKSfc)' 
Yes, the enactment of such a great piece of consl^ciaive 
legislation as this is to the everlasting credit of this 
gress and this administration. You have done a *i®ble 
work and you have every reason to feel satisfied With an 
proud of it. You can be sure that when a future Congress 
cuts forever the tie that as yet binds my country to yO^s*. 
the Filipino people will not forget that it is because bt toS 
legislation that there will then have been brought abW 
such a happy and righteous consummation of yoUr Phih®' 



pine enterprise. (Applause.) +, 

Mr. Speaker, I know I am voicing the unanimous S^ 
ment of my people When from the bottom of 
' to you here today we are grateful^^®^ 

SSS fo"“dly grateful— to the Americ^' P 
to the Congress of the Uaited States 



President Wilson for this measure. . , 

Mr. Speaker, may I not be permitted on this 
to transgress the rules of the House so ifliat I . 

personally the gentleman from Virgima and ^ny ® ‘ 

“Mr. Jones, I have witnessed your untiring Wof on 
bill ; I have seen your Unselfish devotion to the o 
ippine independence, you honestly 
manded not only by God's own law but a^9o by ^ e 
interests of both your country' and rmne; As ibe ‘bair 
of the Committee on Insular Affairs, 'Whioh' is m . 

legislation affecting the Philippines, you have considered^ r 
to be your paramount duty t0‘ write into law the covenant 



18441 O. W.— -B 




SPEECHES OF MANUEL L. QUEZON 



01 iEQPZ£ 



of yOEt fsthofs and the spirit of America’s freedom for all. 
Syithis biU, which is the result of your hard labor — ^labor 
f dti have Cai^ed out at the risk of your own life, for you 
bays been working in spite of ill-health — ^you are entitled, in 
Bay esMniatiOijU to a prominent place in the list of the advo- 
dt h#nan liberty. Surely your name will be written 
In letters of gold in Ihe history of the Philippine Islands. 
Tfou haye, earned not only the eternal gratitude but the love 
## fevery hidividual Filipino. God bless you!” {Loud ap- 

' Now* Mr. Speaker, just one word more of a personal 
fehi®aeter, Seyen years ago next December I first entered , 
the Nal bf the House of Representatives as the spokesman 
of the Filipino people. I came with a man- 
date to work for the immediate independence 
of the Philippine Islands. Ever since that : 
#yi to me best of my abiliiy, I have done everything I 
eotfid to carry out that- mandate. (^Applause.) To my 
tfepwledge i have been loyal to the will of my people, and no 
oppo^nai'^ have I let go by unused that could be employed 
to prodnote their welfare as I saw it. True, I have not 
secured their independence, but I shall feel, once this legis- 
IktioM is enacted, that I have not come to this country in 
vain., ; No one advocating certain legislation ever gets all 
he! wants ip the first attempt. Considering the time I 
have been here, the character of the subject, and the in- 
fiii^Ce i had to fight, I feel inclined to say that I am almost 
surprised that I have secured as much. 

Wil the gentleman yield? 

Mr.«! I do not desire to take the gentleman’s 

l^eij ii>' I -iKItjite i». im-ay porhaps be fitting for a member of 
the liinoMi^ to saf that while he has not always been able 
' '' k^ee with the Commissioner from the 

_ Islands, he is ready to say that 
never known any man more devoted ^ 
as he understood those im K 
! been 'Iho gentleman from the Philippine,'! 
lilSsm#. ' uieA In season and out of season, with 






to the 




PHILIPPINE FREEDOM 



67 



ASSAILED AND . j 

SLANDEB.ED blind 01 



an ability and persistence rare and creditable to any re- 
presentative in any parliament in the world, this gentie- 
man has worked for his people. 

And I desire to say that, so far as my belief is concerned, 
there never has been in any legislative body a representative 
of a people such as the Filipinos, who has represented them 
more ably and faithfully than the gentleman who now 
addresses the House (Mr. Quezon) . {Applause.) 

Mr. Quezon. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman from 
Iowa for his very kind words, which I sincerely appreciate. 

Mr. Speaker, in the course of the campaign I have carried 
on to present before the American people the real^pi- 
rations of my country, I have been at times bitter y 
assailed and even slandered by persons who 
are too blind or too partisan to admi ^ ^ 

anything but selfish motives cah , 

their opponents. An earnest determination on the part o 
some of these to destroy me, politically, and even to 
reputation as an honest man, failed through no fain o 
theirs. I have never retorted in kind. The cause ^ ^ 
vocate is too just, too sacred for me to permit it ® 
stained by base or merely personal animadversions-^ ^ '^a 
I was only “trying to perpetuate myself in this job ® . . 
vocating independence was the least charge made ^ 
me. Well, Mr. Speaker, now the opportunity prdSen ^'1, 
of answering that charge, which up to -ather 

ignored because I always prefer to answm* with ^ 

than with words. {Applause.) I could to 

my post while nothing was done by this atarted 

ameliorate conditions in the Islands. 

the fight, it would have semned lack of determin ^ 
cowardice on my part to stop it or to back t + 

that a decisive battle has been won and the furt er wor o 
be done is comparatively easier, I am goi^ to S ow ow 
attached I am to my office and how fearful I am o osmg 
it. I shall not seek reelection. I do not Want tms or any 
other public office. 1 can manage to live, and much more to 
my liking, as a private citizen. The only reason why I 
sought this place is because I wanted to be of service to my 



A , V/! 

■ '■■^■''V'vv:rV 



iL., * 
y'-: 'kh : - :i 



' ' I / " A’' /') I ^ ' ' ' i 

'68 1' t r, / g MANUEL Ii. QUEZON 

A" « 

!" j; of the honor or the salary attaching' 

;t@j it; ©nee 1 served, my country when there was nothing; 
p every kind of hardships, and danger; 

"yi \ been too generous with me. 

y^, I aTia.ll ever be able to repay, no 
, y,/y/ done or might do in the future 
A" In leaving my present office' I do not propose 



I ! V ^ in the work still to be 
|/J' « done lumtil thi Islmids are completely free. I am only going 
I),,"' ' yte 'oceuipy that place where, in my opinion, I can more- 



/ ^ at least, seems to 

j , , ' , ,; ; ^ ^ be' th^ ;of a private citizen. 

words, and I shall be through. My 
fbis ! House, Mr. Speaker, has been the most 
{ , ^aif able t^erienee in my life. Here I have met men in 

™ heart. I have formed here 
1 ' / friendships I treasure as beyond price. 

I ,' from everyone of you I have received the 

I ®®at courteous treatment, ^e days I spent among you 

w^p Mways hO; very dear to me.. I thank you, Mr. Speaker ; 
j phank the leader of the Majority, the leader of the minor- 

i| i'^% and; ea'^ one of the members of this great House, for 

yO^ail have been extremely good to me. I want you all 
to toow that I realtee that each one of you, no matter how 
y^u vote nn is moved only by your 

^TOest desire to do what you think is best for us. And so 
^ ShalJi tell my people that they have no 

,r®v5^' , ^ possess in every member of this 

body. i4p!kme.) 

fhe Pro tempore. The time of the gentleman 

has expirets;'':, 

I Quezon, come to the Philippines 

and . r^sit me'. i appia'z^ac ) 



,/■ f 



THE NEW PHILIPPINE SENATE 

[From the Inaugural Address Before the Philippine Senate^ 
Ayuntamiento, Manila, October 16, 1916] . . 



It is necessary, however, to bear in mind that a senate 
is expected to proceed differently from a popular house. 
Wherever the bicameral system exists, the lower house is 
supposed to serve as a very sensitive thermometer, regi^r- 
ing the most momentary and temporary changes in pub ic 
sentiment, while the senate must ^represent the 
mature and prudent judgment of public opinion. In ot er 
words, the senate must be a safe, immovable dam to contain 
any overflow of popular passion. The voice of the peeple 
is the voice of God only when it expresses 
formed within the safe channels of serene reflecti'On, The 
most horrible crime recorded by history, a crime that caus® 
the heavens to weep and the earth to tremble, was a crjfise 
committed at the instance of a people blinded by passiel^ 
at a moment when fanaticism had Stifled reason ah^ 
paralyzed all human sentiment. I' refer to the crime o 
Golgotha. „ 

We must take a step forward only when we a^ 
ourselves, and such steps must necessarily be few* 

must act when we are sure that we raow 
public opinion and that this opinion has bnen 
formed conscientiously. In cases of co^ ic 
between private interests we must be the re^latoiy force 
that harmonizes the demands of ibo distinct elements 
making up our community in order that the general interest 
may prevail in every case. We must maintain the stability 
of our institutions and safeguard public and private rights. 

The merits of our work will not be measurable by tiie 
quantity of the laws we pass but by their quality. Nothing 

69 



KEGULATOBY 

EOBCE 



fiO; 8PEBCHES OF MANUEL L. QUEZON 

mof’e confusion in society than a constant change in 
ie^la^tjon. To suffer the evils of an existing law is in 
Miy ^es preferable to endeavoring to remedy these evils 
bf a law passed in a haphazard way, without proper and 
)^itu| consideration, because laws of this nature are pro- 
du'CMve of greater, and perhaps even of irreparable harm. 

wotik will be to build up and not to tear down, and we 
SbaU flol destroy the old until we are sure that the new is 
beetif. idmimse.) 


















.. rJ- 



•L> I 



i® 






■I 



NEW RIGHTS, NEW RESPONSIBILITIES 

[From an Address at a Banquet in Mr. Quezon’s Honor for toe 
ment. of the Jones Law, Hotel de France, Manila, Sep 
28, 1916] 



* 

The Jones Bill has changed this situation radically. 
preamble to this act tells us that it is the purpc»e 0 , 

American people to gr^t the Philippine Islands^ iudep^^ 
ence as soon as a stable government can be establishe 

What does this declaration signify?^ It a 

America explicitly and solemnly recognizes that 
people entitled, like any other, to our liberty and j-. 
independence. It signifies, further, that America nas _ ^ 
termined to allow us to exercise this right as soon ^ 
elements required for a stable government are at han^- 
also signifies that America has waived her righl? sane ® . 
by international practice, though contrary to all x 

r.4s X- X XI T_, j_ 1 nr transf®^^ ^ 



of ethics, to alienate these Islands by sale or - 

This removes my 



some other foreign nation. 



of America’sl abandoning the Philippines 1^^^ _ated 
constituted Filipino Government has been qj 

while a war is pending or imminent in whicb 
might become involved, or during a period of seriou 
turbance of the public order. 

* ♦ * 1(1 * * 

No colored people under foreign sovereign^ 
had the political power henceforth to be enjoyed y ^ 
Filipino people. What is still more, there are : 

in the Far East which, though nomi^ny m- 
dependent, are more subject to 
by foreign government than the Phih^ine 
Islands are subject to interference in their domestic affmrs 
on the part of the Government of the United States. The 

71 









gF^GH^ OF MANUEL L. QUEZON 



WliisilMa 



gn^l, the determination of the reforms which are MEiS 



ij&petus to the progrress of our people in the 
of our own existence have been placed ih;,_ 
is to say, of course, that, in granting us 
the Jones Bill places upon our should- 
most serious responsibilities; and>, 
j^lll^^onsjhijttUes we must face, as I know the people 

with decision, valor and 
'l^^i^e the interests of the community. We 

ifito that our future and, perhaps, that 

less fortunate than ours and grievously 
'hpon Our acts, our prudence, our pure , 
gentlemm, we must not forget that 
IJhited States with respect to the Phil- 
a complete success, sooner 
possessing colonies will find 
to adopt the same policy. These are 
pfi|i|||;P^S M alone, but also of medita- 

ga S ecamine the needs of the country r 

and political organization, in 
|c|^ to sa^^ ^ former and remedy the latter. 



Z' 't 

'■ ■ Z0ZZ0' 



^ all government is that of pro- 



greatest number of its 
il ' should ' tend to^ the im- 

*' of the masses. 

io ! fully upon the grand labor of laying the 

of Filipino nationality 
' fee feo. more. ‘ 

/dangers that 'menace new nations 
,, feel they -have the strength to 

fdf' ^emselves, is that they are 
so- well satisfied with themselves 
' that;they forget or disdain the" ; 

or resent the- aid of other peoples 

The moat-, 

-' yet attained their com- : 
i .- ■ Every nation has some- 

i ' and. any country .which, ■ 

j S 3 ?'SleiuaMeaI^ #11 frdki ah siseess of national pride, refuses 







PHILIPPINE FREEDOM 



73 



to profit by the lessons and the experience of other Coun- 
tries and even other men, not only hurts itself, but evefl 
exposes itself to public ridicule. When I say other 
I say so advisedly. Specially during the first years of ©nr 
life the aid of men from more advanced countries who have 
excelled in certain lines of government work and • whose 
services may be required for the construction 
national edifice, will be cordially solicited and receive/-- 
To copy, without due examination and without takmg 
account whether or not it is adaptable to our 
that which is foreign merely because it is 
harmful as rejecting it in the same 
same reason. The example of Japan, repeat©^ Nation 
very opportunely be cited again. Our 
owes its present enviable situation to a 0 

which the fathers of the Japan of today re a .. . 
and assimilated the best they found m tn ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 
countries. a • -ufo &rant» 

We should be unworthy of the liberties for 

ed us by the Jones Bill were we to i j iouhlic 

the promotion of selfish interests. The prompted 

office is a laudable one when it s 

that is prompted by selfish motives ea$e 

frauding the nation. The people Wust ^ ^^^gg ^^ho 
in the balance the purity of the necessity i® 

solicit their votes. Political parties are _ . a crime 

all democratic government; but they are _ .^g^gnce of the 

if,, in competing with each other for ^ _ manner that will 

public, they conduct their campaigro m _ right of cri- 
cause deep dissensions in the How- 

ticism is one of the safeguards of goo ^ denounce systems- 
ever, when this right is made ^e of to denou^ ^^^grggry. 

tically as , bad everything dishonesty or bad 

charging him in every instance with dish^y 
faith, whether with or Without reason, it b®®™ 

most destructive of the pommon welfare. ^ i-mnnlqp 

ever before the Filipinos must be moved by one impulse 



SPEECHES OF MANUEL L. QUEZON 




j that of procuring the happiness, prosperity and true liberty 
|:®f pur coimtay. Those in power as well as those of fdhe 
must, each in the performance of the mission. 
|i^pferred upon him by his position, endeavor to render be-» 
:t n#cent serrice. 

lie have much to do. There is work for all. It is ou|: 
good fortune that Divine Providence has given us a country 
loth ibeaul#^ and fertile. The wealth of our soil may bp 
said to be still intact. We must, with all the 
f 6 80; energy that is in us, embark upon the devel* 
opment of our natural resources. Do not let 
us forget that we live in a very critical epoch, 
le hei^ble war which is now desolating Europe, in- 
t^na^Ollial economic competition will be more intense than 
iO much accumulated wealth has been destroyed that 
^ ieoplfei who have taken part in this horrible conflict will 
more vigorously than ever in order to regain what 
they have; lost. If we go to sleep or remain passive, 
it BOl he possible for us to realize our ambition to 
tee oie C0U|^ prosperous. Now is the time, therefore, 

J tf^ote more than ever our attention and our efforts to 
me premolion of our commerce, our agriculture, our in- 
it vdi he neeffl^S for me to say that neither 
piptS nor Ihvrs, however wise these may be, arp 
JiO bruig progress and general well-being. Wp 
the worst disappointment were we to cherish 
.. . that the estahlishment of this new government 
» tldifplge islands and the fact that the government 
wii he t f 0 |^ular one, will automatically remedy the ills 
ouv coimtry is now suffering. The govern- 
ffi^t aloft© is powerless to give prosperity to the people. 

«! £ ordiftariy do is to give the citizens an oppor- 
Is miliz© to; their fullest extent their individual 
power of Werk in order to obtain the largest sum of be- 
neflt, la i^g last instaiice: any progress we may make at 
any time must eoiae from the people themselves. 




THE PRESS 

[From a Speech in Spanish at the Press Banquet, Manila Hotel, 
Manila, January 12, 1917] 



The main duty of the press as an expounder of fac ^ . 
an index of public opinion is to be truthful and + 

No one has a right to demand that newspapers shou 
have an established opinion on the various puWie qu 
tions which daily come under their 
should anyone deny them their just prerogative to 
the facts as best they could, but the public has fu _ 
to exact that the press should not deliberately ws o _ _ 
truth nor should fabricate yarns to back up a certain 
paign or support a preconceived plan. ^ . 

If to lie is bad enough for a man, it is a serious . _ 
for the press. The reason is that when an urga . 
which, like the press, exercises a dominating 
the community, commits a falsehood, the effect is 
it perverts public conscience and obstructs the a eq 
solution of the problems which affect society at large. 

* » 

* ' ' * * ' * * • dis 

A hyper-sensitive public man, who shuts 

dainf ul isolation and admits no criticisms nor listens ^ 

counsel, should seek refuge in the woods or in t e . 
These are the spots which become him. As for nie 
not wish yet to be a wild man. 



76 







I 






...... 

*. if 

iSfclSifMilW 

''' ■■■^ 

wwif^i ;:f 



IliifSli^MliS ' '^elf-sovereignty 

|Ff ^ a igpi^b in Spanish on. the Floor of the Philippine Senate, 
. . ®ean&|g the Attitude of the Filipino People on the World War, 






We profess with the courage 
__..... ®be .principle, the creed of nationality, 

lii|Silljl|i^a all peoples have the right to govern 



'Own sovereignty if they so desire.' 
tfeBt right is inalienably ours. We believe 
..’'::gfW'jg^ ' We ' deny that the Supreme Being of the 

'^^e4led men or 'selected families whom: 
the 'power to rule over other men aS;'. 
authority resides in the people and 
- ® These are our principles, our convicr, 

acts, be they purely domestic or con- 



wey purely aomestic ux ^.un- 
P®®ipfea> shall be inspired in those principles, 
faith those convictions and impelled by that 






EDUCATION AND FREEDOM 

[From an Extemporaneous Address Before the League^ of Free 
Nations Association, Commodore Hotel, New York City, April 
19, 1919] 



Ladies and gentlemen, several million boys and girls 
today speak English in the Philippine Islands^thank God, 
better than I do ! 

And see what the result of that is — ra wonderful spec- 
tacle that you and we are offering to the world ! Do you 
realize that if you go through the pages of history you 
will not find a single instance where people 

SPEOTAcu^ who have been under a foreign yoke an 
seeking to be tree bring not grievenees 
against the mother country but love? Do you know of any 
case where people who have been under foreign doininafi^® 
seek to be free, not because they have been so well 'treated . 
{Laughter and applatise.) 

Your own country, the United States, was three 
ago inhabited by the sons, and the daughters of 
And the United States three centuries ago threw off ® 
yoke of England. Why? Because you have be^ 
treated by England. There are no countries upon the face 
of the earth which have secured their independence excep 
through force of arms. We all hope that the day may 
come when at last we may see one country free, not through 
the force of arms, but through good wiU, love and co- 
operation between the mother country and the colony. 
{Hearty applause.) 

Gentlemen— ladies and gentlemen^ — 1 do not want to forget 
the ladies because I am strongly in favor of woman suffrage 
{hearty laughter and applause) : Why- has this wonderful 

77 



SiTBBCHES OP MANUEL L. QUEZON 



tiuBg been accomplished in the Philippines? Because the 
Xlmted States can claim the honor — ^more than that, the ; 
msdom^^^ having discovered that colonies are not the 

properties of the colonizing powers to he 

S toS people of the colonies are 

not the slaves of the colonizing powers to ue 
enslaved, but that colonies are to be treated for the good of 
■^e colonies, for the betterment of their people and for 
their freedom and national sovereignty. 

This principle, which is now being discussed in Europe— 

, ted we all hope it is going to be accepted as the principle 
^^reafter to be followed in the treatment of colonies— -has 
bete from the very beginning the policy of the United 
State! in the Philippine Islands. And because the United 
States stood by that policy and followed it honorably, we 
have the case, ladies and gentlemen, that the people of 
, thrtj^tetry, who, as Professor Bocobo said previously, in 
1891 fought you and opposed the extension of your so- 
vereignty over their country, now are coming here with a 
;lhe8|age of love, true, sincere, genuine love, atfection and 
gratitude frohi the inhabitants of the Philippine Islands 



to the people of the United States. (, Applause.) 



^ ■ 
"r Pite three yea^B, ladies and gentlemen, this governinent 
,;has been in operation; a government where the United 
States has but one, representative, the Governor-General; 

; fTTiTfffln government where the members of the 
f of the government — ^the men m 

/ charge of the execution and administration 

of the iaws^fie, all Pilipinosy save the Vice-Governor; a 
goyernt^ent where ihe Legislature is entirely composed of 
Fili^ihes eleetedi by the people. I am now going to proceed 
to tfli FO® thie governinent has done. 

goyeri® kept peace and order throughout the 

ArOMpellago the war. ^Hearty applatcse.) This 

dlS’ fhore theB that-r—this government was the 
fOfeo bieJc of yOh ih the Orient during the war, and 



E 




PHILIPPINE FEEEIDOM 



79 



every Filipino was ready to fight for your flag, not oi^ 
within the boundaries of the Philippine Islands, but in 
Prance, in Europe, wherever the flag might be assaulted! 
That is what this government has done. 

"Elis government has increased the opportunities for edu- 
cation to girls and boys in the Philippine Islands. Prior to 
that time, and in spite of sixteen years of a government 
in the Philippines controlled mainly by Americans, not all 
the boys and girls of the Philippines could be educated 
because of lack of funds — I mean attention on the part of 
the government. This new government has found a way 
of educating every child born in the Philippine Islands, ^n 
they will all be educated within the next seven ye^s. 
{Hearty appUmse.) . 

Again, ladies and gentlemen, under this govemm^ 
wealth of the country has improved enormously. ^ ® ^ ^ 

retary of Commerce in a speech before the 

Commerce a few days ago gave figures. _ 

i^^sln ^ 

years ago had but five milhon uonws. ■ 

day it has one hundred and fifty million dollars' tho larg, 

bank west of Chicago, not excepting San jg 

course. That is what this government has done. That 

what this government has been doing. 

m '• 

« ♦ ♦ ♦ ^ _ 

Now, what advantages will there be for ^n.t^c 

trol a country under such conditions ? japan khOWS^^ . 
have grown during the last twenty years to eve^ w " , 

that Japan wants from the Philipplues, 1*^^ ,Wo«ome 
men, is our friendship, and since we are 
we are ready ix) be friends with anybody. Japan 
naturally want a share in our trade, 
to eversrthing she can get. That is all, in nay opmi , 
Japan wants from the Philippines. . , . 

. This war has also proved another thing-*^that coun ■ , 

geographically situated as the Philippines are, can be e^i y 
defended from invasion. All We need to have is such defen- 






QUEZON 






mmi 



,,ipij:;:;;:;||^|f^ submarines and aeroplanes. While 

country, we can provide ourselves '■ 



iili5|i|i®giW submarines and aeroplanes 

i{f "'Ecrfll VkA o /liffipiilf PvnpTisivA nroTio 



#8® be a difficult, expensive propo^ 

^ T>lniliT^T^iTioa 



VS&0: 



and conquer the Philippines. ./ 
IplitalSiili^^p^i?^^ to win the ill-will of the United;) ''■' 



the il f p pi n Afl be under American prQr ^ 









l8Sii:5g^ 



', /'I'i'SiS 

Japan tried without any 



come and conquer the Phii 



a little bit more 



Is today in the United States. (Laugh* 



States, ladies and gentlemen,' 
With the rest of the Mission. I;';,j; 
I made it a point to meet more-^ 
1 'did before. A few things l:\ 



Japanese, being a wise people, 
this war. They^ have 





Today the military party W 
.S^lSfilliS'vlSe^^ Of the people are up. Their 

Mm 'comes from the common people., 



M 

'0i 

jII 

' 'It 
':a 



is no difference between'^ 



whether those masses come froni 



Ii^#d States, from England, France*;^^^^^ 

'' ^Applause.) The masses of ;^;,,';: 
.everywhere instinctively believe 
justice., (Hearty applause.) 

large to control their i«;|,;;, 
will not be a source ^of 

.'t\ is tods3^^^ least, it is begin- e 

' ^ hate war as mudi'/'^l 



i I financiers in Japan. Soih# 



■I.''.'.t':'i . ■■'■: 

ks-- 






■ ■■■;.'/'■ 'J'' 



i/k'k' /■!' 



■'■ fk- 



■ill i: 



■'1 






PHILIPPINE FREEDOM 



of them do not approve of certain policies of thehr j^verh- 
ment. They are for peace. They think Japan has enoh^h 
trouble in her hands today without going into ford^ trou^ 
hies. So you see we really have no reason to be .afraid of 
Japan. 

But suppose Japan had some designs toward the Philip- 
pines. How about the League? How about Hie League, I 
say again ? How about those wonderfully dlOQLUeut 'declara- 
tions made by America when she entered the war, that you 
went into that war ready to spend everything you 
money, materials and men, in order to guarantee the lagh. 
of every people, great or small, to live their own independent 
existence. How about those declarations? They 
so wonderful that they were greeted with joy ^ 

were heard in the Philippine Islands. They sounded so 
wonderful that every Filipino offered his services^ to tne 
United States so as to help this government to ma e goo 
those declarations. . ^ _ 

And you are making good those declarations. 
already recognized the independence of Czecho-Sloya a ^ 
Jugo-Slavia and Poland, even before the j 

signed, and you are ready to help 
NEW NATIONS on their feet. Have you promise w ^ 
becognized in particular to those V. ^ 

bound to them by yo" ’'“1" “XS to 
by association? No. And yet you 
have their own country, their own talatK^ci to the 

ment. WiU you deny these to the to Mp 



vyxil ^UU UtSliy tliwc W ** .ivtrJdOfl 

Filipino people, to the P“Pl» ^'’Se’^^pH -hem you 
to have their own government, to the POOP^ vovern- 

proinised to grant independence as s^n 

ment can be established therein, to toe . 

you are bound by ties of long and 

the people who have taken gladly your side i ’ 

would die for you it need be? WiU you deny them 

their freedom? We know you are not going to deny rt! 

That is the reason why we are here in this country today, in 

18441 O. W. 6 



SPEECHES OP MANUEL L. QUEZON 



82 



once more 

ittie #oU<rw^ words: ^‘How better in this time of anxious 
<|i<j^tjohiiig and perplexed policy could we show our con- 
m the principle of liberty as the source, as well as 
the e^r^^ of life— how better could we demonstrate our 

and steadfastness in the courses of jus- 
fece |thd #$interestedness than by thus going calmly for- 
waf4 promises to a dependent people who will 

hOw more anxiously than ever to see whether we have 
Md4edthe Uber the unselfishness, the courage, the faith, 
m have boasted and professed !” I thank you. ( Tremen- 
















, K;f\r<¥ 

f) 



If.¥< ■ I 



' i¥iO: ¥ ■ 



A CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION 
[From a Speech Before a Joint Session of the Committee 

Philippines, United States Senate, and the Committee on Insniw 
Affairs, House of Representatives, Washing^ton, D. C., M-on • 
June 2, 1919] 



The Filipinos have organized, as I said, a new 
ment. Under this new government the country has 
progress in education, in commerce, in industry, m * ^ 
culture. In other words, it has made progress m 
way. So we feel that the conditions Iwd 
Jones Act as prerequisite for the granting of PhJ PP _ 
independence have been performed and that we ® . 

not only that a stable government can be established iP 
Islands but that there is now one there. ^ j. xi, in- 
There is still another reason why we think th^ 
dependence of the Philippines should be granted a _ _ 
time and that is because of the attitude ^ 

Government in the recent of 

xXSSoK vou have to t 

mankind, for the right of every ^ 

govern themselves. Indeed, you have made ^Pod ^ „ 
clarations in thus far recognizing the independ^ P 
of several countries of Europe; certainly it would ^ J" , , 
but natural that the Filipinos should feel that you _ 
make those declarations good witii regard to the _ 
the Philippines. You have recognized the indepen 
countries of Europe which have been under t^ cot 
of autocratic powers, which have had no opportuni^ o 
exercising the powers of self-goVernmOTt--and to these 
countries you were not pledged to give independence^ you 
were not in any way related, you were not tied by bonds 
of long association and affeddon. How can you aiford not 

83 




;; SFBBCHES OP MANUEL L. QUEZON 

,:'''/'to''gecggffiize the independence of the Filipino people to 
; ^hoM yon have solemnly promised independence, whom you 
have topedi to acquire the science and practice of self^ 
,;^0vei®a^t and who are bound to you by ties of affectioUj 
; gratitude? The granting of our 

' ! 'i/ha'M'^ial ff^dom ■Will be at this time the object lesson that 
you loul#j^ve to the world, that this country can give of 



^ deihoefacy and in the rights of every people 

llllpIllUlIl^ to 'govern ■ themselves. 



Well, the point I am trying to get at 
'the aspirations of the Filipinos; what 
Do you want to be wholly 
' connection with the United States iii 



t{ yep asking me my preference or my 

asking for your expression or 

.P®^eps it. might be to the interest 
the Philippines that some 
should exist whereby after the 
of 1*e Islands has been recog- 
' ®till be some kind of connection 

Essi™ hetwe^ the two countries. But that is 
m.y-' ^ secondary consideration, I think. 

Iliippin^s be?S^ the independence of the 

~ , either absolute independence or 

of ffco »“‘od steto. 

wiir mrasioiii f % hJeh wouia yOur commission prefer / 

of the PM- 

Ih what at the present time 

T AftfriiP tie ^ Philippines. But if there be 

fO.OOO f -O “op" 

agreement guaranteed by^ 

4 A* Ka powers; but if that 

shotil^ h P SI they Want independence, anyway. 




PHILIPPINE FREEDOM S,& 

Senator Chamberlain. You will remember that in 
country in 1783, after we had won our independ^cei it 
took till 1789 to get the Constitution ratified, and h^ 
was a condition which existed among people who pc&eti'- 
cally all spoke the same language. In view of ’Hie ififficulties 
that confronted us, don’t you think you will have serioi^ 
difficulties in enacting a constitution or in adopting 
titution after your independence has been recpg®iz^'. ^n 
other words, don’t you think it would be safef^foV 
Philippines to adopt some form of constitution and 
it with your request for the recognition of your in ■ - 
pendence? 

Mr. Quezon. Undoubtedly, Senator. ^ 
my answer to your question before, to ^ 

the thing we had in mind. My own personal 

be this: The Government - X ^ Ifie 

coNSTiTUTioiT- States should authorize the 
At ASSEMBLY Philippine Islands to hold ® ^ 

Convention to adopt their consgotiO%_ 

submit it for the approval of the Congress of 
States, and, once approved, let them elect *a ifeave 

provided in that constitution, and, when those Oj ,ce . ^ 

been elected, to recognize Philippine independence. - 
has been your policy in Cuba. Those have been : 
tical steps taken in Cuba, and that is all that i» - ■ 
to be done in the Philippines. * 

* *** ^ iii 

Senator Phelan. Then, if aggression occurs ydn a 

a position to resist it? ' be too 

Mr. Quezon. I don’t mean to say that. _ Islands 
much for a Filipino to say that now. 

could withstand an attack from a first-class ^ 

We can’t do it, n<yt today, ; anyway, ^ W m?St 

ten or fifteen years. Perhaps after that 

be able to make it so hard for a nation A _ _ ,i j 

Philippines that no nation would care to do i . _ 

not defend ourselves now, say, against. Japan. pU we q 

not believe Japan has any deSire to attack the Philippines. 



II SFWHES OF MANUEL L. QUEZON 

Senator Phelan. Well, it is not good international man- 
nera lo atta^ people, but they insinuate themselves by zones 
of h^h^ce. You see that every day in Asia now. 

Mr. Quezon. Yes, sir. But, Senator, if the physical 
power Of a nation to resist the aggression of any other is 
eisenSal for the recognition of that nation’s independence, 
there are numy nations in Europe that should 
pow» not be independent. France could not have 
saoflfAfrons resiste alone the attack of Germany, and 

( ' according to that theory France should not 

have b|en independent, nor should Belgium and many other 
cOunlri^ be independent. The world has risen up in arms 
|iuat to, stop land-grabbing nations from their plans for world 
domination. So we don’t think that any power would want 
to interfere with our independence. 

' !, ^6 fear that many people have that Japan would grab 
,|pe Pidlippine Islands is baseless. We don’t think that 
fap^i would do that. In the first place, if you grant the 
Phihppines their independence now, for Japan to go and 
the Philippine Islands would be a challenge to the 
United States iteelf. You don’t have to assume the pro- 
,|ootoOn of ^e Philippine Islands. You don’t have to stand 
e^nsQr for PMlippine independence. The world would 
and the Japanese people would know that you would 
r^eat tlieir attacking the Philippines after their indepen- 
fence has been granted by the United States. 

;^Yoh Would be proud of your deed. You would call the 
attehMon ^ maoMnd that you have generously and deli- 
berat^y panted a weak nation its independence — and no 
nation wilt interfere with so magnanimous and glorious 
at^act, 

Ih the S^Ond Places no nation attacks another except with 
the e^ectatidn of gaining more than it loses in the attack, 
^d jhpan^ or any other nation will not profit as much as 
it will lose in conquering the Philippine Islands. Conquests 
are undertaken now either because of need of territory or 
for strategical reasons, japan does not seem to be just 
now very anaious to get more land. She has plenty in 



PHILIPPINE FKEaBDOM 87 

Manchuria, Korea and Formosa, and certainly she has not 
shown herself to be a good colonizer of tropical lands. 

As far as strategical reasons are concerned, Japan does 
not need the Philippines except to get the Philippines out 
of the hands of other pow’ers. I should think that Japan 
might care to take the Philippines if the 
STBATEOiCAL Philippines were independent and Germany 
BEASONS were still in her career of conquest, for fear 
that Germany might come and conquer the 
Philippines and use them as a basis for an attack on Japan. 
That is the reason given by Japan for her conquering 
Korea — ^Russia wanted Korea. But there is no European 
country that we think would like to take the Philippines if 
the Islands should have their independence; therefore, 
Japan for strategical reasons will not need the Philip- 
pines. For commercial reasons Japan need not conquer us 
because she could just as well trade with us if we were 
independent. 









if'V&lii. 



>S§k0i$Mpy 



if ^Igti 



.v.T5'fWirP#"efev - . .. , 

:ftiWi#»OT©'^STAT^ COASTWISE LAW 

i <jie . Students of the University of the 
4 TO Manila, July 1, 1920] 

0" filsiiSf ^ ' ., •■^'-- -— j — — 

a eapy of the congressional record of 
' idfepat^ Congress when the merchant marine 

(^cussed, ' jEopfesentative Jones, the father of the 
■/.?r -f ih support of the bill, declared that 

f consideration^ supporting the bill is to provide 

States' w^ greatest merchant marine. He 

l^^ieted; that;' good and just.” It is 
'WeeniMiyahlhf^t^^^ of an American calling a law of this 
^4 wise,, good and just, a lawj similar in every respect 
^ 1^1 w^<^ Gaused his forefathers to take up arms against 
;) ®^J4sd, ithe.inother country, because they termed it unwise, 
'Bid What would Patrick Henry and the great 

Revolution say if they were alive today and 
cong^ speak thus? Shall history repeat 

J^licy of England of re<iuiring only English bottoms 
®he iproduets of her colonies to the mother country 
^i%|.^hi^'4oned^ It was abandoned before the 

hdien En^and -attained the position of 
■ nnstress of the sea. She abandoned it be- 
caiiSe she had discovered that it was unjust 
-7'S - r-T"***^ h^ What England has considered 

U^air ' idhjiust, after the Americans have shown her 
S% Ihfddf^ /iie power of the sword and pen, the United 
©tStes is g@iag Can anyone beat this? 

'>(oih 




. toid that out of some sense 

Of ^atiftu'l'e’ ^ %his legislation. 



22fA,„. 






PHILIPPINE FREEDOM 



8f 



I say to you, Mr. President, and to the whole WoJdd,- 
that the Filipino people are very appreciative as a race. 
We have given evidence to America of our deep apprecia-' 
tion of the services she has rendered to this country, 
specially of the granting of local autonomy to our 
and the promise of national independence. FortUnatew_ on 
us the most opportune time to show out feelings W^ ^ 
America was in trouble. That we did, quickly, unhesitat- 
ingly, unreservedly and devotedly. And very man W . o 
is now charged with prejudicing the mind of our peop e 
against the United States for political reasons, to_ go 
to keep himself in power, was the very man wlm n , 
at that critical time of our .duty to America and ^ _ 

the sentiments of good will and gratitude of our peop 
the people of the United States. . , . ^ ^ 

It would be laughable, if it were not cont^p i^^^ these 

such unfounded, uncalled for accusations.^ These ’ rtg 

Americans, who thus delight in presenting 

enemy of the- United States and ®v®rW| 
Anierican, seem to forget that m , . _ 

strong criticism and denunciation ® . 
tical opponents, and regardless of its W 

larity or impopularity, I stood fast and and lieir 

States, advismg my people to offer f fS S 
lives to America and the cause she t saw it, and 

I acted thus because that was my duty, _ firm in my 

<^red nothing for any other j,°®;equence^ because 

stand on this question, regardless of CO 

this is the place of honor and of duty „ awav from 

GrS“- Yes, we are gratrful tj the 

if it had beep the Coastwise 

consequence to the American people w “ 

Laws extended to the Philippine Islands a m o-Vif 

tion has been asked. Who knows but that ®nr a ^ ® ^ 

have been different, even if it meant sacrifice of our eco- 
nomic interests? But there is one thing we cannot, we 



LOYALTY 

FBOVED 



9Q SPEECHES OP MANUEL L. QUEZON 

should not, we must not sacrifice for the sake not even 
of the whole world — that is, our freedom, the rights we 
idread^ have and those we are struggling to obtain. These 
are not ours only; they are the rights of our people, of 
our race, of our nation — a. right that is sacred because it 
is a God-given right; a right that does not belong to one 
generatiQn of 'Mlipinos, but to all the unborn generations. 




i 



OUR LOYALTY UNSHAKEN 



[From a Speech Before the Philippine Chamber of Commerce, 
Manila, August 3, 1920] 



* 



4 * 










I was going to say that there are also other reasons why 
we are opposed to this law. We consider its appli^tion 
to the Philippines as something contrary to the policies so 
far adopted by the United States in the Philippines. 
policy has been, as Mr. Frear said, “to turn the Philip- 
pines over to the Filipinos as soon as a stable government 
has been established, and at the same time give them 
nomy in their local affairs.” If you enact legislation which 
will bind the Philippine Islands to the United States, if 
you enact legislation which assumes that the Philippi®®® 
are an integral and essential part of the United States, 
you are not giving evidence of the fact that you look into 
the future to cut soon the ties that bind the Philippic®® 
to the United States. . 1,,- 

Now, as I say, as a result of our campaign against this 
law, we have been accused of indifference. We have 
charged with creating a feeling of antagonism among our 
people against the people of the United States, against the 
Americans. 



Now, gentlemen, I want to say this : No matter what tlw 
American press in the Philippine Islands may say» no mat- 
ter what may be the attitude of some Am^- 
icans in the Philippine Islands toward the 
Filipinos, the people of the Philippine Is- 
lands are loyal and grateful to the people and Government 



of the United States. (Applcmse.) 






i&o 



II SHilGaES OF MANUEL L. QUEZON 

Weil, I gUppose we are at least entitled to be heard, 
c, flgif qiuestions that I wish to bring to the atten- 

ti§l >oUf visitors. One is the sequel of the first. Just 
81 IMi we have been very busy making — if you want 

M, /A • - t w«C4-'U 



% list a good ito^eritan expression — a lot of noise with 
to the hv tfiP r!nncyrA«Q <nf the Shinninff 



to by the Congress of the Shipping 

tow WM@h wli be applied to the Philippine Islands— the 
Cbistsviie tows of the tJnited States. When we learned of 
the §Q8ftaM| of this law with that provision in it, we at 



£ : ; f our strong opposition to that provision of 

1 nersoTialliT’ lYift/^p q rairmaiem both in Ma- 



: ^ PVCTO 



1 personally made a campaign both in Ma- 



li Ujg FiiipiuQg your own history. You 

hsvh laught the Filipinos your own principles. Can you 

' ■• -SiMcifiiiBS Pilipinos to follow the history of 

1 , otter countries, and to learn the principles 

i * ' . ? of other nations? Certainly not. You have 

' • .' ft Jtof rprincttle. when Great Britain in your early 



tt the American colony laws that pre- 
2®Flf ttom using your own ships in carrying your 
#tt|de'"tt Great Britain. You have taught us to learn that 
,*P;S |8ct was resented by the American people. Do you 
tteh if the FilipinQs today should resent a law 
l„ prevent a FflipihO owning a boat from transport- 

Philippine prodiucts from the Philippine Islands to the 
tjn^d States? {Mpplome.) 

^ J® 1^*® don’t want us to^ have these sentiments and to 
^s atfeitnde with re&erd to measures of this sort, 
^onr hooks I, don’t make our children the children 
®f Apjeric^ teachers and Amierican institutions. 




CONCEPTION OF DEMOCRACY 

[From a Speech Before the Philippine Senate, Manila, 
January 18, 1921] 



■4, 



• ^ ^ 

When I was Resident Commissioner in the United States 
and when I was chairman of the Filipiho Independent 
Mission, I adopted the policy of not roaming a concrete 
proposition in regard to Philippine 

OBnosTiiiNQs'^®''^'®' knowing that 

would satisfy our opponents as none s^ 
them now. If we came out with a 
independence, they would combat it -with 
that we would invite external aggression and be sntqec 
to internal dissensions and revolutions, and so iJint . 

independence would not be desirable. If we 
pendence with protection, such as I suggested, 
turn around and argue the other way and say that rt _ ^ 
granted Independence at all it would tsdce the forra Jv r 



“iK yoh • 



they also say no, saying that if they leave 
leave it for good. 



complete?* and absolute separation. They say, ^ ,1 |i 

independence, go ahead and be welcome to it, but yoQ 
out for your own protection.” ^ ^ 

And where do we Filipinos stand? Nowhere. If ^ 
for absolute independence, they say no, we »if® 
enough to protect ourselves. If we ask. f PT ® Pf ®*®® 

ave the Islands -hey 

In view of these nf our 

always thought as the best policy to tet the form 01 

independence be deferred to the last. 

There is no question that the PJ^evailing ^ep^“®h^ 
the part of the prominent Americans in the PhiUppmes m 
regard to the Philippine problem is for its final ®®l®tion 
by the Congress of the United States. I have noted that 



94 SPEECHES OP MANUEL L. QUEZON 



the AMencan Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines has 
e^ressed the opinion that the present existing political 
status of the Philippine Islands is unsatis- 
factory and that a final and complete solution 
to this problem should be arrived at. This 
is the desire of both Filipinos and Americans. 

lii yiew i)f this desire we made an effort, when the Mis- 
sio|t Was then in Washington, to offer a final solution to 
the f Mlippine problem. When Governor-General Harrison 
$|ppeared before the joint committee of the United States 
femi^iss that heard the Philippine Mission, he offered a 
concrete^^^l^^ along the lines I have suggested, as 

^4 the most just solution of the problem. 

: ' Ptit now this proposition is combated on the ground that 
it isj not convenient for the United States to offer this pro- 
But We wish to state that we want independence 
just the same and that as between per- 
manent American sovereignty in the Islands, 
even in the form that we have it at present, 
A complete and absolute independence without pro- 
th^ of the Filipinos prefer the latter; 

w^ are prepared to join the concourse of nations; 
fWt ff Q^er nattons of the world had the courage to 
"ihe turbident waters of international politics, 
^ and our people also have the valor *to do it. 
weMd not be worthy of the sacred ideal of freedom, 
and independence if we Were not ready to assume 
the, that such an existence demands. If 

IJndted States, dictated by its own interests, decides to 
to the Philippines, well and good. We 
WOMd as the solution of our problem; if not, 

have^^^ independence. 

i m not understand, Mr; President, what is gained in 



posT^iiaiig the solution of the Philippine problem. There 
UslIillS id waiting or wasting time as I am 

WiSii iilft ^^n^hced that the Filipinos will never re- 
niQuiiCe their desire for independence. Let 
the? world feow that our Jove for our sacred ideal is deep- 
seated in our hearts and that neither power on earth nor 



PHILIPPINE FBEEDOM 



95 



any consideration, no noiatter hoW tempting it may be, will 
ever erase it from our hearts. There is no reason what- 
soever why the Filipinos should be bound with the United 
States. We can understand how Canada, Australia and 
New Zealand can live happily with England. The inha- 
bitants of these colonies are united with the mother country 
by ties of blood, customs, traditions and a community of 
ideas. They have complete autonomy and they are satisfied. 

But we the inhabitants of this country, what do we have 
in common with the United States? There is a great gulf 
dividing the American and the Filipino races. Our cus- 
toms, our traditions are different from theirs. Our union 
with America is the result of an accident of war. The 
Filipinos will never consider themselves satisfied and happy 
so long as a representative of a foreign sovereign power, 
or even his shadow, remains in the country to remih 
them of their dependent condition and state. 

There is only one thing which we have in coinmon 
the United States and its people — ^the conception of 
cracy. Both peoples love freedom and liberty. Our 
rniwa Tw studying in the public schools are iiu^ 

COMMON bibing the American sentiment of 

liberty and freedom. They are learning t o 
very sentiments the Americans have inherited 
forefathers, the men who shed their blood on the 
fields for these principles. These we have in common ; 
the citizens of that great Republic, but this union is « 
of spirit and will never be realized if those principloB ar^ 
not put into practice by those from whom we have leaino 
them. 



•i ' ’ ’ . 



MM: 



-:m: 



THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 

ail Addross Before the Inter-Alumni Union, Normal 
Auditorium, Manila, March, 1921] 



^ Eoftu&ately 4n sdine of your ideas we are in accord. 
I ^aye just, read your constitution and found that one of 
. the ’^unU'Sj for which you are working is to have the Engr 

iii.k ^ _ _ . _ - • # ^ _ 




^ — — 

'.'- declared as the only official language in the 
Phiillp^^e' Islands, I have been for that proposition long 
before 1 knew English (applame) , and I really think that 
fes is not a debatable question. It has been settled long 
Ago b|? OUf own government and by our own people. 

When it Was decided that the English language should 
the ^nguage to be taught in the public schools, that 
^^^^jAntaiaoupt to a definite declaration on the part of the 
cT(w/>m that English will ultimately be adopted as 

. t t -m _ 



vviii uiLiuiavtiiy 

, official tankage of the Philippine Islands. For 

^ would have been a waste of money to teach a language 
hat Oould not be used by the men and women who have 
iTOe ^ough many years of schooling to learn it. It would 
have b^n hot only a waste of money but unjust to these 
you^ hue^ - and women. 

1 ^hUfse, the English language has to be the official 
‘.anghage of the Philippine Islands. It is out of the question 
® of Our native dialects for this purpose 

om »ratt,vi , begause We could not come to an agreement 
AHrOnAOS which one should be adopted. As a 

^ , TagalOg I will fight to the end of my life 

AdOj^iOa of the Tagalog, and Mr. De Leon, your 
President,, will' try to have the Ilocano as the official lan- 
guage. 

96 



PHILIPPINE FREEDOM 



Besides, our native dialects have not the literature nev 
cessary for the education and intellectual training dur 
youths. If we have to pick out a foreign language Eng- 
lish is the only language. It is the international language 
in the Far East. 

I remember when I first left the Philippine Islands on 
my trip to Russia — ^that was in 1909 and at that ti&e I 
could only speak the Spanish language^fronl^ _ 

landed in Hongkong until I met the first Filipino in Paris 
I could not understand anybody whom I met. And that 
trip made me learn English. 

On one occasion I sat at a table and intended to o^^ 
some eggs. I picked up the menu which was ih Enghs * 
and pointed at something in it. I thought it waa^iggpi* 
but they served me fish. {Laughter and a/pjdmse.) oo 
I was right there and then convinced that if I 
eat eggs and not fish I had to learn English. And When 
I came home I set myself to learning. ^ 

But there are some more important reaspns, One ® 
the aims of this society, as I learn it tonight, is, to pre.- 
serve democratic institutions, and, my friends, the 

lish language is the best toeans of presyP^- . . 
democratic institutions in the FhiMppini 



ENGLISH 

LITERATUIIE 



lands. So if you want to hai*® 
tion and conception of liberty and freedom you have,). : 



clear no# 



get it through English literature. , * 

But there is another reason which at 'll/ 

much more important from our point of view th^ ^ 
others. You know that We are having a 
convincing some Americans that we should ^ 

pendent government. Those who are opposed tO PhiMPPn^ 

independence, as I have said on various occasion#, snay^ . 

divided into two or three classes. I 

scribe now these different classes but I simply 

say that I think we can meet all of them through SP^® 

kind of an argument. When they see already that t e 

hands of fate are pointing to the day When the Separation 

must take place they will at least want to see that some-. 

thing permanent is left here by the American people. And 



. 18441 O. W. 7 



9i SPEECHES OP MANUEL L. QUEZON 

that should appeal to the pride of the American nation, 
to their sentiment, which, according to Professor De Joya, 
goyerhs the world. 

It would be a source of satisfaction and pride on the 
part of the American people to know that the time spent 
hero by the Uidted States has not been lost, that some* 

. thing has remained and will remain in the 
Of Islands forever. It would appeal to the 

American nation to know that even after 
their flag has been pulled down American institutions and 
America ideals have become the heritage of the Filipino 
people, they will be assured of this when they know 
that the English language has been adopted by the people 
of the Philippine Islands as their official language. This 
is so important that when I was a Resident Commissioner 
^in the, XInited States, in my travels I met people who dis- 
missed PWippine independence with me and generally at the 
end of the discussion liiey would ask : What would be your 
language? What would be taught in your schools when 
we leave you? They of course know that English is now 
being taught in the schools. I invariably answered that it 
woiid be the English language. So I say that the adoption 
of English as the official language of the Philippine Islands 
is a good means of securing Philippine independence. 
'(Applaase.) 



NO BACKWARD STEP 



[From a Speech at the Hotel de France Before His Departure for 
the United States as Head of the Second Philippine Mission, 
Manila, July 10, 1921] 



We know the American people; we are familiar with 
their traditions, their history and the principles which 
give life to their body politic. We should not heed the 
statements made by those who affirm that what has been 
done by a Democratic Congress can be easily undone by a 
Republican Congress, and that, consequently, the present 
Congress has the right to repeal the Jones Law. 

Laws which are purely domestic in character iBajr be 
amended or repealed at will by the lawmaker, btit those 
which affect other peoples and lay down ah established 
policy and grant certain rights and liberties which the 
nation affected accepts, cannot be repealed without the 
consent of the latter, except by despotic governments de- 
void of all sense of justice and humanity. 

America, the champion of liberty and justice, 
act thus and will not act thus. This does not mean that 



its pro-independence policy may not be changed tomorrow 
nwATwr-DTAicr at. ^ poUcy of annexation or an autohomis 
HUMANITY^ policy. But I firmly believe ttiat sWh change 
will never happen unless it be With ®e ex- 
press consent of the Filipino people. Therefore, we Thay 
rest assured that if the Filipino people want to be free, 
they will become free. 



* a: ^ ^ ^ * 

Another question which concerns our people is that re- 
lative to the autonomy we now enjoy* Impressionable per- 
sons who are wont to analyze the ideas which now and then 
occur to them, not only think that the autonomy granted to 

99 



tlliSi 



' ' SPEEXJHES -OP MANUEL L. QUEZON 

wMiiiM'i. jpeople WQuld be withdrawn but they even believe that 
/already taken away, so much so that since the 
llMii^ came, Filipino participation in the 



came, Filipino participation m tne 
become purely nominal. To such deluded 
of ;State and the Department Secretaries 
only in name and are without de facto au- 
^Senate and the House of Representatives 
figureheads. 

fact that the Council of State meets every. 



resolutions which must be observed by 
bw the regular and effective running of 
government departments under their 
'v'/ bb^b^ponding secretaries has the virtue of 
b^rniug them to their senses. I hope that 
I inee^; and passes a law increasinfi* 

salaries, those whose pockets will 
the power our national 

I Ill/iSill? is as real as it is effective. 

only I know that we have 
Filipino participation in the gov- 
If imdh but I do, not. fear at all that a back- 

taken in this respect. , 

the Congress of the United 
i '"''If not -only, that we should not be given 
I ^ also; that. we ‘should not be allowed 

t '' have over the Government of 
*' ®'*t tO' deprive us -of the powers we now 

^ height of absurdity. Democracy- 

Ainerican people cannot recede 
/ ^1® step forward in behalf of liberty. 






recede 

liberty. 




THE PHILIPPINE PROBLEM 

[From a Speech Before the Rotary Club, Manila Hotel, Manila, 
August 24, 1922] 



We can solve this problem only by placing ourselves on 
a high plane, devoid of individual prejudices and feelings. 
Our opinions are oftentimes colored by out likes of dislikes 
of individuals. If we do not like an individual we base our 
judgment of a national question on our dislike of him. 
This is human. It has happened to me several times. 
Once in a while I allow my prejudice against a certain in- 
dividual to sway me over, but after I am cooled off and in 
my calmer moments, I .find that it was unreasonable for me 
to have done so, that he is just as good as I am-^--and I 
always believe I am good {laughter and 
then I take a different stand. Let us, therefore, loek at 
this question from an impersonal point of view, and look- 
ing at it from a broader viewpoint, with only naMpnal 
interests in mind, there is no reason in the world why an: 
agreeable solution cannot be reached. 

Your national interests are not ineompatible with 
national aspirations of the Filipino people. If they afe 
not incompatible — ^and I know they are not— 1 caisaot s^ 
why Filipinos arid Airiericaris caSBiot joiri 

soiUTMN bands in the common endeavor of bfirigirig 
SOLUTION a happy solutiott to the Fimme 

problem. America, at the inception of her rule here> 
came in a spirit of helpfulness. She annoUriced that she 
was here to help us learn the art of self-government. This 
was her avowed policy when she came in. 

Since then, however, new international developmerits 
have come to pass that have created new interests for the 
United States in the Far East. This is plairi to every 

ipl 



SPEECHES OF MANUEL L. QUEZON 



A®erican statesman who is not provincial — and a statesman 
shodd not be provincial — it is plain to the American people. | 

) , fhis is your field. You have here the greatest field for 1 1 

I teman activily, and therefore, if the United States is going | 

to take the part that its prestige, its position and its 
' ^ ©iviizatiofi demand, it must take an active participation | 

^ P affairs of the Far East. The United States should | i 

/"» inlerested in taking its proper share of the Far Eastern | 

trspe. , Arid it ta the duty of every patriotic American to || 

, ; help Ms country accomplish that purpose. 

'&is can be accomplished without the necessity of con- | 

' ii .4 ti^Mg thQ present political status of the Philippines. The | 

4 (1 ^ pn retMn the somewhat advantageous position | 

they have now without retaining politi- 
' cal control of the Islands. The present trade f 

, relations can continue. Fortunately for the 

WC have free trade with the United States. The 
'Ilh'IPiidMon of the preset free trade between two countries 

OMy not harmful but absolutely beneficial to the ^ 

(AppUmse.) To say the least, it is silly 
other markets for our products than that 
’ offered us by the United States, when Europe is in 

condition, still in the throes of a war 
(fh^l/jsapped her vitality, and when Bolshevism is trying to 
®verrun that continent. , It is silly, to say the least, I repeat, 
locating other outlets for our products. 

ifhh only trouble is that we do. not get all the protection 
^0 ure entitled to get, and I hope every American will 
cod.perate with us to bring about absolute equality for pro- 
American ports. (Applazcse.) We have our 
or xfidustry hero for example. Its situation reminds me 
that I used a lot when I was beginning 
deliver speeches in English in the United States, 

di^de ® Mt in every audience where I made use of it 
except ii an audience of ministers. Our oil industry as 
It is hpw, 1% qiijole my old egression, is in a hell of a fix. 

(Laughter owf applause.) 




PHILIPPINE FREEDOM 



103 

If the United States must preserve its commercial posi- 
tion in the Far East, it certainly needs to defend its 
interests here. If its interests are protected, th^ere is no 
need of continuing the present political rela- 
commebciaIi between the two couhtfieS. T^e 

POSITION Filipino people will not only be too glad to 
Sive the United States naval bases here, but it is for our 
own interest that this should be done. Its practical effect 
will be the protection of Philippine independence even if 
We are not under American protectorate. 

There may be some individual Americans who hold that 
American prestige is involved in the work being under- 
taken here, that we should have a better government before 
the Filipinos are let loose to shift for themselves. I have 
met Americans in the United States who are honest and 
sincere in this belief. This is, however, a purely academic 
question. 

With the answer of President Harding, an American- 
controlled government here is a thing of the past. If it 
was to be done, it would have been done by the President 
when he first took office. He sent here a 
Mission whose recommendations might have 
been sufficient ground on which to base a 
change in policy. But he announced that ho backwar 
step will be taken, that no diminution in our domestic 
trol is to be sought, that if any step is to be tak^ i 
will be a forward one. He appointed a goverhor 
a machine for work, who has behind him a brilliant record 
of service. He has been our governor for more than a 
now and he has seen that he alone cannot govern the 
ippine Islands. Under the terms of the Jones Law it is not 
possible for him alone to govern the Filipinos. Ho must 
share it with the duly elected representatives of the people. 

Let us, therefore, dismiss the possibility of an all-Amer- 
ican Government here as a purely academic question. I^t 
us look forward to a Filipino-controlled Government. The 
least bad government is purely Filipino Government. 
{Laughter.) I put it this way because others think we 



104 OF MANUEL L. QUEZON 

cMi^t rumi a very efficient government. But I know it will 
Qiuigh i^tte): than the present Government. For although 
al, pfeserit we have an efficient one, with everybody singing 
f.S' - hymns to Governor Wood, still it is a divided 
^responsibility which is constantly inviting 
T ' trouble. If the Governor-General makes a 

of thihgs he can attribute the fault to the Filipinos, 
itei when the Filipinos fail, they in turn can lay the blame 
on the i^erican Governor-General. You cannot place res- 
pOflSihiiity where it belongs. It belongs to nobody. 



RESPONSIBILITY AND AUTHORITY IN PHILIPPINE 

GOVERNMENT 

[From an Address to the Student Body of the National University, 
Manila, September H, 1922-] 



^ 

The Governor-General has two functions- to pefforih in 
the Philippines; one, as the representative pf the sovereign 
nation and guardian of its prerogatives, and the other as 
the Chief Executive of the Insular Govemm^t. m ms 
first capacity he is supreme. He must 
the I'ights of sovereignty of the people of the Um e , _ 
and under no circumstances and on no occasion ^ 
permit the Filipino people or their representatives to ove - 
ride his authority as representative of the ruling pew^. 
or even to interfere with the exercise of such authoniy. 
As the Chief Executive of the Insular Governhien , l 
matters of purely domestic or local concern^ he 
only permit the representatives of the Filipino 
act for him and exercise his executive powers hut e, s 90^ 
do it if the spirit and the express policy 
are to be observed. In other words, he should 
the Filipino people through their constitutional rep : ^ 
tatives to govern their own domestic affairs. 

=•= =1: 

Of course, it is possible that the actual experience of 
the government may show that there are 

it is dimcult to draw toe toe betoW" toe 

DEFINITIVE functions of the Governor-Genera as spoes- 

AGREEMENT man of the sovereignly of the Umted StetM 
and his functions as Chief Executive ef this 
government but such cases will seldom happen, if ®ve^ 
What is important, what is necessary, is that there should 
be definitive understanding that in domestic matters the 

IftK 



log SFBBGHES OP MANUEL L. QUEZON 

(^¥ieMOr«General places the responsibility in the hands 
of the representatives of the Filipino people in the Gov- 
eratnent and gives Ihem authority to exercise such power. 
Ihis principle should be put into practice. 

It may, Qf course, be admitted that the provisions of the 
Jones tiSw give the Governor-General great powers and 
tj^ he can>, if he so chooses, exercise all such powers, 
whether or not the rights of sovereignty of the United 
Slates are iavolv'ed. But there should be a fixed policy 
here. ^ Our government should be a constitutional gov- 
eranient. It should not be permitted to run one way at 
one '^e and another at another time. It should not be . 
made dependent upon the whim of every Governor-General 
whether this is to be a government of Filipinos assisted 
by iynericans or a government of Americans followed by 
Filiphies. Ours should be a government of laws, not of 
men. E^onsibility should be fixed and definitive. If 
the Oovernor-General is to assume responsibility in this 
govemmenl, well and good; let it be known to the whole 
werld. 

In this case neither the Government of the United States 
her even our people should exact any responsibility from 
^ose who have been placed in office by popular vote. 

Moreover, if such would be the case, we 
li^ls ?6a should forget that the present Government of 
niKgNnnncE the Philippines has been created by the 

Jones Law for the purpose of giving the 
Fi'lipino’ people as much control in their domestic affairs 
as is ;consist®nt with the free exercise of the rights of so- 
verei^l^ of the United States. Finally, if this were the 
case we should say that the basis for the granting of our 
independence is not whether we have demonstrated that a 
stabio govei^S^eit can be established here but whether the 
American Government, in the selection of a Governor- 
General wise, and able, has shown that a stable government 
can be estabiished' hero. 

It 'goes, without, saying that such a situation is not in any 
way desirable, and I believe no one desires it. Maybe 



PHILIPPINE FREiaXIM 



the only question now is how the Filipino people can con- 
trol their domestic affairs consistently with the duties and 
powers of the Governor-General as defined in the Jones 
Law. But this question has already been settled, not only 
by the Jones Law itself but by legislation of the Philip- 
pine Legislature under the authority of the Jones Law, 
and by practice. It is not possible for me, without talcing 
much of your time, to enter at length into this question, 
but with your permission I shall touch upon it in a gen- 
eral way. 



The Jones Law confers supreme executive power upon 
the Governor-General, who is appointed by the President 
of the United States with the advice and consent of tixe 
TMT-TTwo. American Senate, and as such Chief Exe- 
THE LAW he has supervision and control over all 

departments and bureaus of the govern- 
ment. It appears that this section of the Jones Law vesm 
in the Governor-General all the powers and responsibili- 
ties in the administration of our public affairs, withoiit any 
intervention on the part of the people. NeverUial^. 
were we to take into account the other provisions of the 
same law and above all its spirit, it will be seen that sue 
is not the case. The intent of the law rather is to place 
this branch of the government under popular control. 

When it comes to maintaining the integrity of 
yerei^ty of the United States or to preventing t^t ifs 
interests as sovereign be endangered, the responsibility n® 
questionably lies in the hands of the Governor'CeneraJ 
exclusively, and he can himself make use of all the 
vested in him by the Jones Law as Chief Exeeutive 0. ^ e 
Islands. But when it comes tO' the adnMni®hPhtion ® 
blic affairs which are purely domestic, then the respon- 
sibility lies in the hands of the ^ ao^isretairies. 



who are responsible to the people. . + «xi. 

One of the provisions of the Jones Law,, which met with 
the greatest opposition in the long process of the pre- 
paration of that measure, is that relative t© the power 
of the Philippine Senate to confirm .appointments made by 



SireiWJHES OP MANUEL L. QUEZON 

i ihiBsfe Opposition came from those who 

Ihi! npti^^te^ to give the Filipino people 

fef^ohsibflity or authority in the administra- 
“tioh. ' Those who thus thought affirmed that 
tt ■ ‘ the responsbility of the government and 

admlhistratlon should be kept in the hands of the Governor- 
Gehofal aihd therefore* he should be invested with all the 
necessa^ ahithofi% to assume such responsibility. It was 
contended that if the Philippine Senate had the power to 
cons^m &e appointments made by the Governor-General, 
he would adt have the full freedom to appoint such men as 
he would GOheidef best fitted for positions in the govern- 
m^ti ' Fpr this reason they declared that if such power 
#aS frMfed td the Philippine Senate, the Governor-General 
eouid hot be held responsible for the government. 

^IHOwever, the Jones Law in its present form, was finally 
-ahpfovfd by the Congress through a unanimous vote of- 
lie^uliieans and Democrats, and none of its provisions, 
fpjthi lhe ex met with any objec- 

amendment whatsoever was presented to deprive 
/ Philipipine Senate of the power to confirm appoint- 
^mts Juade by the Govemor-djeneral, and this was so 
hdcadse the opimon finally prevailed that the Filipino 
people should have full control of their domestic affairs 
eompatiiMe with the exercise of sovereignty by the United 
States. 

The t^onifirmation by the Philippine Senate of the ap^ 
pointfflenita made by the Governor-General has an import- 
anee and aignificanee which the confirmation by the 
4^^ricah Senate of the appointments made by the President 
of the tihited' States does not have. In the United States 
the . Pf^ident is elected directly by popular vote and is 
resi^^iblej ^ the people for his administration. There- 
ford, he eodid even be cloaked with the power to appoiiit, 
afohe add' intervention of the Senate, all the 

executive diUclalS, he being personally and directly respon- 
siMe lo the peopiei 

Gn the other hand, 1# the Philippines the Governor- 
General is appointed the President of the United States. 



PHILIPPINE FREEDOM 

The Governor-General is not responsible to the people.^ n^^^^ 
have the people any means whereby to hold him ae^uht^blP 
for maladministiration of ptibliG .affairs. 
p??S'e Therefore, so that the people couM ^haye a 

essential that the officials elected by the people should inter- 
vene, for the people and before the people, in the selectiQn 
of officials of the insular administration. 

In order that popular control in the government may 
be effective, the Jones Law requires confirma^n Jna 
Senate not only of the appointments of fhe D^artmeh 
Secretaries but of all appointments made by the Govieram^ 
General, and confers in addition upon the 
power of determining how the Department Secre ^ r^ ' 
have the immediate control of the Executive 
should be appointed or removed by the 

The Philippine Legislature, which cuuM h»;« 
had it chosen so. from approving a 14w pr(mg»*^8r W 
appointment and removal of the Department fteadS^ 

the Jones Law gave it poweF to 'dO' i ^ ^ 

KEOEQAHIZA- , tjones xjbw g tiii.Tnber and duties 

TION ACT a law determining the nu^r 

of the Department SecretarieSi Preswo^ 

the manner in which they shall b® 

their tenure of office. This law provides, that 

ment Secretaries shall be Filipino citizen# 

pointed, not when there happens a #anfe : * 

of the Governor-General but rather at tb® f ^ 

each Legislature. This law has been a^prof®^' Potigtess 

ernor-General and has not been revoked 

of the United States so that it can b# 

Government of the United States has ssnGtioned J ^ 

of the Legislature, permitting Jaie EiMdi®® 'f 
the responsibility jfor, and natUralfcr i*be contfol © , 
ministration of the Phiippines, , . j it. i. 

Subsequently, this law was critipized oh the i^ounr ' . a 
the provision limiting only to Filipinos the positions of De- 
partment Secretaries w'asv discTiminatorV t® ytoericans. 
However, this criticism was hot taken seriously, and it 
should be said, in justice to the Americans in the 



SPEECHES OF MANUEL L. QUEZON 



mwwmcB 6 ? 

EtXCXPEAXS 



pteSj, &at th^ did not take offense at it inasmuch as they 
well toew that it was not inspired in a spirit of hostility 
atainst ihero but simply in the desire of the Filipinos to 
make a public avowal that they were ready to shoulder 
the pave responsibilities of the Executive Branch. 

The Ipgal provision which calls for the appointment of 
the Bepartoent Secretaries at the beginning of each Legis- 
lature needs no explanation. It is based upon the theory 
that in each general election the policy of 
the administration should be submitted to 
the judgment of the electorate for rati- 
hcation or repudiation and that, therefore, the results of 
the election should affect the Executive Branch. Hence, 
the people through the new Senate will have the right to 
detfriniiie what party and what personnel should assume 
controlv 1 other words, this provision means that the 
O^artffii^t Socretaries, jointly and severally, are with 
^lir parl^^ responsible to the people. It follows that al- 
under the, dones Law the Governor-General is the 
Executive of the Government of the Philippine Is- 
l» both the spirit and certain provisions of the Jones 
and of the Act of Reorganization of the Executive De- 
parteents passed by the Philippine Legislature, place the 
control of aiid responsibility for these departments in the 
hands of the people through the Department Secretaries 
insofar as such control and responsibility relate only to 
dosiestic Saatters; without impairing the sovereignty of the 



( PlU'ch vuith respect to popular control in the Executive 
, I#.. As for the le^^ it is hardly neces- 

sa^ to, aaj? that both the letter and the spirit of the Jones 
Baw piacse, ll entirely in the hands of the Filipino people, 
ami thetefore,, lull responsibility and authority clearly rest 
wiih usi subjtect, of course, to the limitations established 
by the rightSi of sovereignty of the United States. 




CURRENT POLITICAL EVENTS 



[January to Aufirust, 1924] 

JANUARY, 1924 

January 3, Commissioner Guevara delivered his first speech in the 
House of Representatives, advocating independence of the Philippines. 

At the same time Speaker Roxas was given an ovation by the 
members of the House when his presence in the gallery was 
announced. - 

January 7, Representative Rankin of Mississippi presented a joint 
resolution providing for Philippine independence on July 4, 1925. 

January 8, the Memorial of the Special Envoy and Resident Com- 
missioners was presented to the Senate and House of Representatives 
of the United States. 

January 9, Representative Cooper submitted a ''joint to 

enable the people of the Philippine Islands to form a ponstitation and 
national government, and to provide for the recognition of th^r in^ 
dependence.” 

J anuary 10, a joint ' debate was held at Boston between $j)eaker 
Roxas and former Goverrfbr-General Cameron Forbes regarding the 
W ood administration, before the state convention of woiiien voters. 

January 11, Secretary of War Weeks announced that there nb 
intention on the part of the War Department to recall Governor- 
General Wood, 

January 14, Senator LaFollette introduced a bill in the Senate 
providing a constitutional government for the Philippines, 

January 16, the world-famous Spanish noveiits^ Blasco Ibanez, 
arrived in Manila with world tourists. 

January 16, the American Labor Party in convention approved a 
resolution pledging support of Philippine independence^ 

January 17, Senator Ladd of North Dakdth h»t»d<Jhced a resplhtion 
proposing a congressional investigatidti of tlie administration of 
Goveraior Wood, and also the stodfc tsafiSactioMS of his Son Lieut, 
Osborne Wood. 

J anuary 23, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Philippine Republic 
was celebrated at Malolos, Bulacan Province. 

Ill 



u. 



POT/ITICAL EVENTS 



FEBRUARY, 1924 • 

f fefejrtiafy 3, ex President Wilson died. 

EelsiuU^' ll, hearings began on Senator King’s bill providing for 
the i^thdtanrali o| ^e tJnited States from the Philippine Islands. 
§pe^^W Ito^S delivered a strong and eloquent plea in favor of 
;:Wii^i!|^t^eedofl>.'" 

1®, the Porto Rican Mission gave a banquet in honor of 
the l%|lii^iite. Mission. 

liesWS was circulated that Insular Auditor Wright 
, . f^^ursenrent s from the million-peso independence fund. 

29, the suspension was decreed. 

March, - 1924 

^rch a inonster meeting was held at the Grand Opera House 
Action of Auditor Wright in suspending indepen- 
,'j Ante rhiidk Ri#ty ^es disappeared at the meeting. 

^OOger Independence bill was approved by the House 
tApvesentatiVes voting for and five against.- 
^ Ptesid^t Ooolidge wrote a letter to Speaker Roxas in' 
eestainc^ Wood and enumerated his objections 
ifidependanee. Supporters of Philippine independ- 
ibrAuch letter. 



War Weeks announced the War Depart- 
fW iie extension of American occupation to 25 years 
5^|^^;|^'J^^®^ds'may be given independence. 

S dhrehj War Department issued a ruling that no Army 

fs hold insular positions after fiscal year June 30. The 
rtkif S ™ consequence of the Comptroller General’s dis- 

cpv^ that such dhties were illegal. 

toerican Democrats in the Philippine Islands 
* resolutite recomineadiag, among other things, the de- 
fwiS intention #o withdraw American sovereignty 

*0 declare and recognize the Philippines a 

free ana so;\Re^ state. 

APRlIi, 1924 

composed of President Quezon, 

Senator Onamia and ^epreson^ 

Ap^l 17j. the D^arbm^t of War released for publication Governor 
WoO#s cable report, wMoh reads in part as follows: 

i»«r hetM vaV independence would be a heart- 

result in turning over the 
Islands to strife and dis- 
order in the near futura; for it would result in aliriost 



CURRENT POLITICAL EVENTS 113 

immediate serious clashes between the Moros and Chiis- 
tian Filipinos, the former being a unit against in- 
dependence and desiring the continuance of American 
sovereignty. ♦ « * 

“No greater or more brutal injustice could be done 
these people than to abandon them under the guise of 
granting them immediate independence when they are 
not ready for it. * * 

Mass meetings were held throughout the Islands protesting against 
the contents of said cable. 

April 23, Louis W. Fairfield, Chairman of the House Committee 
on Insular Affairs, introduced a bill providing for the independence 
of the Philippine Islands after thirty years if the Filipino people 
should indicate their desire for it in a plebiscite to be held at that 
time. 

»1AY, 1924 

During the first three days of this month, the conventions of the 
Federation of Labor and of the National Confederation of Tenants 
nnd Farm Laborers were held in Manila. Resolutions were approved 
demanding the immediate independence of the Philippine Islands. 

May 5, President Quezon appeared before the House Committee 
<>n Insular Affairs and pleaded for Philippine independence. 

May 6, news was received in Manila to the. effect that President 
Coolidge signed Act 3164 of the Philippine Legislature providing 
for the granting of free patents to homesteaders occupying lands 
since 1907, and fixing 24 hectares the size of a homestead. 

May 10, House Committee on Insular Affairs favorably reported 
amended Fairfield bill providing for absolute independence of the 
Philippine Islands in 1944. 

May 12, the Attorney-General of the Philippines filed two civil 
complaints against thje former directors of the Philippine Nhtiottal 
Batik for the recovery of sums of money aggregating over one inillioi^ 
pesos. 

May 24, the cable announced that President Coolidge had upheld 
the veto by the Governor-General of the realty tax bill passed by the 
Philippine Legislature. 

JUNE, 1924 

The most important political events of the month were the holding 
of the conventions by the tWo major p^tical parties of the United ' 
States. 

The Republican Convention which opened at Clevelmid on June 
10, inserted in its platform the following Philippine plaiiks 

“The Philippine policy of the Republican P^rty has 
been and^p inspired by the belief that our duty toward 
the Filipino people is a national obiigation which ;#ould 
remain entirely free from partisan politics. 

18441 o . w .— — 8 






||4 . €IJ»EEN POLITICAL EVENTS 

. '-Li aw^fcing the obligations which came to them with 
^ soverdgnty of the Philippine Islands the American 

f . ' pcdpte h^ djnly the ^sh to serve, advance and improve 
: ■ s ^e coiidil^n of the P people. That thought has 

SiPPeilfiost in every American determination con- 
Itelteds. Ilj will continue the dominating 
i^or ijj. the American consideration of the many prob- 
must inevitably grow out of such relationship 

jC :vf ■ • € AS esnst^ 



If ^ '^e comes when it is apparent that independ- 
better for the people of the Philippines 
PPinfe of view of both their domestic concerns 
and. ^ worid, and if when that time 

l^m^ the Fihpinb people desire complete independence, 

^ government and people will gladly accord 

conditions in the Philippine 
^ Convinced the present administration that 
the time for such action has not yet come.'' 

the hand, the Democratic Party's convention held in 

New ^prk firom Juu^ 24, approved the following Philippine plank: 

succeeded in maintaining a 
J^ve thus fulfilled the only con- 
Congress as a prerequisite to the 
We declare that it is now our 
by ^ promise to these people 

independence which 

to. Filipino Xabbr Delegation left for Canton, China, 

■Workers. Conference held in that city, 
tli Conference was one endorsing 

PMUppine Islands and pledging the coopera- 
bon of tie members to work for such indepenLnce. 

M»S^hl“pi5!drthe'n celebrated in 

msei^ hero at occupied by the 

a conm!^*»fttiVe plate speeches were delivered and 

Auditor Wright refused to recognize 
of the ^airman, insist ® ojf pi*lic works fund the sipature 
^ Joint^Sh^ ***®.^^ majority of the 

ah order relOasm? The: Governor-General then issued 

s ihe fund in qh^on. 

■ 1924 . 

deserted by the Filipino workers 

.^edf it was discoy^”^^ McKinley was 

t&0eme» raise in pay/ ® ^*3 "’^SaMZied among them 

^ly soldiers Wi^t ^ike and were arrested to be 




CURRENT POLITICAL EVENTS 
• « Teffislature opened. 

July 16, the ^ Auditor Wright released hit ppiilion 

On this same day, m , appropriated by Act 2933 i^cpn-. 

declaring the independence 

stitutional. .lolivered a strong speech in the Senate 

July 17, Senator A 

attacking Secretary of the resolution No. 32 regpiriiig the Sec- 

July 18, the Senate app before that body to e^lain certain 

retary of the Interior to ^^.^uation as Secretary of the Interior, 

matters in connection witn " . ^ Envoy to the IJiiited States, 

July 19, Speaker Boxas, Special 

turned to the Islands. informed the Senate tiiat in ^ew 

July 23, the _ of powers and of the demMid of public 

of the principle of separano _ ghopld not 1^ coapelledi fo 

interest “the Secretary oi Secretary of the 

appear before the Senate. ggnate Resolution staling that he 

Interior wrote a . body without injuring the prestige pf 

“cannot appear before principle of separation of powers 

July 26, Chief Justice AxauUo died. 

^ -n 4 -ct of the Philippine Islands was Biuntdic^* 

July 29, the Labor Party ot tne jrmupiuuB xm»uu» w . 

AUGtJSl?, 1934 

Aueust 3 news Was received that the campaij^; | 1 >U# p| t|e 
Augurt j nay -earnest attention to the im»edia|e PhUr 

Democratic Party ^uld be giren extensiye pubUcity. 

ippine independence planx o ^ 

“o InLa" of *f.bWrat tlo PklliPPWf* l» »W »»» «<« «» 
ican Government turns her loose. 



