GENERAL HEADQUARTERS 
UNITED STATES ARMY ^ORCES, PACIFIC 
PHILIPPINE ARMY SECTION 




) AFO 500 

My dear General Valdes, 20 September 1945 

The Inspector General Service, Philippine Army, has 
developed into a strong, loyal and efficient organization. This 
has been accomplished through your staunch support and cooperation 
in its reorganization. 

It is admitted that steamroller tactics v/e re used at 
times by the undersigned, but this ms deemed necessary to over- 
come the obstacles put in the way, and to overrule objections of 
some people. 

The present Secretary of National Defense and the Chief 
of Staff, Philippine Army, as well as any future change in these 
officers in years to come, have now at their disposal an instru- 
mentality in the Inspector General Service which is placed at 
their disposal to keep them informed at all times, in an unbiased 
manner, of the true status, efficiency and state of training of 
the Philippine Army. 

The personnel in the Inspector General Section, Head- 
quarters Philippine Army, have been handpicked and indoctrinated 
with the importance of their position and the best traditions of 
the Army, in that the Inspector General Service's mission is to 
inquire into and report with strict impartiality and honesty on 
all matters which affect the efficiency and economy of the Army of 
the Philippines. 

It is known by you that there have been objections with- 
in this Headquarters to make The Inspector General and his assist- 
ants independent of all General and Special Staff Sections, in 
making The Inspector General directly responsible to the Chief of 
Staff. It is to the Chief of Staff's advantage to retain his 
Inspector General as his confidential advisor in all matters 
affecting the efficiency and economy of the Philippine Army. 

Tt is to the benefit of the Philippine Commonwealth, 
and the Philippine Army, that the present policy of the Inspector 



- 1 - 



\ 



General. Service be continued for as long as there is a Philippine 
Affty. Headquarters Philippine Army Circular No 139, 1 August 1945, 
should be published in the form of an Army Regulation, numbered 
AR 20-10. It would be wise and a guarantee to the future efficiency 
of the Philippine Army if, in general, "Composition, Mission and 
Duties" of the Inspector General Service, Philippine Army, as set 
forth in Circular No 139, be incorporated as law, in an amendment 
to the National Defense Act, Common-wealth of the Philippines. 

The undersigned will be relieved very shortly from his 
present duties. It is with deepest regrets that my pleasant rela- 
tions with you and the Philippine Army are being severed. 

In closing I would like to stress that whatever action I 
have taken has been, in all sincerity, for the general good of the 
Philippine Army and the Philippine Commonv/ealth, as the’-e have been 
no personal gains except the self satisfaction of having accomplished 
my mission to the best of my ability. 

With fondest affections to a close friend and gentleman, 

I remain 





HERTHL L. F'ARISEAU, 
lit Colonel, IGD. 



