A THOUSAHD TEftRS OF PHILIPPIME HISTCRI 
BKPCEE THE COKEHG OP THE SPANIiRDe 



By 



ABSTIS CRAIG 
Associate Professor of Hletory 
Uniwelty of the PhlHppines 




Ootober 13, 19U 



1 THOUSAND ISARS OF PHILIPPINE HISTCftI 
BEFCSE THE COUING OF THE SPANIARDS 



The Philippine History of vhioh om is apt to think when 
that stibjeot is aentioned covers hardly a fourth of the Is- 
lands* book-recorded history* 

These records are not the romantic dream of a Paterno 
that under the naiie Ophir the Philippines with their gold en- 
riched Solomon (lOth century B. C). They are solider ground 
than aqy plausible explanations that Uanila hemp (abaka) was 
Strabo«s (A, D. 21) "ta seerilca," the cloth made of "a kind 
of flax combed ftom certain barks of trees," The shadowy i- 
dentificatlon of the Manilas with PtolsBy^s Maniolas (c. A* 
D» 130) is not in their class. Nor, to accept them, is re- 
course needed to farfetched deductions like Zufiiga«s that the 
American Continent received Israel's ten lost tribes, and 
thence, through Easter Island, Magellan's archipelago was 
peopled* Their existence saves as from having to accept such 
references as hos Slnbad the sailorman (Burtom The Arabian 
Nights, Nliht 538 et esq.) evidently made seme of his voyages 
in this region, though it would not be uninteresting to note 
that the great Roe is a bird used in Moro ornament, the 
"ghoul" of the Thousand and one nights is the Filipino Asuang 
and that the palm-cwrered island which was believed to be a 



- 2 - 



eoloflsal tortoise beeatue it shook might veil have been lo* 
oated iihere the Fhilipplne nape indicate that earthqualcefi are 
nost Arequent* 

The records hereinafter to be cited ere tor the moet 
part of the prosaic kind, aU the more reliable and valuable 
beeavse thi^ are inclined to be *y and matter-of ■^et» They 
Bake no such demand ijpon ifflagination as Europe's pioneer tra-« 
veller's tales, for instance the sixteenth century chart which 
depicted America as inhabited by headless people with ?yes, 
nMe and mouth located in the chest* 

The British Museum' s oriental scholar (Douglast Surope 
and the ^ Bast, Cambridge, 1904) states that by the begins 
ning of the Choa dynasty (B. C, 1122-255) intercottree had been 
established at Canton with eight foreign nations. Duties as 
early as 990 B, C» were levied, and amoug the imports figure 
birds, pearls and tortoise shell, products of the Philippines, 
but the origin of these has not been iavostigated. "ReH- 
able history," says Dr. Pott (A Sketch of Chinese History, 
aanghai, 1908), "does not extend further back than the mid- 
dle of the Chott dynasty (B. C. 722) After the time of 

the Chou dynasty we come to more soHd ground, for at the be- 
ginning of the Han dynasty (B. C.206) the custom originated 
of employing Court chroniclers to write a dally account of 
gwrernmental proceedings. These diaries were kept secret and 



3 



stored away In Iron ohasrs until th« dynasty thoy ohroniclad 
had peiasad away; then they were opened and published, and so 
f flria the battis oif our knowledge of the agents that had tranfl- 
Iilrad whllfl the dynasty was In axistenoe." 

Fhlllppine history, however, has attracted only incident- 
al interest In the translating of these voluainous chronicles 
so that while the first three nentions hereafter to he cited 
are well within the reliable histoary period they have not been 
▼erified and are Taluable only as suggeeting more definitely 
where to investigate. 

Mr* Wallaoe Ptatt, chief of the Bureau of Science *s Di- 
vision of Hines, states that he has read sonewhere, but lost 
his notes of it, that the PhiUppines were once called "Gold" 
in China, because of their considerable export thither of the 
precious yellow metal. This parallels the raalay province naaed 
"SUver" (Perak or Pilak). Further he refers to Becker's Geo- 
logy of the Philippines where (on page 90 of the reptrint) F. 
Karuseh gives a former German Consul in Manila as authority 
far gold haviag been exported to China during the third oen- 
tury. If the ghlnese authority for this can be found it will 
destrqy the value of Dr. GroeneveWt«s observation (Notes co 
the Malay Archipelago and Malacca compiled ftoo Chinese sour- 
ces; Batavia, 1876, p. A) on his quotation ftom the history 



of the Idang dynaaty (Book 54> P* l)» 

"In the time of Sun Gh'uean of the house of Wu 
(A» D. 222-251) two functlonarieB, called ChUf^ing 
and K'antai, were ordered to go to the south; they 
went to or hoard from a hundred or more countries 
and made an account of then." 

The cofflmontatcr adiaits that "what these countries wore is 
not stated," bat believes the "Malay islands were not anongst 
them, otherwise their name would have appeared at that tiffle al- 
ready in the annals of China." 

Since only a beginning has as yet been made in studying 
the volnmnous records of China, a little further In^stigatlon 
«ay easily result in establishing this early date. 

The last of the early three possible references to the 
Philippines, classed only as introductory because of their un- 
certain character, is frm the narrative of Fahien, the details 
of whose home voyage seem to suggest that he passed in the vi- 
einity of . if not through, this group of islands. This Budd- 
hist priest in A. D. 400 went overland to India (Groenevedlt, 
Hotes, p. 6) in search of Buddlist books and fifteen years 
later oame back by sea in Indian vessels via Ceylon and Java. 
Shortly after his death a book was published, written from his 
narratives, givi^ account of Buddhist countries" (Fo Kuo 
Chi). After stsying five months in Java where "heretics and 



Brahnans flourlBhod but the law of Buddha hardly deserved 
Bention," Fahain eoharked In May, W> on a 2ars9 merehant 
yessol with a crew of over two hundred and prorieioned for 
f iftydaye* Steering a north oast course for Canton, ^en 
over a month out they struck a tyj^oon, "a sudden dark squall 
acconpanied by pelting raln#" The Brahiaans felt that the 
priest of the rival religion was a Jonah and wanted to land 
hlM on one of the neighboring islands but were dissuaded by 
a trader representing the danger that would be to all « ooa- 
ing to China, The weather continued very dark and the pilots 
did not know their situation. Finally on the 78th day, with 
watw almost gone and provisione short, they determined to 
change their course since they had already exceeded the usual 
fifty dtvys for the run. So on a norttarest route in twelve 
days aore they reached not Canton but Shantung, nearly thir- 
teen degrees farther north. Noif this voyage on a map works 
out that they passed the Philippines about the tlae that «a- 
rccnlng the priest on an island was under discussion, and, as 
St. John notes (The Indian Archipelago, London 1B53, Vol. 1, 
p. 103), "The Philippines .... occ^y the only part of the 
Archipelago liable to hurricanes." Apparently the land was 
then unfamiliar to these early navigators. 

Ho voyages of discovery were attempted by the Chinese 
but, creeping along the coast, they finally came to the Iblay 
Peninsula and they worked fr<M one island to another in the 
T^.-n Archipelago. (Groeaeveldt, p. 1). W this roundabout 



oourso in eonxwetioa iiith tha gr«at laland of Bonitto» tiisn 
called Polo and noted to have seat envoys to China in 5^,523 
and 616, we find the Snlu iB3Ands euggeoted. The reference 
reads "at the east of this eounbry is situated the land of the 
Rakshas (or lawless persons, ovir pirates)," These were stated 
to have the same castons as the Poll people, unerring in throw- 
ing a saw-edged (wooden) disoua Imife, but using other weapons 
iiitft those in China, in ways resembling Cambodia and with the 
products like Siamfts. Mnrder and theft were punished cut- 
ting off the hands and adldtery by chaining together the legs 
for a year. In the dark of the moon came the sacrifices, bowls 
of win© and establea set adrift on tha surface of the water, as 
Bornean tribes supposed to be akin to the Biseyans and Tagalogs 
aoir are doing. The Polans collected coral and trained parrots 
to talk, and so prdbably did the men of Sulu. In their ear* 
were the teeth of wild beasts and a piece of hone-made cotton 
cloth was wapped about their waists, sarong fashion. Their 
markets they held at night and they were accustomed to keep 

their faces covered. 

H«zt In point of time is a reference through SouMiem Por- 

mosa, called by the Chinese P'i-sho^r*. *^ 
nChlna before the Chinese" (Oe lacouporie) believes is only 
a miscalling of Bisaya. and former Consul Davidson of Parmcsa 
oorruborates this both on Chinese authority (ife Tcuaa-lln) and 



froa local traditions, (BaviAsoiu The lalaad of FormoBa Past 
and Frsseab, N«« York} 1903)* 

"Baoda of unoiTlllzea Stela^s" ftco the south drors Into 
the Interior the Foraoaaae with whom the Ghinesa earlier had 
been familiar* So on the next expedition from the nainland, 
in 605, the Chinese leader was surprised to find on «ie ooast 
strange inhabitants with whffln he oottld not otarannleate. His 
suralse that the newcomers were Malays led the next expedition 
to talce with it Interpreters ftom different southern Malayan 
islands, of whom at le^st one made himself understood. The 
iiaalgrants kept up oonimunicatlon with Luson and on their rafts 
raided ooast tonne of Qxim, as wUl be later seen. 

Pangasinan ones extended nmch father north in Luaon and 
Kr, Servlllaao de la Cruz, a Unirersity of the PhiUpplne stud- 
tut apeoiallBing in the history of that prmrinee, describes 
rafts of bamboo bound together with vines, of a size which two 
Mn can lift, yet need on rivers and by people venturing as far 
as four miles ftom the ooast upon them# 

The chronologietl order takes as again to the sooth. 
A "Ka-ling" »eationsd in the old Chinese history of the 
Tiaag dynaaty <618^) has been, it seems to me, wrongly iden- 
tified by yba Doboh scholar Groenevsldt (Notes on the IfeOay Ar- 
chipelago, P* 12) *8 J»« assumption that Pali or Po-H 



• 8 - 



was Scmtra* Sinoa it ifl ouch mora probable that Foli is only 
an older f ona of Pooi, Bnmai» our Borneo (Hoae and HeDongalli 
Pagan Tribes of Borneo, London, 1912 » vol. 1) Kaling rather 
should be looked for as an island off the eastern side of Bor- 
neo, Canbodia to the north, the sea to the south, and on the 
western side of the island of Dva-pa-fcan, which might hacTO been 
the old, and more «xtensive, district of Dapitan on the north- 
nest of Mindanao, Directions are so general that the flsiBg of 
the spot is only guess work, yet the probabiUty puts it irithin 
the soTitham (Sulu) part of the Philippine Archipelago, 

the walls of the city were of palisades as were those en^ 
closing Fort Santiago»8 Moro predecessor. The king's palaoi 
was a two-story affair thatched with coir ftom the abundant coco 
palitf and the throne of the nonarch was an ivory couch. Using 
neither sppoM nor chopsticks, food was handled with that .anual 
dexterity of which the Tondo tribune has recently been conplaitt- 
iag as contribttt<«ry to cholera. The pa]a wine was obtained 
Just as tuba is ntm prepared* 

The older history was considered vague and to its revl- 
sion, callsd "the new histoopyll, fuller detaiU appear, among 
the- another name (DJava. DJapa or Dayapo (Dva-apo?). The larger 
houses were covered with palm leaves and Uk. the king's e<iulpped 
with ivory couches. Baniboo mats are also mentioned a« the «- 



ports m given as tortoise sheU, gold and eilTor, rhlno- 
ceros-harns, and ivory. The ivcey night have been white oa- 
aagon, since it was itfed for furaitiire, and the rhinoceros 
horns could have been imparted. The rapid intoxication fton 
native drink is emphasised and, contrary to the American 
traveller (Rev, Arthur J. Broime) who attributed the intro- 
duction of vice here to his eoldier-coanbrymen, a virulent 
venereal disease in mentioned. The alternative name of the 
island turns out to belong to the place on it where tfcs king 
resided and he is said to be a descendant of Ki-yen who had 
Uved more to the east in the town of Pa-la-kaHii. Of his 
thirty-two high ministers Datu Kan-liung was chief and twenty 
eight small neighboring couofcries owed him aUegianee, as the 
twenty-eight islands wotOd to a powerful Sulu sultan* (A8 to 
n«ib«- of islands, see SeleebyU History of Sulu, Manila, 1908, 

p. 15).. 

A royal mountain resort overlooking the sea was Lang-pi- 
ya, a name for which, like the others, Groeneveldt finds it 
difficult to name a counterpart in Java, in this case noting 
«wa think it advisable not to insist upon the avove identi- 
flcati<«a.« The Utitud. would seem to have been in th. S«lu 
neighborhood for at the s,^ «olstice an S-foot gn«on cast, 
on the south side, a 2,A foot-shadow. 

Between 627 and 649 en7oys to China accompanied the tri- 
bute bearers fro. D«.^a-la and l.ra-pa-tan CDapitan), receiv- 
ine acknowledgements under the Chinese aupercr»s great seal. 



10 



Dva-faa-la also aalEed for good horaes, aad got thea« 

Than in 674 thaara wae an Ida&l rular, a «oaan nawd Slaa, 
of whom a story is told similar to one remembered in Korea, and 
somevrhat like the tales of China's Golden Age, that a foreign 
Ving (prince of Arabs) to test the reports he had heard sent 
a hag of gold to be left in the road* There it remained undls- 
tiffbed till the heir apparent happened to step oror it. The 
incensed q\wen was dissuaded by her ministers from killing hla 
but, saying his fault lay in his feet, Insisted on eutting 
these off, finally, hoseTsr, compromising on amputating the 
toes. Not only was this an example to the whole nation but 
it 80 frightened the Arab king that he did not carry out his 
planned attack. This wlation of the Queen of Sieba-Solomon 
anecdotes is coimon in Chinese history, and its eortenslve use 
was probably due to the same sort of local adaptation as later 
made an ca-ientaUaed Dido sta^ of land-measurement trickeiy 
^aad so quickly after the coming of the Europeans. Groene- 
Teldt suggests the Arab prince might have been one of the Arab 
chiefs in the Archipelago, which would by our identification 
nicely fit with Boraaan conditions. 

Between 766 and 779 three Ka-ling eiwcys visited China 
and in 813 ^^^^ (Groeneveldt thinks negroes), assented 
colored parrots, tpinka-blrds" - whatever these may have been. 



- n - 

and other giite «9re presented to their pofwarful oelghbcr. 1 
title of "left Defender of the Office of the Four Inner Gates" 
oame to the aabassadctt' who by olerera^ seeking to relinquish 
this title to his yonnger brother seewed imperial praise and 
the eoreted honor for two membere of his family instead of one. 

In 827 and 835 »ere two embassies, and between 837 and 
850 an emrcy presented female musicians as the trlbufce gift, 
(Account eraunariaed ft-om Groenareldt, pp. 12-15) • 

"The great sea southwest of Hainan," says he" .... . 
has in it Triple- joint currente (San-ho-lin). The waves 
break here violently, dividing Into three currentst on« flews 
south and is the sea which forms the highway to foreign lands; 
one flcwB north and Is the sea of Canton (and Amoy).... one 
flows eastward and enters the boundless place, which is call- 
ed the C^eat Eastern Ocean sea. 

"Ships in the southern trade, both going and coming, must 
run through the Triple- joint currents. If they have the wind; 
in a moaient they are through it. But if on getting into the 
dangerous place there Is no wind, the ship cannot get out and 
is wrecked in the three currents, ... It is said that, in 
the Great Eastern Ocean Sea there is a long bank of sedd and 
rocks some Hyriads of li (705 yards or 2-5 mile) in length. It 
Barks the gulf leading to Hades (Wel-lu). In olden times there 



vas an ocean going jnnk which was driven by a great we8ter]y 
wind to within hearing distance of the roar of the waves fall- 
ing into Vei-lu of the Great Eastwrn Ocean. No land was to h« 
seen. Suddenly there arose a strong eaeterJy wind and the Jtmk 
escaped its dooau (flirth and Rockhill, Chan Ji>Kua, note 3, 
p. 185)* 

Snoh superstition, like that of the Pillars of Hercules, 
in the Strait of Gibraltar, naturally restrained explorations 
so that the first voyages across the China eea cane £rm Ifanila. 

The earliest account of Filipino traders cooes through a 
telef mention in a Ereneh ethnolcgi8t»s notes on foreigMrs in 
China (Heniy St. Denis, Ethncgrephie, H, 502, according to 
Rockhill) that in 982 merchants frm Manila visited Canton for 
traide. They probably were not pioneers as it is related that 
they came with valuable merohandise. This was about the tl«e 
(between #76 and 983) when the Canton traie was declared a 
state monopoly. Over two centuries a maritime customs ser- 
vice had «iated in that port, reorganized in 971 because of 
the greatly increased foreign trade. 

FroD 1174 to 1190 (CShau Jo-Kua«8 account, Hlrth and Bock- 
JIU, p. 165) the Fomosan Bisayan Xhiefs were in the habit of 
assembling parties of several hundreds to make sudden, raid0 cn 
^riOlages of the neighboring Chinese ccst. There murders in. 



nmerable and wen «annibttli8m were charged against thea, though 
perhaps there shotild bo some discount upon these unfavorable 
atateuents as ««n today enemies are not always reliable auth- 
orities upon their adirarsaries. 

They ^ced great value upon iron, even to the extent of 
attaching ropes, of orer a hundred feet in length, to their 
spears so that these might be recovered after each throw. 

Snob was their fondness for all forms of Iron that those 
surprised by them would throw away spoons or chopsticks of that 
metal so while the pursuers were stopping to pick these up they 
eould gala a start. Once in the htmse the door had only to be 
dosed and they would be distracted fron the attack by sight 
of a iron knocker which thc^y would wrench cff and then lume- 

diately depart with It* 

The soldiers deceyed them with mail-covered horsemen and 
in their mad struggle to strip off the armor they would meet 
their death without being sensible of their danger. Bamboo 
lashed into rafts lomreyed them over the waters aud when hard 
pressed facilitated their escape for these, folded up like 
screens, were easy to 14ft and swim off i^lth. 

A coUector of eustoms (the Chau-Ju-Kua before quoted) of 
Chinchew, the port in the Amc^ district later made famous 1^ 
Marco Polo, personal ixrrestigatlon obtained data as to 



- It - 



the Philippines which he published in a greographjr uritten 
betweea 1209 and 12X1 (B» Laufer, Relations of Chinese to the 
Philippines, Washington, 1907, p* 24)* 

Under "Mai" , an island north of Borneo, he is supposed to 
inoltide Western Luson, and the Island of lUndoro, which BlUBwiir- 
tritt thinks (Versooh einer Ethnogrphie der Philippinen, 65) 
had the name "Ifait," or black, frcio the former negrito popula- 
tion* The opening description, new held to be of Uanila, telle 
of about a thousand fanilies who occupied both hanks of a watar- 
coarse. Sone people wore only waist-cloths while othws draped 
themselves In a aort of cotten sheet, getting prisunally nuch 
•the same effect as nsy be seen among the fa«inlne bathers on 
the Tondo beaeb any Sunday norning* 

Little bronae idols of unknown origin were to be f otina In 
the grassy region outside the village, for Kr. EockhiU is care- 
ful to translate "idols" instead of "Buddhas," holding that the 
word has the more general meaning often. let because hhe lat« 
idols of the country vera of wood and clay one wonders where 
^on«e idola would be made at that t^ if not in a B«idhl.t 
3^. Manila was a peaceable community then, and peacem too, 

«rletes of the south had not yet gotten into the 
for the fierce prlates oi 

. there still less had settled, as they were to 
habit of cooing there, e*i^ * 

do tiro cneturieo later. 



- 15 - 

The tradors* sfaipe anohared in front of the quarters of 
the chief 8, to nhom they presented the white silk paras ole which 
theee dignitaries were aeoustomed to uro. There the itarket was 
heldf and the shore people at once went on board, aixing in 
fi-iendly fashion with the newccmere. Nor wae there fear of 
loss, for such then was the Manilaas' honesty that eren when 
some one helped himself and took away goods without being seen 
he oould bo relied on in due season to faithfully account for 
then. The period was nflually eight or nine aonths so that, 
thwigh not traweling the greatest distance, those trading to 
Manila were among the latest in getting back to China, 

The trade was without money, a barter of the coantr7»syeU<» 
was (a nsdlTm grade), cotton, pearls, tortoise shell, ■ediclnal 
betel note, and native cloth, for imported porcelain, trade gold 
iron censere, leads,' colored glassbeads and iron needles. News 
of other settlBfflents in this region may be what we n« oaU the 
BabiTanes islands, PollUo island, of the east coast, Wi*«yen 
in Pangasinan, Luzon perhaps used of East Luzon and (according 
to L«th«r M. Parker, a graduate student in the Tmiverslty of the 
Phillppli-fi. 1923-19W) Llan in Batangas. 

For the group called -the three Islands," Calamianes, Pa- 
lawan and Bt«n«u«a are the closest resemblances to the curli«s 
of the Chinese narrative, though B. laufer in hii. notes 
to Fay Cola«0 Chinese pottery in the Fhlllppines (Held «useu. 



. 16 . 



Bulletia) suggeeta another for Cal«Biane8« 

Loe«l ouBtoms wm said not to differ partlenlarny frcn 
the VBsra of Hal* The oountxy, grand In Ite aeenery, had nansr 
ridges and ranges of ollffs rose trcn the shore, steep as the 
walls of a house. 

Saoh tribe had aboob a thousand faBlliee (which seens to 
be oq3y another way of saying that the tribes were large rather 
than an effort at statlstlos) and they lived In wattled huts 
in eoamanding situations difficult to access. The siht of wo- 
aen bringing water from the streams In Jars gracefully and easi- 
ly carried on the head, two or three being borne one abore the 
other, still anases and Interests us as it did the Chinese gee 
graidier*s informant. 

In more remote ▼aUeys lurked the negrltoes, nesting In 
the trees the author alleges. They were stunted in stature, 
with eyes round and yellow, curly hair, and teeth erposed hy 
their parted lips. In groi«>s of three or five they wouM an- 
tasbe* some msrary wsyfarer and many feU Tlctlms to t*elr 
eunnlng and deadly arraws. But throsing a porcelain bowl would 
Mto then f Wt their murderous purpose and off they would go , 
leaping and shottfclng In jey« 

The country f ott evidently did not inspire in the traders 
the same confidence these felt toward the %nilans. Their ships 
would anchor in midstream and none went ashore tiU there had 



- 17 - 



bMtt ae&t one or two hoetagee to be retained till the trading 
waa orer. Jtrm beating annoonced tiaelr arrival^ when tiie lo- 
cal trader e raced for the ehlp earrying, evidently ae samples, 
eotten yellow wax, and home laade cloth, and ooocnut heart aats, 
whatever this last say hare neant* In ease of disagreeaent 
over prices the chiefs of the traders came in person, when, 
after a matually satisfactory settle»ent had been reebbed, theore 
would be presents given, - silk laihrellas, porcelain and rattan 
baskets, probably the first two tron the visiters and «he last 
froii the people. Then the barter waa coooluded ashore. Three 
•r f our days was the usual stop in each place when the ships 
sailed to another anchorage, fear each of the settlaoents was 
iadependeut of its neighbors. The Chinese goods were parce- 
Iftin, black danask, and other silks, beads of all colors, lead* 
en sinkers for nets, and tin. 

Polllo, on the Pacific coast, was also, but less ftrequent- 
ly, visited, to obtain two priaed varieties of coral. There lo- 
e«l cnstOBB and ceafflsrcial usages were the same as on hhe other 
side of the archipelago but thoug^i the settlewnt. were more po- 
j«la«e the ecral was hard to get and so there was little trade. 
The coast, too, was dangerous, with the sea fuU of -bare ribs 
of rock with iaggad tooth^Hke blasted tree., their joints and 
^a sharps- thazi swcrds and lances." Ships tacked f«- out 
fro. shore in passJ^ to avoid these perils and besides the 



- 18 - 



tfaft poople were Sef cruel dleposltiort and given to robbery*" 

HorthMMi Formosa, during this ptriody «a8 not visited bgr 
Chixwee for there were no goods of special laportanoe to be 
gotten there while the people were also given to robbery, bat 
ForBoeen goode, - yellow wax, native gold, bnffalo tall0> and 
jerked leoperd-oeat, were brought to the Philippines for sale. 

Pte 1349, in an unptibllshed translation by Mr. Rocldiill 
of »A Descriptlco of the Barbariane of the Isles (Tao-i-obih- 
Uo) by Hang Ta-yiian is owitioned, the "three arohipeOagoes" 
if that is the proper way to distinguish beteeen Chao-jurkua»i 
Saafastt and the present Sa&-tao. Islands were for the Chinese 
BereJy places distant by a sea route flrom each other rather 
than our "bodies of land COTpletely surrptmded by water." 

This anther's region was to the east of a very curious 
range of «ountalne if one nay translate the name "taki-ehan." 
It was divided by a triple peak and there was range upon range 
of moantains, which suggests to |(r. Hocldxlll the Paclfio ooaet 
of Luaon sooth of Cape Engafio* 

AS no*, the sou was poor and the orops sparse, while the 

heated ollaate was Iwrlable. 

The old question of a lost white tribe, ajrtriboted so often 
to mndoro, U raised by ««tlon of "some males and females" be- 
i»g -tolte". PThape the breeding principle that a second ores 



19 



aonetlaee reverte to th« original tup* may be the «zplanfttioiu 
Cbinsee nestlsos have seemed to me whiter here than Suropeass 
blende with Filiplnae vhere no Chinese strain was present. Their 
dello&te beauty suggests the Caneasians ft en whom the earliest 
Chinese nay have taleen wives in the remote peat before they oaM 
to the "eigfateen provinces.* The first Spaniards commenb also 
on exceedingly fair Filipinas and as the Caucasian type Is the 
European ideal of beauty it probably resulted that sooh mixed 
Mrrlages as oeourrSd were with these Chinese mestlsa». The 
prejttdice of new converts against pagan, linked with the humi- 
liation to which the Chinese residents in the fhilippiaes were 
subject during Spain«B rule here, led to covering vp and ignor- 
ing all Chinese relations and is a very good reason why even 
where known there is today reluctance to admit descent frat the 
oldest of civiUaed races. let before the Spaniards came both 
lift the miipplnes and in the lands from which successive Im- 
lOgrations of Filipinos have come, the Chinese traders ranked 
,ith the aristocracy and Chinese wives were sought by rcyalty. 

A trait by no means died out was a fondness for Je-eliy 
Shown by stowaw^ on board junks for Chinches. When their 
money was aU expended on personal adarnments they returned 
home, there to be honored as travelled personages, the dis- 
tinction of having visited China raising them above even their 



- 20 - 

own fathers and the older nen* 

The 3349 account of Mai, oa^ ll&nllay oredlts the people 
with "oustoms chaste and good*" Both men and women wore their 
hair done tq> in a knot and clothed thenselvee in bliw cotton 
ehirts* Since the earlier notice, within the oentut; and a 
quarter isterral, Hindu inflinnoe had become manifest for a 
«ort of suttee is related. New widows with shaven heads would 
lie fasting beside their husband* s earpses for seven days* 
Then if still alive thej could eat but were fcwer penaitted to 
remarry and maiy when the husband's body was placed on the fu- 
neral pyre accompanied it into the flanes. The region must hare 
been populous for on the burial of a chief of renown two or three, 
thousand slaves would be burled in his toaib. The Imports show 
more l-ujoiries; red taffetas, ivory and trade silver figuring In 

the later list* 

Sulu soaes in for mentitm with fields losing their ferti- 
lity In the third year of cultivation. Sago, fish, shrimps and 
sheU flBh made ta> the diet and the people, with cut hair, wore 
black turbans as may now be seen in parts of Borneo, «*d dressed 
in sarongs, BolUng eeawater for salt, maWng rum and wearing 
were their occupations ashore, and dyewoods of middling quality, 
beeswax, tortolse.shell and pearls, swpassing in roundness and 
whiteness, were their exports. 



lAQf er (Relationa of Chlnesa to the PhiUppinas, p* 251) 
gives 1372 as the date of the first tribute embaaagr to China froa 
the Philippine peoples tnder their present name of xLiuon-aisnf'* 
than designating prijiolpally Manilana (Ming ChronloXes obap* 323* 
p* 110 aooording to his reference)* luson h&b then stated to be 
situated ih the Sooth Sea very close to Ghiaohew, Fukien provinoe. 

The nalar of the great Middle Klngdoa in areturn sent an of- 
ficial to the king of luaon with gifts of silk gauae eabroidered 
in gold and oolors* The coBsaeatator adds a well founded eautim 
Against accepting the word "fipit" afl meaning anything other than 
that the chronlclar was unfamiliar with previcus notices* 

Lauf er quotes from the Ming Chronloles of the Malayan tribe 
P'ing-la-shi-aau wboo be concludes are the Pangaslnanes, inha- 
bitants of the western and southern shores of Llngayea Bay, Luzon, 
but in earUer days appareirtV extending further north* Barly in 
the Vr century they had a small realm of their own, sendiiig an 
♦Bbasay to China in U06 and preaentiag the emperor as gifts «with 
exoelleafc horsee, eilver and other objects" and receiving in re- 
turn paper money and silks* In U08 the chief was acooopanied by 
an ii^oslng retinue of two headmen trm each village subject to 
his authority and these in turn each accompanied by aoae of his 
retainers. This time the lurperial gifts were paper money for the 
subHihief s and for each hundred men six piecee of an open work 



▼arlegated silk, for making coats, and linings^ 

Besides in embassy ft-om Pangasittan there was another 
tribute party ffom Lnzon headed by one Ko-<:h*a-lao nho brought 
products of his country, among which gold was most prominent. 
This last party came because in 1^05 the Emperor Yung-lo had 
sent a high Chinese officer to Luzon to govern that country. Here 
is definite political identification with the Chinese empire. In 
U07 it is probable this moral force of respect for the superior 
culture of what was the Rome of the Orient witnessed also a phy- 
sical demonstration, for in that year the eunuch Cheng-ho set 
sail, with his 62 large ships bearing 27,800 soldiers, on the ex- 
pedition which explored as far as the Arabian Gulf and required 
the nominal allegiance of the numerous countries visited during 
repeated voyages extending over thirty years. 

Ian C. Hannah states in his "Eastern Asiat A History" that 
otrtside the North of Toh Chow, in Shantung province, by a little 
mosque, is yet marked the burial place of a former sultan of Sulu 
who died on a visit to the Emperor lung-lo in U17. 

In the same year, Sulu's eastern, western and village rajah, 
with their wives, children and headn^n all came to the Chinese 
court With tribute, and another tribute mission rr«a ^u arrived 

in 142Q. 

About the »id<.l« of tha XV century, Doctors Hose and Mo- 



- 23 - 

Pwgall tn thalr hlsteory of Bornoo (Fbgan Tribas of Bonwo Iioo- 
doDy 1912, ohap, 1) asserty a Blsayan vas Idng of BrunelU Tbls 
Alak bar Tala^ latw to ba ealled Sultan Hohammed, Introduodd 
Arabic dootrlnes into his Idngdom and tha use of Arabia writing 
aadtt his reign the begiaaliig of Brunei's local recorded history* 
His great grand naiAaii, IfaOcoda Ragan, had Arab and Chinese as 
well as Biaayan blood, a fact renembered to this day by having 
representatives of these three races officiating at the IdngU coro- 
nation» and the fonrth official on these occasions is dressed In 
anoient Bisayan costuM, Hakoda Kagab, aso eaUsd Sultan Bul- 
kiah, is spofeen of as the «oet heroic character in Bornean history 
and conquered the SoLu islands, and sent wqpeditions to Ibnila, 
the second ti« seising the place. His wife, the first q«sen of 
the muppines of whom we know, was a Javan Princess, This great 
king was accidoHtaUy Idlled his wife's bodkin. It was this 
.coarch or his son who died iii 1575 that so l»prsssed the chro- 
nieler of Mageltols expedition, 

Corrbboratioii for this considerable historic association co»ss 
in the Chinese jars f au«i in the cOdest burial caves as well aS 
prised «.o«g the -ore re-cts hiU tribes ae ancestral possessions, 

.rtfclfluity that their origta has 
handed down ft» remote in ^U^^T 

. «^t•n and they are now veasrated* cbjects that 
been forgotten ana 

. «n (Fsy cole. Chinese Pottery in the PhiUppinss). 
came from heaven CFsy oo« 

designs place then among the Chinese 
The four-toed drag<m claw designs p 

^ ««t later th«i the last of the XCT century 
Banufaeture of not law 



-24- 

I«geod i» not Iftokiiigy aith«r, for a tradition of Ta^ 
(aale9l:7t Th« Origin of the Malayan FiUpinoB, p. 1) relataa 
that a Chinese rajah lAio aaohored his boat at the BoUbh of their 
Island had his daiighter stolen In the nl^t "tiy the "dewas*** SiM 
vas hidden in a heaiboo stalk and there found by the solitary aale 
who had batched oat of a roe's egg« Xhair daatbter» the earliest 
reoorded Chinese m^lsay was^ aeeordlng to Doctor Saleeliy agalni 
the grandnother of the Chiefs of Soltb 

The v«7 DBW Lnscn Is not the tlM«4ieBoired rice nortar^ Ia 
stD3g» but Loaong of whloh Sahn Crawford (^stfloy of the Indian 
Archipelago^ vol. 1, p» 324) "The tern, I have no dout*, 

is Chinese, for the Chinese, who destroy the sound of all other 
native names of oonntries, or m barbarieas of their osn, apply 
the word Lusong familiarly and correctly** They even associate 
it with their faaous dynasty of that nsne and have a joke of their 
own at the expense of the Spaniards (B. Lauferi The Chinese la 

the FhiUpplnes)* 

naming in pairs is common enough by Chinese to nake it sen 
more than a mere ooinddenoe that thesa islands are called (Liu 
sung." whlU their neighbors to the n«th were originally «Llu auV 

HOW to recapitiUate, first ..s three d^xbtful references, the 
gold in the 3rd oe:.t«ry with the corollary la^oluslon in the report 
Of the C»-i.aloners to the sootharn countries in A. D. 222-251, 



ua ttaa iffobablllty of the Bnddjiiirt pilgrim's ship tavlng bssn 
drlTsn liy storm tfaroogh ths archipelago in 4M) than "ths thon- 
sand yeara* bagins ia ths sxtrana aenbh with "ths land of ths 
Salishaa'' whosa psopla raasablsd ths Folans asntionsd in S13>!i23 
and 616} ths Bi«a<^nB tuTadiag Soiithsrn Fcraosa and in saaures 
with luzon In 60Si an island group hatwssn Bernso and Mindanao 
Imsira as Ka-llng In ths psriod 618-9C*J trihnts from Dapltan, 
Hindanao, as Dvapatan in 627 and 649, In ec«s>»ny Kith Kaling's 
snrcys, and ths atary of ths Just Qassn of 674; othsr trltaibs .Is- 
.ton. froo Ka-llng in 766-779. 813, 827. 835 and 837-850, >l«dl. 
»rchaats .rr««lng trads in (toton in 982. ths Fonwsan Blsa- 
yans raids hstwssn 1174 and U90, Ittndoro and Imon a. "Ihl- 
a.d Oal.»l«nss. Pal»an and Bnsnanga hy thslr n.«s although 
.o«.h.t di.t<rt.d in . Ooosraphy «itt.n 1209-1214, 1« 1349 
fnrthsr ds.criptlon of "^al" a»J adjaos* rsgi«- and of S«ln, 
for 1372 th. fixat tribut. -is.ion fro. nupino. und^ t. na» 
-Lnzo^sn", • 0^^'^ offi.i.1 ..=t to go«rn Lnaon in 1405, 

^. . visit to 1^ 

« 1-fro.lng fr» ?>^'^ ^ 

ir-^d. in U07, ^ 1-^-^ ^ 

^ , . , - sulu sultan near « &n«»^««6 

th. bnrlal of SoX ^ ^ ^ 

Ohlnss. o«irt In U17, ^ 
a aUrilar ons in 

{Escape «U lcno.n. I ha« 1." 



- 26 . 



w«r« f ooad tfarooghoot th« PblOippiMS on tha eoadng of th« 
Spazilard8)a 

Here ar« cwar 26 date vertabre nhereon to fima oar pp«- 
SpaolBh Philipplna history of which th« Chinese referenees atre the 
baekbone* 

Other warksre are in the field. Dr. Seleeby epeeks with at*- 
tboffity on the Moro Eagion; Judge del Pan has e«ltlvated Ja-wm 
assoeiationsj Mariano Ponce taaoiie the infliaeaoe of the Indo-Chiiia| 
ChaneeUos Robertaon ha. brought to light valuable BUayan bark 
writings and Hagroa .anuacnpta, Lufcher Parker traced the ai^ 
eestry of King lalcadola; Cc«aiaaioner de Verya «id »anuel Artigaa 
have written of the ancient days of their native I^e. H. Otley 
Beyer ia locking for reae^blancea between tha hiU paople and 
aouthem border Ohi^se; J»^e Ko«.lde a ia seeking <^ the r^ 

. * -ir**h«t8- and the TJniveraity history cliib 
«lns of the ancient al|*abeta. ana 

^ smIoos to know of their 

, . . ^^i, of future aoadeaicians aeaJ-ouB 

numbara a hoe* <» iwu*- 

is rocBU Hot froa one man'a line 
by th. e^blned wleacm of aU .111 

Ihe phUologl rtrrtohing .long • 

, fi-tructure of Korean oi** 

tl„ l.l«ia roots wbibh r..oh.. thro-g 

to India itself* 
tern Indt>^bin» coast to mo* 



- 27 - 



The naturcLList will r«Taal fcrrther evidane* of long laod se- 
peratira such as the dissinllar BAlghbaring Ulndcro and Lvbang 
STJggest, the autropologiet will re-^ita for na th» story of tha 
Phillppinas* f comer peoples by disooraring relationships with the 
Bornaans and Fomiosan tribes, and perhaps with northern Japanese, 
whose development has been less rapid so that they are now in 
stages fton whioh the Filipinos have emerged. The geologist nay, 
too, reoognize here the ■orraaeats of xmhewn stone whioh make 
the world-rtate of that wooderful anoienb people whose diffioulty 
distinguished «»arials have been found in every oontinenb* 

Yet for all these, beoause scienbific speoulation is liable to 
.rr, the «anH«de »oords of oiviU^ed China, wherein are ««V 
ether references obtainable through inteingent research, Hust be 
the balance aBd oheC to ^ep our restoration of the forgotten 
past within due boundso 



