
DECEMBER 1940 



EDITORIAL 



PHILIPPINES which here makes its first appearance, 
has been planned and arranged as a medium of informa- 
tion and opinion. Its sponsors, interested in promoting 
a greater flow of fact and comment on Philippine-Amer- 
ican relations, feel that this can well be accomplished in 
part through a magazine, authoritative in tone, and open 
to every shade of representative thought and opinion. 

• • • 

In the present phase of world events, with confusion 
riding fast on the heels of destruction, and all our values 
stretched upon the rack of war. facts on the one hand 
and frank opinion on the other carry a cool and reas- 
suring touch. It is with this in mind that we launch our 
editorial venture. 

It is our belief that the Philippine Commonwealth, its 
affairs and its problems, are of great and vital interest 
today, and have a peculiar significance in the cataclysm 
which is going on about ns. In the Far East today Fili- 
pinos and Americans together man the treacherous ram- 
parts, and keep joint watch on the Pacific frontiers. Yet 
it has been natural in late years, and especially in recent 
months, for current discussions to slur over the Philip- 
pines and to lose sight of its problems. Too main in- 
formed people consider the Philippine nation a detached 
and semi-insulated area of the world which figures only 
passively in the dynamics of daily events. 

We Filipinos feel, however, that the welfare of Amer- 
ica, as well as the welfare of the Philippines, can be pro- 
moted by a better realization and closer acquaintance 
with recent developments in that sector of the world : it is 
our hope to foster a more conscious relationship between 
our two peoples and countries. 

• • • 

Common vigilance and cooperation in defense are by 
no means the only active tie of interest between us. We 
of the Philippines are today a people heading toward 
the great adventure of independent existence after more 
than forty years under American direction: we face a 
world boiling with trouble, with aggression, and uncer- 
tainty. America, for its part, is taking the unprecedented 
step of preparing to hand a charter of liberty to a land 
acquired by the historical right of war and purchase. 
To yield sovereignty and independence to a people whom 
the United Stales has schooled in American tradition, 
taught the American tongue, and given the American form 
of constitutional government, is in itself an action of time- 
less importance in a world where all our values are being 
tested in the fire of force. 



This great adventure of a people living by American 
ideals and the American system in an area of the world 
dominated elsewhere by dictatorship and force is a mighty 
test of those ideals, and of that system. Americans should 
be, and are interested in that test. 

It is fairly obvious, though not fully recognized that 
Filipinos do not visualize the advent of independence 
as the signal for the severing of all spiritual, cultural 
and commercial ties which now exist between the peoples 
of the Philippines and the. I nited States. These ties of 
common interest will eventually prove far more lasting 
than the purely political bonds which exist until 1946. 
The I nited States, we expect, will always remain our 
closest friend, and confidant. The ties of commerce and 
investment are strong and real, while the channels of swift 
communication by airplane, telegraph, and radio will 
always keep the Philippines within ready earshot of the 
United States, regardless of political developments abroad. 

• • • 

Briefly and somewhat sketchily. that is the basis for 
our issuance of this magazine. We believe that leaders of 
thought in the United States can use and appreciate a 
frank discussion of our mutual problems, in the light of 
world developments, despite their primary preoccupation 
with those developments, themselves. 

Naturally our editorial accent will be on the Filipino 
viewpoint. However, this will not be a "house organ," a 
""shop paper." nor the peddler of a program. We have no 
desire to sell anything to anybody. We not only invite 
but solicit expressions of opinion on the Philippines and 
the Far East from those whose views must necessarily 
conflict with ours. Our primary desire is to arouse interest 
and discussion in these matters which concern both our 
countries, and to help Americans become more personally 
acquainted with the viewpoints, the personalities, and 
the facts about the Philippines. 

We hope to be both entertaining and stimulating, edu- 
cational and informative. We will avoid, as much as 
possible, the didactic, the dull, and the patronizing. Our 
magazine will not be a primer for children, nor a statis- 
tical digest to file and forget. 

We want to make friends. We want to be read. We 
expect to improve. 

J. M. ELIZALDE, 

Resident Commissioner of the Philippines 
to the I nited States. 



Personalities in this Issue 




• ROY HOWARD is nationally known as a newspaper 
publisher and authority on foreign affairs. A personal 
friend of President Quezon, he has visited the Philippines 
on four occasions. The article on page 5 was written 
after an extensive tour of the Far East last summer. 



JOAQUIN M. ELIZALDE 

• NOW IN his third year as Philippine Resident Com- 
missioner in the United States, Joaquin M. Elizalde is 
one of the best-known businessmen in the Commonwealth. 
His forefathers left Spain for the Philippines a century 
ago; the family has been intimately identified with insu- 
lar economy ever since. Commissioner Elizalde contrib- 
utes this month's editorial. 

• • • 

MAJ. GEN. JAMES G. HARBORD 

• AT A banquet in his honor at Malacanang Palace in 
Manila, Major General James G. Harbord was described 
by President Quezon as 4 not only a friend, tried and true, 
but a living example of honesty and integrity — a public 
official who exhibited exceptional love of duty." Chief 
of Staff and later Commander of the Service of Supply 
for the A.E.F.. Gen. Harbord today is Chairman of the 
Board of the Radio Corporation of America. On page 
19 he recalls some of bis early Philippine experiences. 



PAUL V. McNUTT 

e PAUL V. McNUTT was High Commissioner to the 
Philippine Islands during 1937 and 1938. Since return- 
ing to Washington last year, he has headed the Federal 
Security Agency. His message is on page 4. 



LEO KOCIALKOWSKI 

• LEO KOCIALKOWSKI, Democratic Congressman 
from Chicago, is Chairman of the House Committee on 
Insular Affairs. On page 1 he pleads for fuller mutual 
understanding between Americans and Filipinos. 

• • • 

HARRY B. HAWES 

• SHORTLY after Harry B. Hawes began practicing law 
in St. Louis in 1896, he took the added job of repre- 
senting the Republic of Hawaii during the negotiations 
for annexation to the United States. Today, having 
retired from the Senate after sponsoring the Philippine 
Independence Act, he is once more practicing law — this 
time in Washington — and serving as counsel for the 
Commonwealth. His message is on page 15. 

• • • 

FRANCISCO VARONA 

• AS A member of the Philippine House of Representa- 
tives, Francisco Varona was responsible for many for- 
ward-looking labor laws. In 19.37, President Quezon 
asked him to survey Filipino labor problems in the 
United States, Hawaii, and Alaska. The following year, 
Mr. Varona was appointed Labor Assistant to the Phil- 
ippine Commissioner in Washington. He looks at the 
Filipinos in this country on page 14. 

• • • 

PILAR N. RAVELO 

• PILAR N. RAVELO, a member of the publicity staff 
of the Resident Commissioner's Office, was formerly 
a reporter and columnist for the Manila Daily Bulletin, 
and editor of the Woman's Home Journal, official organ 
of the National Federation of Women's Clubs of the 
Philippines. Since coming to Washington she has been 
a member of Mrs. Roosevelt's press conference. On page 
21 Miss Ravelo describes an old-fashioned Philippine 
Ch ristmas. 



• 2 • Philippines 



Philippines 



Contents for December, 1940 

Editorial, /. M. Elizalde 1 

Personalities in This Issue 2 

A Note from Paul V. McNutt _ 4 

A Congressman Speaks, Leo Kocialkoivski __ 4 

Wanted: A Foreign Policy, Roy Howard 5 

Independence and Economics. Manuel Roxas 7 

Loyalty, President Manuel L. Quezon 8 

As Amended 10 

Strategic Storehouse 11 

1 /25th of 1 Per Cent,' Francisco Varona 14 

Have We Kept Our Promises? Harry B. Hawes 15 

Jacobs Goes to Egypt, Julius Edelstein 17 

Meet John Ker Davis 18 

Over My Shoulder, Gen. James G. Harbord 19 

Xmas Without Santa Claus, Pilar N. Ravelo 21 

• • • 

Photo credit: U. S. Army Signal Corps. Philippine 
Army Signal Corps, Photo Finishing Corp., Manila; 
Office of the President of the Philippines; and Tomel- 
den, Washington. 

• • • 

Back Cover: Inter-Island Shipping at Zamhoanga. P. I. 

• • • 

Permission to reprint material appearing in 
"Philippines" is gladly granted except in casts 
where use is specifically restricted. Proper credit 
will be appreciated. 




Flying over Manila, the visitor sees the capital 
of the Philippine Commonwealth as it appears 
on the front cover. Through the city winds the 
yellow Pasig River, its lower reaches providing 
a berth for dozens of hemp and copra-laden 
inter-island ships. In the center stands the mod- 
ern Bureau of Posts. 



Iii the Editor's Basket 

"Philippines" next month will offer an im- 
portant study of the iron resources of the Philip- 
pine Islands and show who is utilizing this im- 
portant raw material. The international aspects 
are not what you have been led to believe. 



W hat does free trade with the Commonwealth 
mean to the average American businessman? A 
revealing article on the export trade of the 
U. S. is on the schedule for January. It offers 
encouragement to dairy farmers, fruit growers 
and oil men, as well as a host of others. 



Is the Philippine Commonwealth a foreign na- 
tion or part of the United States? A member of 
the Philippine Commissioner's legal staff will 
show why the answer is "a little of one and a 
little of the other — and, from another stand- 
point, neither." 



In the lipstick department. Miss Ravelo, who 
describes a Philippine Christmas this month, 
promises a discussion of Filipino women leaders. 



Incidentally, cartographer Frank Manning is 
working on a series of "three-dimension" maps 
of the Commonwealth. Readers who wish copies 
for their own use should write to the editors. 
Whenever practicable, they will be supplied 
without charge. 



''Philippines'' Is published monthly by the office of the Philippine Resident Commissioner to the United 
States. Editorial and circulation offices at 2.*62 Massachusetts Avenue Northwest, Washington. D. C. Entered 
as third class matter in the Washington post office on December I, 1940. Permit No. 5045. Printed in U.S.A. 



A Note from Paul V. McNutt 



To THE Philippines, to my Filipino friends, and to 
the new publication. "Philippines," which is being 
brought forth for the first time, my every enthusiastic- 
wish for success. 

Although time has run swiftly since I left Manila, the 
memories I hold of the Philippines, its people, and its 
leaders are as fresh and moving as ever. 

The Philippines face great problems in a turbulent 
and threatening world. I know that the Filipino people 
face those problems with the same courage, the same 
resolution, and the same intelligence they have always 
shown in their great moments. I am positive that whatever 
their decisions and their actions in the trying months 
ahead, they will have the sympathy and friendship of 
the American people who have been so closely associated 
with them for the past forty years. 

I am proud of the association I have had with their 
history. I am ready today, as I hope I shall always be, 
to do whatever is in my power to be of assistance in the 
mutual development of the relations of our people. 

The idea of a Philippine publication, aimed at spread- 
ing information and opinion on Philippine-American rela- 
tions, is an excellent one. Any move to stimulate frank 
discussion of our mutual problems is a great contribution 
to our friendship. 

Pall V. McNutt. 

A Congressman Speaks 




Leo Kocialkowski 

Chairman of the House Committee on Insular Affairs. 



* 4 • Philippines 




Paul V. McNutt 

U. S. High Commissioner to the Philippines in 1937 and 1938. 



• • • 



— Leo Kocialkowski 

When in my boyhood days I read of the Philippines, 
of Dewey's victory in Manila Bay, and of the strug- 
gles of Filipinos for reform and freedom, I little dreamed 
that later I would be brought into intimate contact with 
the solution of problems affecting the relations between 
the United States and the Philippine Islands. My service 
in the Congress and my position as Chairman of the Com- 
mittee on Insular Affairs, which has jurisdiction over 
measures that have to do with Philippine questions, served 
to awaken in me greater interest in those lovely isles of 
the Pacific and their friendly and hospitable people. That 
interest was further deepened by my association with 
many able and patriotic Filipino leaders in Washington 
and by my visit to the Philippines, together with various 
Senators and Representatives, upon the inauguration of 
the new Government of the Philippine Commonwealth in 
November, 1935. 

Despite the heavy demands upon my time in these days 
of confusion and stress, it is a pleasure to accede to the 
request of my good friend, Resident Commissioner J. M. 
Elizalde, to contribute to the initial number of the 
magazine. "Philippines." T have long believed a respon- 

(Turn to Page 23) 



Wanted: A Foreign Policy 



By Roy Howard 



D ESPITE tlu 1 thousands of miles between Manila and 
the Caribbean, the deal for American bases in the British 
possessions was big news in the Philippines. Many viewed 
the move as a step toward ultimate reversal of the Tyd- 
ings-McDuffie Act granting Philippine independence in 
1946. The interlocking nature of the events is more logi- 
cal than is casually apparent. 

Most Filipino politicians still proclaim publicly their 
desire for independence, now assured them by Congress- 
ional action. In private conversation most will admit that 
once the American (lag comes down Japan can and will 
take over the islands at her convenience. 

In the face of such, certainly all Filipino leaders admit 
that Japanese dominance, which would certainly mean 
Japanese exploitation, would be intolerable after Ameri- 
can administration which has developed into almost com- 
plete local autonomy. 

Nowhere in the Far East, not even in China under 
Chiang Kai-shek, is local political leadership in stronger 
or more skillful hands than those of Philippine President 
Manuel L. Quezon. By no one are Japan's intentions 
better understood than by Mr. Quezon. But events have 
frozen the Filipino leader's position. 

For 30 years Manuel Quezon was a consistent and ag- 
gressive advocate of Philippine independence. The sin- 
cerity of his attitude was above question as long as the 
possibility existed of collective security — of independence 
to be guaranteed jointly by the United States, Great Brit- 
ain, Japan and other powers with territorial and political 
interests in the Pacific. 

The Manchurian incident of September, 1931, and Ja- 
pan's flouting of the Nine Power Pact was a crushing- 
blow to Mr. Quezon's hopes. He understood the signifi- 
cance of Japan's conquest of Manchuria before most 
Filipinos had even sensed its relationship to their prob- 
lem. Abyssinia, the collapse of the League of Nations, 
the invasion of China proper, and the second World War! 
In succession they carried away, piece by piece, the last 
hope of Philippine independence coupled with security, in 
a world where force ignores all treaty obligations. 

With the new Commonwealth government and his own 
inauguration as president set for November, 1935, Mr. 
Quezon faced political suicide if at that time he attempted 
the hasty education of his people as to why the indepen- 
dence he had long fought for had suddenly become of 
questionable value. The new president, with a keen un- 
derstanding of the Philippine psychology, did not dare 
risk the charge of deserting the independence issue at the 
moment when even a hollow success was in sight. He 
stalled and played for time. 

In the meantime, two lobbies in Washington went into 
action to make certain, like it or not, the islands got 




/ I 5 LANX> S- 

jajuursJ Mandate) 



ATA S T RALIJV S 



their independence. One lobby represented American 
sugar interests, eager to exclude duty-free Philippine 
sugar. The other represented the dairy interests seeking 
to bar free Philippine coconut oil used in a small way 
in the manufacture of margarine. 

Today a well-organized committee of leading Filipino 
business men and politicians is working for reconsidera- 
tion of the entire independence idea. The ultimate objec- 
tive is abrogation of the Tydings-McDuffie Act and estab- 
lishment of some form of dominion government under 
the American flag. 

President Quezon's hold on public confidence is so 
strong that no one doubts that he could, in a very short 
personal campaign, convince his people of the futility 
of a small nation so vulnerable hoping to defend its in- 
dependence in a corner of the world where might is the 
interpreter of treaties and the arbiter of the fate of small 
nations. 

Mr. Quezon has, however, remained silent on the sub- 




ject of independence after 1946. The reason is no uncer- 
tainty as to what he could persuade his people is best for 
them, but his very justifiable uncertainty as to how the 
American Congress would react to the suggestion of a re- 
consideration in favor of a dominion form of government 
for the Islands. 

Under the Tydings-McDuffie Act the subject of the 
future relations comes up automatically for considera- 
tion "at least one year" before the final grant of in- 
dependence. Theoretically this consideration has to do 
with future trade and tariff relations. Actually it is 
expected to embrace the broader subject of a continu- 
ance of the American flag in the Islands. 

Those working for dominion status hope that before 
1945 the great American export industries, such as U. S. 
Steel, General Motors, General Foods, General Electric, 
etc., will develop an appreciation of the great tariff- 
free market they are throwing into the lap of Japan. 
It is hoped and believed that once they realize that 
withdrawal from the Philippines means withdrawal from 
the entire Far Eastern market, they will launch a cam- 
paign in Congress to offset the efforts of the relatively 
unimportant sugar and dairy lobbies. 

In the meantime, an effort will be made to urge upon 
Congress and the Washington Administration the formu- 
lation of a clear-cut Far Eastern policy — something we 
have lacked since the Japanese exploitation of Man- 
chukuo nullified the Open Door policy of John Hay. 
It is in connection with a new American policy in the 
Far East, which they believe may grow from the present 
tendency of British and Americans to draw together 
for common defense, that Filipinos opposed to indepen- 
dence base their hopes. 

If the United States intends to adopt a purely isola- 
tionist policy and interposes no objection to Japanese 
domination and exploitation of everything beyond Ha- 
waii, our day in the Philippines is obviously near its 
close. So also is the era of complete local autonomy 



Trainees in the Philippine 
Army take an oath of allegi- 
ance to the Commonwealth. 

which the United States has developed under the Philip- 
pine Commonwealth. 

But many Americans in the Far East believe that iso- 
lation will be found impractical, if not impossible, and 
that before it is attempted consideration will be given 
not only to American export markets in the Orient, but 
also to our import needs in the form of rubber, tin, 
quinine, etc. If in the light of such considerations the 
United States adopts a policy of maintaining its political 
and economic status quo, the extension to the Pacific of 
the same basic formula of British-American mutual de- 
fense that has been established in the Atlantic would 
alter the entire picture for the British, the Dutch, and 
American interests. 

Recent straws in the wind have been the settling, by- 
negotiation between Washington and London, of the status 
of necessary island bases for Pan-American Airways in 
the South Pacific. More recently there has been the in- 
creasingly recurrent suggestion of the use by the Ameri- 
can Navy of the great Singapore base. 

Should American use of the Singapore base develop 
even as a temporary measure, the move would alter the 
whole pattern of the Pacific, at least insofar as Japan is 
presently attempting to reshape that pattern in her own 
interest. An American or a British fleet at Singapore 
would definitely affect any plans Japan might have for a 
southward thrust in the direction of the Netherlands In- 
dies or Australia. It might even hasten a fair and just 
Sino- Japanese peace in a war which obviously has be- 
come deadlocked. 

But before any of this must come announcement of a 
definite and long-time American policy in the Pacific, a 
policy broad enough to respect the legitimate needs and 
aspirations of every other nation, Japan especially, but at 
the same time clearly defining and limiting the rights 
which America regards as legitimately hers, and the main- 
tenance of which she is prepared and willing to protect. 

Reprinted from the Washington Daily News, courtesy of Scripps- 
H o ward Newspapers. 



• 6 • Philippines 



INDEPENDENCE and ECONOMICS 

Proposals for a Revision of the Philippine 
Independence Act 



On September 17, 1940 9 the Hon. Manuel Roxas, 
Philippine Secretary of Finance and chairman of 
the Philippine National Economic Council, broad- 
cast over Station KZHR, Manila* a plea to the peo- 
ple of the United States for a modification of the 
Independence Act. Following is an abstract of Mr. 
Roxas 9 proposals, which reflected the official view- 
point of the Commonwealth Government on this 
all-important sub ject. 

Mr. Roxas began his political career at the age of 
27, when he was elected governor of his province* 
Capiz. Three years later, in 1922, he was sent to 
the House of Representatives. Elected Speaker of 
the House the same year, Mr. Roxas soon became 
one of the foremost leaders in the Philippines. In 
1932 he helped draft the Hare-Hawes-Cntting Law, 
which was finally supplanted by the Independence 
Act of 1934. Today he is considered one of the 
most eminent Filipino economists. 

^THE INTERNATIONAL situation is filling us with 
misgivings as to the future. We see danger signals ahead 
and we are impotent to face the possible emergencies 
were they to eventuate in the near future . . . 

"We do not expect American soldiers to shed their 
blood in the Philippines. We claim that duty as our own. 
We have now approximately 150.000 trained men, . . .. 
a force which is being augmented each year by some 
.30,000. We have conscription. We have an adequate 
framework. We have intelligent leadership. We have 
patriotism and determination. What we need are more 
arms and ammunition, more airplanes and other equip- 
ment essential to modern warfare which are not produced 
in these Islands. These, I believe, the United States can 
supply us [with] while, at the same time, safeguarding 
our communication with continental America with her 
powerful fleet . . . 

'The Philippine Independence Act approved by Con- 
gress In 1934 grants us ten years ... to make ready for 
an independent existence and the termination of prefer- 
ential trade with the United States . . . The aim of the 
plan was gradually to make the Philippines less de- 
pendent of the free American market . . . But the con- 
gressional formula as well as the plans we have adopted 
were predicated upon normal conditions prevailing in 
the world, with commerce flowing freely among nations 
on the basis of free competition. That basic condition no 
longer exists . . . We have lost our trade with Europe, 
and our comm°rce with China and Japan has been 
drastically curtailed. 

"The effect . . . has been to bind [our economy] 
more closely with that of the United States, for America 
is practically the only market that remains open to us. 




Finance Minister Roxas 



As a consequence, instead of reducing our economic 
dependence on America we find ourselves today even 
more dependent on her market than we were when Con- 
gress enacted the Independence Law . . . 

"We now find our task of economic readjustment not 
only extremely difficult but practically impossible during 
the period granted to us. These difficulties will be aggra- 
vated by the imposition of export taxes and quota limita- 
tions on our exports to the United States beginning next 
January . . . 

"We will have to undergo great human suffering unless 
we are granted immediate relief from the operation of 
Congressional statutes that will increase our burdens 
during these times of stress . . . Concretely, this relief 
should consist of prolonging the economic adjustment 
period for at least ten years more and postponing the 
gradual imposition of quotas and tariff duties on Philip- 
pine exports to the United States until four years after 
peace has been reestablished . . . 

"Congress has provided for the calling of a trade con- 
ference between representatives of the United Slates and 
of the Philippines to meet at least two years before 1946 
in order to formulate plans for trade relations between the 
two countries after independence. I am of the opinion 
that that conference should meet before the end [ of 10 40] 
so that our present problems and difficulties may be con- 
sidered and a sounder and fairer plan may be submitted 
to Congress for action at its next session. 

"Any change in the program of economic adjustment 
need not postpone or alter the date of independence pre- 
scribed in the Independence Act . . 



December- 1940 • 7 • 




In 1898 Manuel Quezon 
fought in the revolution 
with Gen. Emilio Aguinal- 
do, first president of the 
short-lived Philippine Re- 
public. Today, President 
Quezon and Gen. Aguinalrio 
both affirm their loyalty to 
the Stars and Stripes as well 
as to the new flag of the 
Philippine Commonwealth. 




K MESSAGE FROM 

PRESIDENT MANUEL L. QUEZON 

OF THE PHILIPPINE COMMONWEALTH 



THE GREAT inventions of our industrial civilization 
have, in recent years, almost annihilated the vast ex- 
panse of ocean which separates our two countries. 
Through the facilities of regular clipper service, Manila 
is now accessible to you from San Francisco in six days, 
while a telephone conversation between your citizens and 
ours has been made possible by the progress of the 
technology of communication. 

The task undertaken 42 years ago by the United 
States in the Philippines has no parallel in history. From 
the very beginning, it has been inspired by a spirit not 
of hatred or conquest, but of friendship and service. In 
a message to Congress, President McKinley said : "From 



the earliest moment no opportunity was lost of assuring 
the people of the Islands of our ardent desire for their 
welfare and of the intentions of this government to do 
everything possible to advance their interests." Later on 
he added: "We shall continue, as we have begun, to open 
the schools and the churches, to set the courts in opera- 
tion, to foster industry and trade and agriculture, and in 
every way in our power to make these people whom 
Providence has brought within our jurisdiction feel that 
it is their liberty and not our power, their welfare and 
not our gain, we are seeking to enhance. Our flag has 
never waved over any community but in blessing. I 
believe the Filipinos will soon recognize the fact that it 



• 8 » Philippiines 



has not lost its gift of benediction in its world-wide jour- 
ney to their shores." President W ilson, in a message to 
the Filipino people, said: "We regard ourselves as trus- 
tees acting not for the advantage of the United States 
hut for the benefit of the people of the Philippine Islands." 

That was a noble mission, nobly proclaimed by the 
highest representatives of the government and people of 
the United States. It brought about wonderful results. It 
paved the way for mutual understanding and cooperation 
between Americans and Filipinos, resulting in notable 
strides along all lines of national endeavor. Tt awakened 
in the Filipino heart a sense of loyalty produced not by 
compulsion or fear, but by affection and admiration. It 
drove home to the Filipino people the loftiness of Amer- 
ica's aims in this country. It has given the world a shining 
example of the great things which American principles 
and ideals are capable of achieving in the field of human 
relationship. It has demonstrated that in the relation of 
one people to another, harmony and peace may be 
attained when fairness and justice is allowed to prevail. 

Friends in America, may I take advantage of this oppor- 
tunity to assure once again the government and people 



of the I nited States of the gratitude and loyalt) of the 
Filipino people? As 1 have said on other occasions, we 
want the government and people of the l_ nited States to 
feel that we are bound to them not merely by the presence 
of the American Hag in our country, but by the nobler 
and stronger ties of gratitude and affection — bonds of 
sentiment that are born of the human heart and which 
transcend the obligations of allegiance implied in the 
presence of that Hag. Our loyalty to the I nited States 
is rooted in something more lasting than legal or political 
relationship. Our loyalty is built on faith — faith in the 
sense of fairness and justice of the American people, 
faith in the great principles and ideals for which the Stars 
and Stripes proudly waves over land and sea. over a free 
and happy people. 

Our loyalty to the great American nation is but the 
fruit of her altruistic policy in dealing with our people — 
a policy which has been characterized by justice and 
good will and by both moral and material assistance. 
That loyalty. I am sure, will outlive the sovereignty of the 
United States over our country, and will attest for all time 
the moral grandeur of America and the vitality of her 
free institutions. 




The President attends mass at the Letran College chapel, Manila., 
with Mrs. Quezon and their children. 



December, 1940 



AS AMENDED 



Why Are Some Provisions 
of the Philippine Constitution 
Reing Changed? 



A CONSTITUTION, to be sure, is intended to crystal- 
lize with more or less fidelity the political, social and 
economic ideologies of its framers. but as conditions and 
problems surrounding the 
people, no less than their 
ideals, are constantly chang- 
ing, the instrument must 
necessarily be amenable to 
changes and alterations. In 
the epigrammatic language 
of Justice Cardozo, the inn 
that shelters for the night is 
not the journey's end. and 
the Constitution, like the traveller, must be ready for the 
morrow. 

The constitutional amendments proposed by the Na- 
tional Assembly and ratified by the people of the Philip- 
pines are threefold: (1) to permit the reelection of the 
President; (2) to reestablish the bicameral system, re- 
viving the Senate; and (3) to create an Electoral Com- 
mission. 

Are the proposed amendments to the Constitution con- 
sistent with the principles of democracy? The essence 
of democracy is its representative character. Democracy, 
as we understand it nowadays, is republicanism. It is 
maintained as long, and so long as the people retain the 
ultimate power of selection of the persons or officials 
who are to exercise for a given period of time the powers 
of government. It is the Websterian theory that the 
source of all political power is necessarily the people. 
As long as the people retain the power of selection at 
reasonable intervals, the essence of representative gov- 
ernment is maintained. 

I. Reelection of the President 

The original constitutional provision on Executive 
Power fixed the term of the President at six years with- 
out reelection. The amendment shortens the term to four 
years, permitting one reelection, and no more, by virtue 
of the clause providing that no person shall serve as 
President for more than eight consecutive years. This 
change permits more frequent renovation of the Presi- 
dency and thus makes the position more responsive to 
the popular will. The President, by the Constitution, may 
be removed from office only by impeachment, a power 
exercised by the Assembly only on rare and exceptional 
occasions. Where, therefore the President commits gross 
abuse, injustice, oppression or misconduct not embraced 



President Roosevelt on December 2nd an- 
nounced approval of three amendments to the 
Philippine Constitution. The nature of these 
changes, the first to he made in the Common- 
wealth's charter, has heen explained in an author- 
itative paper hy Justice P. Laurel of the Supreme 
Court of the Philippines. This is a hrief digest 
of Justice Laurel's observations. 



within the grounds for impeachment enumerated in the 
Constitution, the people are powerless to judge him. 
much less remove him from office. Hence, the wisdom 

of shortening the constitu- 
tional term of the President. 



II. Return to Bicam- 
eralism 

The presence of a second 
chamber secures exhaustive 
deliberation and avoids pre- 
cipitate action, thereby 
achieving maximum wisdom 
in the legislatve process and comparative excellence in 
the quality of approved legislation. The Senate operates 
as the center of revision and resistance; it "watches and 
plans, weeds and discriminates, and quashes precipitancy 
in the framing or alteration of laws, as well as against 
yielding to the suggestions of indolence, selfish projects 
of ambition, or the cunning devices of corrupt and hol- 
low demagogues/' 

The revival of the Senate should speed the growth of 
national consciousness. Being chosen at large, Senators 
will represent the whole nation, and be a potent force 
in the cultivation of a militant sense of unity which can- 
not be fostered by an assembly whose members represent 
different sectors of the country. The broad sweep of 
their perspective would furnish a new slant in the solu- 
tion of local and national problems. 

III. Independent Electoral Commission 

The constitutional amendment creating an independent 
commission on elections is wise for the following rea- 
sons: (1) transfer of the enforcement and administra- 
tion of the election law from the Secretary of the In- 
terior, a political officer, to the Commission on Elections, 
a non-partisan body, will provide a greater safeguard for 
elections; (2) elimination of partisan control and super- 
vision of elections will have a wholesome effect on the 
body politic, strengthening popular confidence in the 
sanctity of suffrage; (3) limitation of Executive pardon- 
ing power in election cases (it can be exercised only on 
the favorable recommendation of the Commission on 
Elections) deprives the political party in power of a 
method for frustrating the popular will at the polls; 
(4) the Commission on Elections being protected by 
ample safeguards against both executive and legislative 
encroachment or interference, the independence so es- 
sential to honest, fearless and uncompromising enforce- 
ment of the election law is guaranteed. 



o '10 o Philippines 



Beneath the hills of northern 
Luzon, long famous for their 
Ifugao rice terraces, modern 
engineers have found unex- 
pected mineral wealth. Not 
many miles from here are 
some of the richest gold mines 
under the American flag. 




Strategic Storehouse 

Philippine Resources Offer a Solution to U. S. Material Needs 



w ITH ils eyes on the vital problem of national de- 
fense, the United States Government has listed fourteen 
"strategic materials*' which are not produced in suf- 
ficient quantities within the hounds of the 48 states 
to meet estimated war-time needs. These include anti- 
mony, chromium, coconut shell char, manganese (ferro- 
grade), manila hemp, mercury, mica, nickel, quartz 
crystal, quinine, rubber, silk, tin, and tungsten. The 
need for this material is urgent. The metals must go 
into armor plate, food containers and electrical equip- 
ment; other materials are necessary for gas masks, 
medicine kits, and precision instruments: rubber and 
silk play important roles in our everyday lives — and 
roles that would be even more important in war; Manila 
hemp is as vital to shipping as fuel or cargo. 

Of these strategic materials, however, a number are 
now produced in quantity under the American flag 
in the Philippine Islands. The western shore of the 
island of Luzon has one of the largest known deposits 
of chrome in the world. Manganese is found in many 
parts of the islands. Coconut shell char is available in 
unlimited quantities as a by-product of the copra indus- 
try. The southern islands of the Philippine Common- 
wealth have a natural monopoly on abaca, the so-called 
Manila hemp. (And, although production has not yet 
been undertaken on a large scale, experiments have 
proved that rubber can be produced in the archipelago, 
the output per acre approaching the world record.) 
Philippine resources thus include four of America's 
missing strategic materials. 

Recent exploration and development has increased the 



list of Philippine natural assets, several of which are 
listed as of "critical** importance to the United States. 
Iron mines are becoming increasingly important: the 
Philippines apparently have most of what little workable 
ore is found in all the Far East. Nickel occurs in small 
quantities. Some petroleum is produced and research 
indicates the possibility of modest deposits. Total stands 
of marketable timber — particularly useful ""Philippine 
mahogany'" — have an estimated value of $4,000,000,000. 

Kapok and earabao hides are urgently needed by the 
Government: the Islands produce them. Newly developed 
mines have put the Commonwealth in ninth place among 
world gold producers: under the United States flag, the 
Islands are second in output only to California. Sugar 
is one of the most important exports of the Common- 
wealth, and the U. S. does not produce enough to fill 
its own needs. The ubiquitous coconut, whose dried meat 
is the second most valuable agricultural export, has an 
important part in the manufacture of American soaps, 
margarine and explosives. 

In the case of both chrome and manganese, the dis- 
covery that the Philippines has important deposits of ore 
is quite recent. Smaller bodies of chrome ore had been 
exploited in the past, however: one. in Camarines Sin 
Province, yielded 76,000 tons of 32 per cent ore before 
it was worked out. Today, chromite reserves in tin 1 
vicinity of Masinloe. in Zambales Province north <>f 
Manila, have been estimated to total more than 10,000,000 
tons. Following recent discoveries in that province, three 4 
areas were set aside there for official exploitation. Two 

( Turn to Page 23 ) 



December, 1940 • I 1 • 



7 -r .- _ 



v " 




-<sF ; ' 





Above — President Quezon, surrounded by friends, brings in 
a sheaf of rice from his farm at Arayat, north of Manila. 





Above — High-speed "Q Boats'' 
have an important place 
in Philippine defense plaus. 



Left — Inter-island ships unload 
sacks of rice at the Pasig River 
quays in the heart of Manila. 



• 12 • Philippines 




Above — Filipino troops, undergoing training as part of the Common- 
wealth defense program, on parade at Camp Murphy, outside Manila. 

Below — Intramuros, the old Walled City of Manila, is the site of 
the oldest hospital and the oldest university under the American flag. 




December, 1940 • 13 • 




The Filipino Population of the U. S. 

By Francisco Varona 



Educational and economic motives are responsible 
for the presence in the United States of most Filipinos. 
Emigration to continental United States and its territories 
was relatively insignificant until shortly after the Span- 
ish-American War. Having been inculcated by American 
teachers in the public schools of the Islands with a de- 
sire to improve their education, early arrivals were gen- 
erally students. Following the exclusion of Japanese 
labor, Filipinos met the growing demand for efficient 
workers in the cane fields of Hawaii, the canneries in 
Alaska, and the agricultural regions of the Pacific Coast. 
Filipino migration gathered momentum through the 
twenties and early thirties until 1935, when it was effec- 
tively stopped by a provision of the Tydings-McDuffie 
Act which set an annual immigration quota of 50. 

Partly because of the steady stream of Filipinos re- 
turning to their homeland after a few years in the United 
States, the number remaining today is relatively small 
and steadily decreasing. In 1938, only 45,506 nationals 
resided in continental United States, the majority on the 
Pacific Coast. (The total comprised something less than 
1/25 of 1 per cent of the population of the United 
States. ) If statistics now being collected by the office of 
the Philippine Resident Commissioner in Washington 
are a criterion only about 4 per cent of these Filipinos in- 
tend to remain in the United States indefinitely. This 
means that the vast majority are interested mainly in 
learning American methods and efficiency, in preparation 
for jobs they hope to fill on their return to the Islands. 

Prior to the passage of the Tydings-McDuffie Act in 
1934, the Bureau of Insular Affairs of the War Depart- 
ment handled, among other matters, the problems of 
Filipinos in the United States. Today, this work is done 
much more comprehensively by the Nationals Division 
of the Resident Commissioner's Office. In issuing Certifi- 
cates of Identity to citizens of the Philippines, the office 
has tabulated the information contained in the first 298 
applications. Data based on such returns are not suffi- 
cient, naturally, to draw categorical conclusions, but the 
material at hand does indicate certain trends. 

The average age, as shown by the present survey is 
37 years.'" The survey relative to educational attain- 
ments reveals some very interesting facts. For example, 
of the total registered thus far, grammar school gradu- 

* Bruno Lasker, in Filipino Immifjratiov to Continental United States 
and to Hawaii, put the average age at 25. 



ates represent 23 per cent: high school. 2, per cent: 
college. 21 per cent; and those having no formal educa- 
tion at all. only 3 per cent. 

This is doubtless one of the most important factors 
which differentiate Filipino workers in the United States 
from those of certain other nationalities. A man who 
can perform his assignment intelligently, irrespective of 
the task, is bound to be a more efficient worker. More- 
over, the record of Filipino laborers in the cane fields of 
Hawaii and the agricultural regions of the West Coast, 
as well as in the canneries of Alaska, has been extremely 
creditable as regards both intelligence and efficiency. 

Filipinos are also in demand as hotel and restaurant 
workers. Whether this is because of natural inclination or 
custom is uncertain, but the fact remains that Filipinos 
are favored as bell-hops, bus boys, waiters and assistant 
cooks throughout the West. Intelligence, willingness to 
work, and unfailing courtesy are qualities that make the 
Filipino appreciated in this field. 

The average annual income of 257 Filipino wage 
earners so far tabulated is $921. Agricultural workers 
with lower incomes comprise the majority of this group, 
however, so the actual average is probably somewhat 
higher. Unlike some other racial groups, the Filipinos do 
not habitually send a large part of their earnings home. 
Available information indicates that the figure does not 
exceed 15 cents out of each dollar earned. 

Filipino labor in the United States is obviously of 
considerable potential importance to Insular finances, 
particularly if the habit of saving money and remitting 
it to relatives in the Islands is encouraged. On the other 
hand, however, the steadily diminishing Filipino popu- 
lation of the United States seems likely to counterbalance 
any greater tendency toward thrift. 

As a result of too much rugged individualism, mutual 
cooperation is often lacking among Filipinos in this 
country. The office of the Resident Commissioner is 
doing its utmost to foster a spirit of unity and mutual 
helpfulness. To this end, Filipino Executive Councils, 
wherein representatives of Filipino organizations in a 
given community serve as delegates, are being encour- 
aged and aided in their establishment. This, together with 
the program to encourage thrift and sound investment 
of incomes, will, it is hoped, be the best possible training 
for the responsibilities of independence when it becomes 
a reality in 1946. 



14 • Philippines 



Have We Kept Our Promises? 

By Senator Harry B. Hawes 



ABOUT forty years ago, seven million Filipinos in 
their group of 7.0[>3 rich islands eame into the possession 
of the United States. 

The average American, when asked how this possession 
was secured, would invariably answer that it was ac- 
quired by purchase from Spain for $20,000,000, but. 
as a matter of fact, the Archipelago eame into our pos- 
session by conquest in a war lasting over three years 
and costing the lives of some 1.000 American soldiers 
and 16.000 Filipinos. 

First governed by an American Commission, then 
given civil government with a measure of local sover- 
eignty under a Governor General appointed by the 
President of the United States, the Filipinos graduated 
in 1935 from what we may call a "high school*' political 
education. After the acceptance by plebeseite of the sec- 
ond independence offer in 1934, there came into existence 
a new form of government, called the Philippine Com- 
monwealth, in the control of which the Filipino people 
exercise in a general way the same local and sovereign 
rights granted to the citizens of each State of the Amer- 
ican Union. Commonwealth autonomy is subject to but 
two limitations: first, approval by the President of the 
United States is necessary for laws respecting currency, 
coinage, imports, and immigration: second, supervision 
and direction is maintained by the United States over 
foreign affairs, similar to that imposed on each of the 
48 states in our Union. 

Under the above reservations, the first great democratic 
state in the Far East came into being. Fired with en- 
thusiasm and patriotic inspiration, the Filipinos, guided 
by their great President, Manuel L. Quezon, have earn- 
estly faced the task of building up a nation worthy of 
the traditions of a great people. They have undertaken 
to meet the difficult problems of national defense, of 
economic readjustment, of wider education, of sanitation, 
of social justice for the common tao, of public road 
building, of colonization of their unpeopled areas, and 
of development of their natural resources. 

In this process of nation-building, it is important for 
the American people to know that the entire cost has 
been paid by local taxation. No direct contribution has 
been made by the United States. In fact, only once under 
American sovereignty did the United States directly con- 
tribute to the support of the Philippines. After the sur- 
render of General Aguinaldo's forces an appropriation 
of $3,000,000 from the Federal treasury was made for 
the purpose of healing some of the wounds of war, and 
for rehabilitation and health purposes. I have alluded 




Senator Harry B. Hawes 

to this matter because of the erroneous impression that 
we have spent hundreds of millions in the Philippines 
for the Filipino people. This has been based on the mis- 
conception that our Army and Navy have been in the 
Philippines for the protection of that country alone. 
As a matter of fact, they have been there for the protec- 
tion of American interests in the entire Orient. The ex- 
penses of our Army and Navy there should be logically 
charged to the cost of maintaining our position as a 
great power in the Pacific. 

In 1932, in a speech in the United States Senate. I 
made the following observation: "The great thing, the 
big thing, the human thing is to redeem the promise 
made to the Filipino people so that they may adjust 
their political and economic affairs and enter the family 
of nations, a grateful people, a happy people, a people 
whose friendship and affection for America will be in 
part our reward for keeping faith with them." 

Since that time, I have had no occasion to change m\ 
opinion. They have moved on their way in the new plan 
which provides ultimately for their self-determination in 
all things, but this is not an easy way. The path is strewn 

( Turn to Page 24 ) 



December, 1940 • 15 • 




Malacanan Palace was the 
home of Spanish and Amer- 
ican governors. Today, it 
is President Quezon's resi- 
dence. 



Beside palm-fringed Dewey 
Boulevard, overlooking Ma- 
nila Bay, is the new resi- 
dence of Francis B. Sayre, 
American High Commis- 
sioner to the Common- 
wealth. 




i 




I I n B b Q I) I b | 




Jacobs Goes to Egypt 

By Julius C. Edelstein 




Joseph E. Jacobs 

JOSEPH E. JACOBS, chief of the State Department's 
division of Philippine affairs, leaves his post this month 
to accept a diplomatic assignment in embattled Egypt, 
thus terminating a four-year monument of achievement 
whose full evaluation and appreciation must truly be left 
to future historians of Philippine-American relations. 

Such a sweeping statement may sound somewhat 
strained to the casual ear, which may never have even 
heard the name of Joseph Jacobs. That would not be 
surprising either, because this man has made an art of 
anonymity. Nevertheless, his accomplishments, though 
almost esoteric, are real and large, and he deeply merits 
a handsome valedictory. 

Jacobs is not a man who enjoys seeing written, in all 
solemnity, a heavy estimate of his good works in Philip- 
pine-American relations. Rather, he is the sort whose 
joy is in seeing an end achieved. For the record, let it 
be said that Jacobs founded the Philippine division in 
the Department of State. That was four years ago, shortly 
after the Philippine Commonwealth was inaugurated in 
Manila as a semi-sovereign government, with foreign 
relations under the direction of the United States. 

Jacobs had just completed a two-year "trick" as travel- 



Philippine Affairs Chief 
Bows Out After 4 Years 

ing inspector for the State Department, covering con- 
sulates and legations of the United States in Egypt. Iran. 
India. China, and the East Indies. Setting up and directing 
the new division was quite a pioneer job, with its new 
duties and activities to be determined. 

There wasn't much time for even that job when Jacobs 
first took over. Philippine President Manuel Quezon was 
on his way to the United States with ideas for the recti- 
fication of certain economic injustices in the legal rela- 
tionship between the Philippines and the I nited States. 
Jacobs was plunged into these momentous consultations 
and discussions, which finally resulted in establishment 
of the now-famous Joint Preparatory Committee on Phil- 
ippine Affairs, the "JPCPA/* 

President Quezon came to W ashington and conferred 
with President Roosevelt and Assistant Secretary of State 
Francis B. Sayre (now American High Commissioner to 
the Philippines ) over what could be done about economic 
relations. President Quezon is said to have favored a 
general conference of American and Filipino officials to 
iron the whole thing out. Sayre's adviser and assistant. 
Joseph E. Jacobs, vigorously urged a fact-finding com- 
mittee to studv the economic- factors involved and to 
report back to President Roosevelt. Jacobs" advice pre- 
vailed, and the JPCPA was set up by joint agreement 
between President Quezon and Assistant Secretary Sayre. 

Jacobs was named chairman of the American group 
on the committee, under the Joint Committee chairman. 
Ambassador John A. Van MacMurray. For long months 
this group of Filipino and American fact-finders held 
hearings in the United States and in the Philippines, and 
finally in May, 1938 agreed on a report to the President. 

Those who participated in the deliberations of the 
Committee tell of Jacobs* firm, unruffled patience in the 
numerous minor deadlocks, impasses and dead-ends which 
the Joint Committee reached and circumvented. After 
trying months of consideration, the final JPCPA report 
was signed and sealed. 

There began for Jacobs a new task — the transforma- 
tion of sweeping economic recommendations into legisla- 
tion for submission to Congress. Conferring constantly 
with legal experts, with Sayre. and with the Philippine 
representatives in Washington, he finally produced the 
Kocialkowski-Tydings amendments which — after exten- 
sive change and modification — were enacted into law as 

( Turn to Page 24) 



December, 1940 • 17 © 



Meet John Ker Davis 

He's New Chief of the Division 
of Philippine Affairs in 
the State Department 



O-N DECEMBER 1. a new chief of the division of 
Philippine affairs in the Department of State — John Ker 
Davis — takes office. China-horn, John Davis will relieve 
Joseph Jacobs, who completes four momentous years as 
founder and first chief of this division (see page 17). 

Davis begins his 32nd year in the foreign service of 
the United States, and the Philippine assignment will 
probably be his last before he retires from diplomatic 
work. He hopes, moreover, that Philippine affairs will 
be more placid than some of his previous assignments 
which have placed him under more military bombard- 
ment and fire than most army veterans experience dur- 
ing a lifetime. 

This veteran diplomat left Warsaw only a few days 
before the Nazi legions marched in triumph into the 
smoking ruins of that Polish capital. He sailed from 
Norway only shortly before the German "putsch" into 
the Scandinavian peninsula; he has seen China in flames. 
Davis has twice lost his household furniture "by in- 
vasion", has been in physical danger almost numberless 
times, and now looks forward to the peaceful economic 
and diplomatic tasks of Philippine-American relations 
with relish. 

Davis was born in Soochow, China, of American mis- 
sionary parents on March 5, 1882. He spent his entire 
adolescence in China during the "roaring nineties," saw 
the expansion of western influence, and the rapid growth 
of Japanese aspirations in that region of the world. 

He came to the United States to attend college and was 
graduated from Wooster College in Ohio in 1904. 
Completing his post-graduate studies he returned to 
China, became a private secretary, tutor, and then teacher. 
In 1910 he was named Deputy Consul General at Shang- 
hai, and from that time on was uninterruptedly in the 
foreign service of his government. 

For the next 16 years he served everywhere in China — 
at Chefoo, Antung, Nanking, Shanghai. When Nationalist 
uprisings in the interior of China threatened the lives 
of American missionaries and business men, Davis was 
sent into the heart of the trouble zone to evacuate the 
refugees, a task he and his helpers fulfilled in spite of 
great personal hardship and danger. 



After another period in the United States for school- 
ing in the Department of State, Davis went again to 
China, this time to the Embassy at Peking. Then came 
London and Amsterdam, where he represented the United 
States at the Fifth Congress of the International Chamber 
of Commerce. His next post was at Vancouver, British 
Columbia, and then back he went to Europe for the 
most exciting phase of his career. 

Davis was in the American Embassy at Warsaw when 
Poland was invaded in the grey hours of September 1. 
1939. As the "blitzkrieg" rolled nearer the Polish capi- 
tal, Ambassador Anthony Biddle decided to move part 
of his diplomatic establishment out of Warsaw before 
the invading Germans arrived. Davis was assigned to stay 
in charge of the Embassy, and to look after the Ameri- 
cans remaining in the beleaguered city. 

Under constant, ferocious and unprecedented aerial 
and artillery bombardment, the Poles held the city for 
two long, terrible weeks. All that time, while death swept 
the streets and human slaughter was a daily occurrence. 
Davis was charged with the duty of "protecting" Ameri- 
can interests. Huddled at times with the other Americans 
in the Embassy basement, and at other times chancing 
death in the shell-swept streets, Davis had more than his 
share of war. Two days before the city fell, he and many 
other Americans departed, passing through the German 
lines and finally reaching Norway. 

Davis has been in the Philippines several times, but 
has never served there. He has an intimate grasp of Far 
Eastern affairs, and has spent the last two months fa- 
miliarizing himself with the historical and political 
background of Philippine-American relations. The prob- 
lem of the economic relations is also on his study agenda. 

John Davis is already earnestly preoccupied with his 
new job. He is personally pleasant, even occasionally 
jovial, affable, and friendly. He meets people easily, 
talks easily, and seems to have a real interest in the 
Philippines. 

Davis is married and has a son. a student at Princeton 
University. He and his wife make their home at a Wash- 
ington apartment hotel. 



o 18 o Phi lip fl^nes 




• U. S. Army and Philippine Constabulary officers 
confer during the battle of Bud Dajo, 1906. After 
fierce fighting, troops drove rebellious Moro tribes- 
men from their mountain-top stronghold. 



OVER MY SHOULDER 



By Maj. Gen. James G. Harbord, Ret. 



HEN a man reaches the point where the only long 
view for him is over his shoulder, his recollections usually 
undergo one of two changes — either the lapse of time 
makes them fade in color or it magnifies the impor- 
tance of events which, after all, took place in a compara- 
tively small theater before an audience that has no doubt 
long forgotten them. In recalling my experience of nearly 
40 years ago in the Philippine Islands, I hope I shall be 
guilty of neither fault. 

My introduction to Manila took place on March 21, 
1902. That date was engraved in my mind by the fact 
that it was my 36th birthday. Furthermore, during the 
ensuing week Asiatic cholera appeared in Manila, re- 
maining in near-epidemic proportions for many months 
thereafter. 

I went to the Philippines as a captain of cavalry, but 
after a year and a half in command of a cavalry troop in 
the I locos Provinces I was appointed Assistant Chief of 
Constabulary in the newly created Moro Province. Gov- 
ernor General William Howard Taft made the assignment 
on the recommendation of General Leonard Wood, new 
governor of Moro Province. Our new Constabulary Dis- 
trict was called the Fifth, and included, besides the Moro 
Province, the Christian Provinces of Misamis and Surigao. 
I had my headquarters at Zamboanga from September. 
1903 to October, 1905. Encouraged by Governor Wood 
and with some assistance from the Army, I organized the 



Moro Constabulary in the districts of Zamboanga, Lanao. 
Cotabato. Davao, and Sulu to the point where, before I 
was relieved, the men were in some instances lighting side 
by side with American soldiers against their own tur- 
bulent people. This was no small achievement, for they 
were recruited in many cases from the slaves of various 
Datos. were generally illiterate, and were utterly without 
conception of any government work. 1 could obtain 
recruits only through their local chiefs, and it is not 
strange that on the first pay-day many inquired if they 
should hand over their wages to the Dato who had recom- 
mended them. 

Some of the best officers that ever wore the Constabu- 
lary uniform served under me in the Fifth District. John 
R. White, my first adjutant — a real soldier of fortune, 
though he will deny it if he ever sees this article — 
stands out among the very best of the Constabulary officers 
I met during more than a decade of service with that 
organization. Heyson, a gallant Kansan who had been 
an Officer of Volunteers, was murdered b\ a Moro sentry 
at Siasi while Senior Inspector at Sulu. James 1,. Wood, 
a gallant youngster from Cleveland, organized the Con- 
stabulary of Lanao. W aloe became a District Chief and 
later Assistant Chief of Constabulary. Gilhauser was first 
Senior Inspector and then Governor of Lanao. Vernon 
Whitney, desperatel) wounded in combat with the Moros. 
later became Governor of Sulu. They and main others 



December. 1910 • 19 • 



wrote their names on our little scroll of fame in the 
Moslem region of the Philippine Islands. 

I went from Mindanao to Tayabas in October. 1905. 
to be chief of the Second Constabulary District, succeed- 
ing Colonel H. H. Bandholtz, who later became perhaps 
the most efficient Chief of Constabulary we ever had. 
Later Samar and Leyte were added to my district, and 
I was in at the closing of the long pulajan troubles in 
those provinces. 

The first incident of my stay in Tayabas that clings 
to my memory is a horseback ride from Lucena to Ati- 
monan, just after the great typhoon of October, 1905. 
On this, my first visit to the contracosta. my companion 
was a young lawyer named Manuel L. Quezon who was 
seeking election as Governor of Tayabas. The ride was 
the beginning of a friendship that has endured for 35 
years. Nothing in his distinguished career since then has 
made me regret that I did everything consistent with my 
duty as a Constabulary Officer to help him in his first 
election. 

Two incidents in his subsequent administration as 
Governor of Tayabas stand out in ray memory: 

The first was a visit to his birthplace at Baler, which 
he had left in 1893 to join the Insurrecto Army and had 
not revisited. Baler, like most coastal villages on Luzon, 
was situated a mile or two from the beach as a measure 
of protection against the Moros who, in Spanish days, 
regularly harassed this area for plunder and captives. Our 
Coast Guard ship had anchored off Baler during the night 
and we went ashore in the bright sunshine next morning. 
The people had been notified of the Governor's visit and 
were on the lookout for him. 

The welcome procession was headed by the Spanish 
priest, who had been there in the time of the insurrection, 
and by a local band. Quezon's own immediate family 
had passed on, but there were many old women who re- 
membered him as a small boy. All were in the procession 
that morning. Everybody carried flowers and I have never 
known a more touching scene than the welcome the 
Governor received in his own home town. 

All day long and until past midnight we witnessed 
scenes that have probably never been duplicated since 
and never were seen before under such circumstances. 
Games seldom played in the presence of the white men 
were staged on the open plaza. There were fencing com- 
bats of the kind that in the old days trained every Filipino 
boy in the use of the bolo or machete. The music was 
constant and the old people performed folk dances that 
were disappearing even in the Philippines. The Governor 
made an address, talking equally well in English, Spanish 
and Tagalog. The feasting would terrify any person with 
a respect for his waistline. The whole town went down to 
the beach with us after midnight, when we sailed with 
many memories. 

The other incident was a little expedition after bandits 
in which Governor Quezon and I participated. We landed 
from a Coast Guard vessel at the little town of Gumaca 
after nightfall. Making our way by midnight up to the 



crest of the mountain range that borders the Bondoc 
Peninsula we ran into a camp of the bandits who were 
asleep. Our approach had not been heard and there was 
a spirited little fight, almost hand-to-hand, in which some 
of the bandits were wounded and later captured. Few 
Governors personally hunted for outlaws in those days. 

I had the pleasure of knowing many of the early 
Filipino leaders under American occupation. Circum- 
stances in Spanish days were such that every Filipino 
family that was able to do so sent its oldest son to Manila 
to school. There was the University of Santo Tomas, the 
oldest university now under the American flag, some sub- 
sidiary schools, such as San Juan dc Letran. and other 
Catholic institutions. Practically no educational facilities 
existed outside of Manila beyond the most primar) of 
parish schools. Consequently, the boys who were of an 
age to aspire to be in the first list of elective Filipino 
Governors in 1905 were friends and playmates from their 
school days in San Juan de Letran and kindred institu- 
tions. Relative importance among those early Governors 
was largely a holdover from boyhood leadershi p. 

As time for the promised first Insular legislature 
approached, these young Governors, though still in office, 
recognized the opportunity for a larger theater and were 
elected to the first Philippine Assembly. Governors 
Quezon, Jaime C. de Veyra, Juan Luna. Isauro Gabaldon 
and a number of others destined to become leaders were 
prominent figures in that first legislature. Ex-Governor 
General Taft, then Secretary of War. eame out in the 
autumn of 1907 for the inauguration, bringing with him 
the Chief of the Bureau of Insular Affairs, General Clar- 
ence R. Edwards. Osmena was elected Speaker of the 
Assembly and Quezon became Majority Leader. 

Philippine politics shortly before that had taken the 
trend which ultimately led to the autonomy and promise 
of independence which the Islands enjoy today. The first 
political organization I remember, after peace had been 
restored and self-government began, was the Partido 
Federal. Its announced aim was to bring about better 
relations between Filipinos and Americans, looking for- 
ward to an ultimate permanent connection between the 
Philippines and the United States. Cold water was thrown 
on their aspirations by Mr. Taft's blunt statement that 
the Philippines could never expect statehood. The intim- 
ation was made that we had enough troubles with people 
not of the white race and would not be anxious to take 
on any more. Thus rebuffed in their desire for permanent 
connection between the two peoples, self-respecting Fili- 
pino leaders had no recourse except to advocate 
independence. 

That was the road which was taken by all of the men 
whom I have mentioned above, with Quezon and Osmena 
as the principal advocates. The older Philippine states- 
men — Pardo de Tavera, Benito Legarda and others — 
held themselves more or less aloof from the independence 
agitation and served on, realizing perhaps that before it 
could be accomplished they would have passed off the 
stage, as has happened. 



o 20 o PInnMppiinies 



Xmaa Uttljottt §>attta (Hiatus 



By Pilar N. Ravelo 






1 HREE hundred years of Spanish rule fixed in the 
minds of all Christian Filipinos the deeply religious 
significance of Christmas. Despite the introduction since 
1900 of the more secular American-style Christmas, 
characterized by a jovial Santa Claus, gayly decorated 
Christmas trees, and colored lights, tinsel and holly, 
the Filipinos, especially those in remote towns and 
barrios (villages), cling to their old Spanish traditions. 

Christmas in the Philippines is a festival widely anti- 
cipated and universally celebrated. The whole country 
takes on a festive mood. There is promise of much feast- 
ing, merry-making, and exchanging of gifts. To the young 
it means new clothes, abundant food, and money to spend. 
Everywhere there is gaiety and laughter. 

Christmas really begins nine days before December 
25 with an early morning mass. The misa de gallo is an- 
nounced by the pealing of church bells at 3 a. m. a 
usually the town band helps awaken the villagers. Church- 
goers attend the early morning mass in groups. The 
churches are decorated allegorically ; in the center niche 
of the altar are lifelike figures of Mary and Joseph. The 
music of the Christmas service suggests pastoral songs 
and dances with the ringing sounds of castanets, cymbals 
and tambourines, while the songs and hymns symbolize 
the joyous music of the angels when they heralded the 
birth of the Holy Child in a manger in Bethlehem nearly 
2,000 years ago. 

After mass, members of the congregation troop to the 
homes of friends and neighbors, where they have a break- 



fast of native candies and hot steaming chocolate or rice 
coffee. Very often, if there happens to be a phonograph 
in the house, couples dance while they wait for the 
hostess to announce breakfast. The merry-making takes 
place every morning for nine days, each family taking 
its turn at entertaining. 

Each night, roads and streets are ablaze with rows 
upon rows of bright city lights, while picturesque paper 
lanterns of every color hang from the windows and doors 
of the houses. These native-made lanterns are a source 
of great delight because of the skill and painstaking 
effort that goes into their making. Often a whole village 
takes part in a contest to choose the most artistic, the 
most beautiful, and the most original lanterns. These 
lanterns with their symphony of colors — red, blue, green, 
yellow — and their quaint designs, which are patterned 
after the moon, the stars, the sun, animals, houses, fruits, 
or anything which catches the craftsman's fancy, furnish 
a picturesque and ga\ setting for the celebration of 
Christmas. 

By December 24, the holiday preparation is at its 
height. Houses are made spotlessh clean, graying cur- 
tains are replaced by attractive new ones, potted plants, 
airplants and orchids are brought in from the batalan 
an outside porch made of bamboo — to adorn the win- 
dows and corners of the house. The housewives cook the 
suman, bibingka, cuchinta. and the polo I all native pas- 
tries) and prepare the lechon (suckling pig to be roasted 
on Christmas day), which is the main delicacy, and sec 



December, 1940 • 21 • 



to it that there is an ample supply of drinks for the elders. 

The children wait for Christmas Day with great an- 
ticipation. They are careful not to displease their parents 
lest they be forbidden to wear their new clothes or receive 
their gifts or attend the midnight mass, which is the most 
elaborate celebration of the Christmas season. 

Before the Christmas Eve mass the villagers gather in 
the homes of friends and relatives, where they dance to 
the music of bamboo flutes and string instruments. Folk 
dances are the most popular. This celebration continues 
until a few minutes before midnight, when the people 
hurry to mass. The churches are even more elaborately 
decorated than they were for the pre-Christmas services. 
More candles are lighted and, in addition to the lifelike 
figures of Mary and Joseph, there is a reproduction of 
the manger and the Holy Child. After the chanting of the 
mass and the benediction, the congregation gathers in 
front of the church, where the story of the Nativity is 
presented in a series of four tableaux. 

The first scene shows the Angel Gabriel appearing 
before the praying Virgin to herald the coming of the 
Holy Child. In the same scene Satan tempts the Virgin 
Mary, but he is driven away by the Angel Gabriel. The 
second scene shows Mary and Joseph wandering from 
house to house, asking for a night's lodging, but every 
house turns them away. The third shows the appearance 
of the herald angel in the midst of the shepherds and 
their flocks to announce the birth of their King. The 
final scene deals with the Nativity itself, when pauper 
and prince come to lay their gifts at the feet of the new- 
born Babe. Music accompanies the tableaux, and there 
is a rhythmic cadence and a touch of poetic charm in 
the manner in which each player portrays his part. Al- 
though crude and simple, the performance has beauty 
and dignity in the message that it brings to the hearts 
of men — the message of peace on earth and goodwill to 
men. 

On Christmas Day, the doors are open wide — every- 
one is welcomed to every household. Families visit from 
house to house. There is an abundance of wine, food, 
candies and fruit. There is feasting and merry-making 
everywhere. Everyone, even Grandma, is dressed in his 
best. The absence of a rosy-cheeked Santa Claus is not 
felt at all, since god-mothers and god-fathers act as living 
Santa Clauses for the children. Dimes, nickels and 
centavos (half cents) are distributed freely. Children in 
groups make the rounds of the village, singing Christmas 
carols, and are rewarded with gifts of money and candies. 

American influence in the Philippines has of course 
brought many changes, and the traditional Christmas 
celebration is slowly being supplanted by Santa Claus, 
elaborately decorated pine trees, and the exchange of 
expensive gifts. Store windows are gay with wreaths, 
tinsel and holly, and even the smallest shop is decorated 
with paper bunting and streamers. The exchange of 
Christmas presents is now profuse and universal; although 
an American innovation, it is in keeping with the Fili- 
pino's generosity and love of family. 



P. I. mm 



Anticipating the time when full tariff duties will be 
imposed on sugar exported to the United States, directors 
of the Philippine Confederation of Sugar Cane Planters 
have submitted to President Quezon a memorandum urg- 
ing the government to purchase all big sugar refining 
"centrals" in the Islands. 

The planters believe that the plan will not only save 
the sugar industry from ruin, but will also serve as a 
means for bringing about much closer cooperation be- 
tween the management of the "centrals", the planters 
and the laborers. They contend that under the present 
situation, relations between the "centrals" and the plant- 
ers are not ideal, as the planters and laborers benefit 
less than the "centrals" in the distribution of profits 
in the sugar industry. 



The Philippine Electoral Commission, created during 
the last special session of the National Assembly, will 
function for the first time this year in the December 10 
elections for provincial and municipal officials. As the 
name implies, the Electoral Commission has complete 
charge of all elections, seeking to make them truly ex- 
pressive of the popular will. The Commission consists 
of Pedro Concepcion, Chairman; Rufino Luna, Under- 
Secretary of the Interior, and Judge Jose Abreu. 



U. S. High Commissioner Francis B. Sayre expressed 
great satisfaction over the work being done by the U. S. 
Navy at the Cavite naval station during his recent in- 
spection tour of the 16th U. S. Naval District. The base 
is being converted into a really efficient plant, he reported, 
praising the efforts of Rear Admiral John Morris Smeal- 
lie and Maj. Gen. George S. Grunert in maintaining the 
efficiency of both the U. S. Navy and Army defense plans 
of the Islands. "The Philippines is lucky to have these 
two officers here at this time," Mr. Sayre concluded. 



The Benguet Consolidated Mining Company in Baguio 
in October signed a contract to supply the National De- 
fense Commission of the United States with 100,000 tons 
of chrome ore from the Consolidated Mine property in 
Masinloc, Zambales Province. (See page 11.) 



Ayala and Company of Manila has announced the sale 
of the sugar mill and entire equipment, including build- 
ings, of its Central Azucarera de Calatagan in Batangas 
to the Thai Niyom Panich Company, semi-governmental 



• 22 • Philippines 



firm of Bangkok, Thailand (Si am). The mill, idle for a 
year, has a capacity of approximately 750 tons a day. 
Plant and machinery, which is of American manufacture, 
will he dismantled and shipped to Thailand, where it 
will he resold to the Thai government. 



The enrollment for the current year at the Ateneo de 
Manila, an institution of learning conducted by the Jesuit 
Fathers of the Philippines, is 2,094. The Institution in- 
cludes grade school, high school, and college. It is the 
third largest educational institution under the direction 
of the Jesuit Fathers of the Maryland-New York province. 
The two largest are Fordham University in New York 
City and Georgetown University in Washington, D. C. 



The latest Philippine census reveals 29,262 Japanese 
in the Islands, as compared with 117.461 Chinese. Out 
of a total of 166,977 foreigners living in the Philippines. 
8,739 arc Americans and 4,637 Spaniards. 

• • • 

A Congressman Speaks (from Page 4) 

relations between the two peoples would serve to bring 
about a better understanding upon the part of both, and 
a further cementing of the friendship existing between 
them. Since in a great part of the world the press has 
been throttled and public opinion is influenced, if not 
controlled, by propaganda, the importance of such an 
enterprise is more outstanding than at any other time 
during the history of the relations between the two 
countries. 

In these days when nations are being subjugated by 
their powerful neighbors, when nations in various parts 
of the world are combining together with the avowed 
purpose of waging war — either economic or physical — 
against the rest of the world, when individual liberty over 
so great a portion of the earth has been wiped out, both 
the United States and the Philippines want to know the 
truth, to know the worst, with respect to the prospective 
change in their relationship, and to provide for it. The 
one important contributing factor to this result is an 
uncontrolled and uncensored press. 

The Philippines, because of Spanish and American rule, 
is the one country in the Far East which possesses the 
culture we know in the West. It is the only Christian 
nation in the Orient. Its new Constitution provides for 
the individual rights and fundamental freedoms that we 
cherish. 

It should be the purpose of both governments and 
peoples to conserve the gains of the past and promote 
those things that are mutually beneficial. Modern com- 
munication and transportation have greatly reduced the 
distance between the two countries. The organs of infor- 
mation and opinion should help foster better understand- 
ing and closer friendship between them. 



Strategic Storehouse (from Pasre 11) 

of these reservations are now being surveyed and studied 
by the Philippine Government and the other by the 
United States. 

Philippine exports of crude chromite have boomed 
since 1935. In that year. 1.292 tons were shipped: for 
1939 the figure was 126.000 tons. During the first six 
months of 1940. exports nearly equalled those for all 
1939. Uncle Sam, busy building up stocks of strategic 
materials, took about 85 per cent of these shipments. 
Japan purchased about 10 per cent, and the rest was 
distributed among half a dozen other nations in all parts 
of the world. 

Similar increases have featured manganese production. 
Annual shipments have increased from 520 tons in 1935 
to 39,600 in 1939. Japan normally takes about 70 per 
cent of the output, but recent emergency purchases bave 
diverted the bulk to America. Since deposits are widely 
scattered, development has been concentrated to date 
on ore bodies closest to the seacoast. where transporta- 
tion is cheapest. The most important of these are on small 
islands in the southern half of the archipelago: Siquijor. 
south of Negros Oriental, and Busuanga. north of Pala- 
wan. 

Nickel and molybdenum are two other "defense*' min- 
erals occurring in the Philippines, but they are not of 
strategic importance to the United States because more 
satisfactory supplies are found in North America. Neither 
mineral is at present known to exist in large quantities: 
nickel, however, is associated with iron in the huge 
Philippine Government ore reserve at Surigao, and sur- 
veys of molybdenum resources have so far been incon- 
clusive. Mercury has been reported, but without official 
verification. 

Despite recent efforts to grow the abaca plant in 
Sumatra, Borneo and Panama, the Philippine Islands 
retain their natural monopoly over the production of 
Manila hemp. Satisfactory growth requires peculiar con- 
ditions of soil and climate, which a few islands of the 
Commonwealth alone seem to satisfy. Further experi- 
mentation may produce a type that will flourish in other 
lands, but for some years to come the world is likely to 
be dependent on Manila for its supply of cordage. Re- 
flecting this general demand, abaca plantations occupied 
11 per cent of the island's agricultural area and hemp 
products formed the third most important Philippine 
export item in 1939. In that year the United States paid 
$4,253,053 for abaca fiber, plus another $608,000 for 
prepared cordage. 

In an age when closed economies are the fashion and 
sources of supply are increasingly subject to interrup- 
tion through invasion, the United States is particularly 
fortunate to have ample resources in as mam strategic 
materials as it does. And it is doubh fortunate in having 
an additional supply under its flag in the Philippine 
Islands. Such a circumstance ma) easil) be a matter 
of national life or death in the event of war. 



December, 1940 • 23 • 



Have We Kept Our Promises? (from Page 15) 

with many difficulties and some of these difficulties were 
created by us. 

Over their protest, officially expressed by their Legisla- 
ture and their leaders, free trade was established between 
the Philippines and the United States. They feared at 
the time that it would make them dependent upon the 
United States and that one single market would prevent 
a diversity of industries. The result has been what their 
thoughtful men anticipated — development of an economy 
based on the American tariff. 

As a result of this trade agreement, they have become 
one of the greatest purchasers in the world of American 
farm products and manufactures. They have sent their 
staple products — their sugar, their abaca, their copra, 
their lumber, and their minerals — to the United States. 
Today, more gold comes from the Philippines than from 
any state in the Union, except California. 

We, in return, send our cotton goods, our flour, our 
boots and shoes, our automobiles, our canned milk, and 
a long list of products from our farms and our factories. 
This is friendship — the "good neighbor" — of a practical 
kind which has existed for well over a quarter of a 
century. 

The young men of the Philippines come to our col- 
leges and schools for their education. They have carried 
back with them the best traditions of America, its 
political and historical ideals. The names of our fore- 
fathers are household words with them, taught by the 
fine soldiers who remained after the war and by that 
small army of American "school marms" who undertook 
their education. They have followed our methods of gov- 
ernment, of sanitation, of banking, of business manage- 
ment, and of social welfare. 

It is, indeed, a fine friendship which we must not lose. 
If we lose that friendship, if we do not assist in the ex- 
periment that is taking place, we will lose not only the 
friendship of 16,000,000 Filipinos, but the respect of 
the entire Orient, which is watching this experiment in 
democracy avidly. They want to know if we will be 
selfish; whether we will go through with our protesta- 
tions of friendship; whether the great American republic 
will forget its ward simply because it has grown to the 
stature of manhood. 

• • • 

The Philippine Archipelago is composed of 7,083 is- 
lands, the largest of which is Luzon. The population of 
the Philippines is 16,356,000, which is greater than the 
combined populations of the New England states and 
California. 

The Philippine Islands has the oldest hospital and 
oldest university under the American flag. San Juan de 
Dios Hospital was founded in 1577, and the University 
of Santo Tomas was founded in 161 1, or 25 years before 
Harvard. 



Jacobs Goes to Egypt (from Page 17) 

economic amendments to the Philippine Independence 
Act. These amendments, of transcendental importance and 
significance to Philippine national life, were signed by 
President Roosevelt in the summer of 1939. 

In all the conferences, meetings and negotiations. 
Jacobs was an omnipresent personality. Never in the 
limelight, he was always in the workroom. Some day the 
story of the exact part Jacobs played will be written by 
a sympathetic historian. 

Since the passage of that legislation, Jacobs has had 
time to lay down the lines of practice for his successors 
(the first is John Ker Davis — see page 18), and to 
develop the lines of jurisdiction of his office. His incum- 
bency in his Washington post was lengthened to four 
years (the usual span is three) at the direct instance of 
President Roosevelt. He now goes to Egypt, where he will 
be counselor of legation and consul general in a country 
which may be overrun by an invading army by the time 
he reaches it. But Jacobs faces change with equanimity. 
During his lifetime he has served in China. Europe and 
Africa. 

A slight, soft-spoken South Carolinian, Jacobs still 
carries a hint of his Southern origin in his pleasant voice. 
He has few relaxations except his work, but he once had 
a mild passion for golf. He is attractive for his frank and 
direct sincerity, the sense of quiet conviction and authority 
with which he expresses an opinion — when asked. 

Not that Jacobs is without faults. He is inclined to be 
a little mousy, and to affect a cynicism he doesn't really 
feel. He is cautious and conservative, and somewhat slow 
to warm up. But, away from his job, he is a fellow you 
would want to have spend a week-end at your home or to 
join you at golf on your day off. That is what makes 
writing about him a pleasure. 

• • • 

S O N N E T 

You have to go. We must accept the truth 
And bravely smile the while we separate, 
Content we had this much, at least, of youth 
And happiness before it was too late. 
It would not be so hard to bear if I 
Were certain this were merely Au revoir. 
It may mean more — perhaps it means goodbye. 
The roads are so uncertain where we are! 

Then let me take one last long look at you — 
Your eyes that always had so much to tell, 
Your brow, your chin that courage always knew, 
Your lips that even now must say farewell — 
That on my heart I may imprint your face, 
A living image nothing can erase. 

SOLEDAD R. JUAN 



24 • Philippines 



A IVEW MAGAZINE 



Philippines 



Published by the Office of the Philippine 
Resident Commission in Washington, D. C. 

Philippines is intended for every American who is interested 
in his nation's future in the Far East. It will strive to keep him in- 
formed on developments in the Philippine Commonwealth and it 
will seek to explain the events that receive such cursory mention 
in the day's news. The magazine will not, however, pose as a pro- 
found critic of foreign affairs. Neither will it knowingly present 
a one-sided picture. "Philippines" sole purpose is to promote in- 
telligent discussion of Insular prohlems, based on accurate knowl- 
edge rather than sentiment or sensationalism. 

The reader may expect authoritative articles and comments, 
reflecting all representative viewpoints on Philippine affairs. Al- 
though every effort is to be made to obtain original material, the 
editors will not hesitate to reprint articles from other sources if they 
believe them to be of immediate interest to the readers of "Philip- 
pines". 

Expressions of opinion on every phase of Philippine-American 
relations are solicited. They need not conform to any standard 
viewpoint; it is only necessary that they be of genuine interest to 
American and Filipino readers. The availability of space in the 
magazine w ill, of course, be a controlling factor. The editors regret 
that, for the present, they cannot pay for these contributions. 



Philippines 



2362 Massachusetts Ave., N.W. 



Washington, D. C. 



