PHILIPPINE 
MAGAZINE 



VOL XXX VI 



DECEMBER, 1939 









H . Ik | 


{ Jm 


& i 1 




G R 
C 




GUESS WHAT MA BOUGHT FOR ME 



No 1 I (380) 




Thirty Centavos the Copy 



Three Pesos the War 



asses assesses! 



—J%t lfonr 

Instant Dependable 



Light 



with 



eveready 



TRADE MARK 



WHAT a comfort it is to have instant dependable 
Eveready light wherever you go at night. 
Always— at your service— to provide you, at the touch 
of the button, a brilliant flood of light to guide your 
way, to assist you in the numerous emergencies that 
occur in the darkness. 



Always carry your handy Eveready 
flashlight with you at night. Use lit 
for your safety and protection. There 
is no other portable light which is so 
dependable. Safe for the smallest 
child to use. Wind or rain cannot 
extinguish it. No danger from fire 
or explosions. 



For best results — 
brightest light and long- 
est service — insist on 
genuine Eveready bat- 
teries for your flash- 
light. They are easily 
identified by the dis- 
tinctive red and blue 
label and the Eveready 
trade-mark. 




At All Dealers 



^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ 



PHILIPPINE 
MAGAZINE 

A. V. H. Hartendorp, Editor at d Publisher 




VOL. XXXVI CONTENTS FOR DECEMBER, 1939 No. 12 (380) 



The Cover: 

Guess What Ma Bought for Me Gavino Reyes Congson Cover 

Philippine Economic Conditions Paul P. Steintorf 480 

News Summary 480 

Editorials: 

Nationalization of the Retail Trade — Russia and Fin- 
land: Defense or Conquest? — Christ-mass The Editor 487 

Manila from the 16th to the 18th Century M. Le Gentil 490 

Translated by Fred C. Fisher 

The Koronadal Valley, Cotabato Dominador Z. Rosell 493 

A Mandaya is Born Jose Mangune 494 

Three Wives, A Lanao Folk Tale Mangoda Magiringa 495 

Sunday in Tulinda Luis B. Ladonga 496 

Cabesang Andang and Pepay Pura Santillan-Castrence 497 

Basi Jose Resurreccion Calip 498 

Holy Wedlock in Lepanto Dalmacio Maliaman 499 

O Land of Volcan (Verse) Albert W. C. T. Herre 499 

The "China Incident" Lin Yu 502 

Four O'Clock in the Editor's Office 510 



Entered at the Manila Post Office aa Second Class Mail Matter 
EDITORIAL AND BUSINESS OFFICES 
Uy Yet Building, 217 Dasmarifiai, Manila 
P. O. Box 2466, Telephone 4-93-76 



Subscription rates: P3.00 in the Philippines, P6.00 ($3.00) elsewhere. The Magazine will be stopped at the 
expiration of a subscription unless otherwise ordered. When informing the Publisher of a change in address 
please give the old address as well as the new. Remittances should be made by money order. Advertising rates 
will be furnished on application. ( 

Copyright, 1939, by A. V. H. Hartendorp. All Rights Reserved. 



479 



480 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



December, 1939 




Philippine Economic 
Conditions 

By Paul P. Steintorf 
American Trade Commissioner 



O* CTOBER witnessed a 
sharp recession from the 
feverish war specula- 
tion noted in September. It 
became evident that the 
European war would have 
very little immediate effect 
on local business and in con- 
sequence, tension relaxed and 
business returned to normal. 
Although war reports have 
had little outward effect on 
local market, a general atmosphere of caution and 
uncertainty has prevailed. An example of this 
feeling is the reluctance of importers to make com- 
mitments pending clarification of world conditions 
and stabilization of prices. As a result, import or- 
ders for practically all major commodities during 
October were practically dormant, with the aggre- 
gate volume of sales probably the smallest for any 
month in a number of years. There is little doubt 
that uncertainty was enhanced by announcement 
of various anti-profiteering measures by the Govern- 
ment, including fixing of prices and Government 
purchases and sales of basic commodities. 

Retail business showed the usual seasonal impro- 
vement, but reports from various districts indicate 
that theagregate volumewas somewhat disappointing. 
Although average price of the principal Philippine 
commodities for October were considerably above 
those of the previous month, the trend was sharply 
downward with prices at the end of the month 
considerably below the high point attained in Sep- 
tember. Comparison on this basis shows declines 
of eight percent in domestic consumption sugar; 
25 percent in copra; 18 percent in coconut oil; and 
nine percent in hemp. This has blasted hopes of an 
immediate war boom in these commodities and 
probably accounts for the unsatisfactory retail 
business during October. 

It appears that the aggregate volume of both 
imports and exports during October declined sub- 
stantially from the corresponding month of 1938. 
The principal causes were curtailment in shipping 
and dislocation of trade with European countries. 

Government finance was featured by a sharp in- 
crease in internal revenue collections. Collections 




For the best 

Philippine Wines, 
Liquors and Gins 

buy from: 

"LA ROSARIO" 

TUASON & LEGARDA LTD. 

1001-1023 R. Hidalgo 
Manila, P. I. 



by the Bureau of Customs also were substantial, 
w*th the result that total revenue during the month 
reached the highest point in more than a year, while 
the cumulative total for the first ten months shows 
a satisfactory increase over the same period of 1938. 

The banking situation was featured by heavy 
import financing as a result of the large amount of 
maturing obligations resulting from the speculative 
buying during September. Banking statistics show 
a substantial increase in loans and a drop in deposits, 
this being attributed to import financing and to 
withdrawal of investment funds for operations in 
the American market. 

The exchange market was more stable during the 
month, the most important development being an 
increase in the strength of the United States dollar 
against the peso, the principal cause being the delay 
in offering of sugar bills. 

Corporate investments during October showed a 
moderate improvement over September, but invest- 
ments in partnerships fell to a new low. 

Ocean shipping improved as a result of the gradual 
restoration of normal shipping facilities. However, 
sailings during the month were somewhat below 
normal, while freight rates continued to be high. 
Railway tonnage declined somewhat from the previous 
month, but equalled the corresponding period of 
1938. 

Building construction recovered from the dis- 
location noted in September and in general was 
fairly active, although some projects continued 
to be deferred owing to uncertainty concerning prices 
of imported building materials. 

The local market for export sugar was practically 
stagnant throughout the month, since the 1938-39 
crop had been sold and the decline in New York 
prices prevented sales of new crop sugar. Specu- 
lation in domestic consumption sugar ceased and 
prices showed a downward tendency. 

The coconut products market was influenced by 
uncertainty concerning the European war, with 
prices fluctuating sharply. Despite the absence of 
European demand, exports were very well maintain- 
ed, with the excepton of coconut oil which declined 
materially. 

The abaca market showed a sharp recession from 
the speculative activity of the previous month. 
The market was generally weak, with sales limited 
and with prices showing a steady downward ten- 
dency. 

The rice market was steady throughout the month, 
with adequate supplies to meet market requirements 
and with prices stationary. 

The tobacco market was featured by extremely 
heavy shipments of leaf tobacco to the United States, 
in anticipation of the establishment of an export 
quota during the coming year. As a result of war 
conditions, there were almost no exports to Europe. 

The lumber market showed the usual seasonal 
improvement in domestic consumption, while ex- 
ports increased materially. Prices, however, con- 
tinued to be rather low. 

Gold production for October reached a new all- 
time high. Production of base metals also was 
active, being stimulated by potential war demand. 

The local textile market was extremely quiet, 
with import orders sharply curtailed and with whole- 
sale business dormant, in reaction to the heavy 
speculative purchases made during the previous 
month. Retail business also was somewhat dis- 
appointing. Sales of both passenger cars and trucks 
during October were very satisfactory, with indi- 
cations of continued good business during the re- 
mainder of this year. 

The foodstuffs market showed a somewhat erratic 
tendency during October. The flour market was 
extremely dull, while both imports and retail sales 
of canned fish showed the usual seasonal recession. 
The market for canned milk was moderately active, 
while the demand for fresh fruits and vegetables 
was very strong. 

Electric power production during October reached 
a new high, gaining four percent over September 
and six percent over the same month of 1938. 

Net radio registrations during October again 
established an all-time high, gaining six percent 
over September and 94 percent over the correspond- 
ing month of 1 938. The total for the first ten months 
shows a gain of 85 percent. 




News Summary 

The Philippines 

Oct. 13. — Malacanan an- 
nounces appointment of Mayor 
M. Valderosa of Zamboanga 
as Mayor of Baguio, former 
Representative P. Lorenzo to 
take his place in Zamboanga; 
also appointment of Mayor S. 
Artiaga of Davao as Governor 
of Bukidnon, A. Alvarez, for- 
mer governor of province, 
being named Mayor of Davao. 

Secretary of Justice J. A. 
Santos reverses decision of 
Secretary of Intferior R. R. Alunan, declaring that "a 
member of a board of election inspectors at time 
of passage of Act 492 may be relieved from office 
and substituted with another. . . in accordance with 
provisions of Sec. 74 of Election Code." 

Oct. 14. — President Manuel L. Quezon in speech 
at Dagupan urges people to vote affirmatively in 
plebiscite on incorporation of terms of new Philip- 
pine Economic Adjustment Act into Ordinance 
appended to Constitution. He states Secretary 
Alunan still has his full confidence and announces 
he is recalling Justice Teofilo Sison from Court of 
Appeals to appoint him Secretary of Department 
of National Defense, recently created. Speech is 
translated from English into Pangasinan by As- 
semblyman E. Perez of province who had led in 
movement for recall of Alunan. Justice Sison has 
served as Governor of Pangasinan, member of 
Senate, and Secretary of Interior. 

Representatives of various bus transportation 
companies protest to President Quezon against 
competition offered by bus lines of Manila Railroad 
Company as unfair and harmful to private investors. 

Oct. 15. — U. S. High Commissioner Francis B. 
Sayre, on way to Philippines, states in Shanghai 
he will make intensive first-hand study of Philip- 
pine problems and that re-examination of independ- 
ence question is one problem requiring his close 
attention. He states extension of reciprocal United 
States trade relations with Far Eastern nations will 
depend on outcome of Sino- Japanese hostilities 
and expresses hope American shipping will be able to 
continue to operate in Pacific despite new neutrality 
law being framed. He says people of United States 
are profoundly interested in Orient. He states 
commercial agreement with Japan is obsolete and 
that more up-to-date agreement is wanted which 
will protect American rights in Far East more ade- 
quately. Regarding European war, he states "some 
of most precious things of our civilization are at 
stake", adding it is impossible to predict what 
America's future attitude will be expressing personal 
hope America may avoid involvement, he states 
"only time will tell". 

^Vice-President Sergio Osmefia, on way to Phil- 
ippines, states in Shanghai, "I consider political 
aspects of Philippine problem definitely settled". 

Oct. 18. — President Quezon after visiting new 
P2, 000,000 City Hall (Manila) issues instructions 
to Public Works officials to exercise economy in 
construction and not use materials more expensive 
than necessary; reported he objected to colored 
marble columns and elaborately carved hardwood 
doors. 

Philippine- American Trade Association, Amer- 
ican Chamber of Commerce, Philippine Chamber of 
Commerce, and Philippine Sugar Association re- 
ported to have joined in protest against ban in 
neutrality measure on shipping and air service 
between American and belligerent ports in Pacific. 

High Commissioner Sayre is tendered reception 
by American Consul-General in Hongkong and 
dinner by Governor Sir Geoffry Northcote. 

Vice-President Osmefia tells Shanghai American 
Chamber of Commerce it would be illogical to ask 
for reversal of independence program and that 
there can be no backing out; he states Philippines 
will follow in full United States foreign policy. 

Ocr. 19. — Dr. Bienvenido M. Gonzalez is formally 
installed as President of University of Philippines, 
President Quezon declaring in speech he was selected 
on sheer merit and tested ability and that he has 
not only confidence of Board of Regents but of 



ATLAS ASSURANCE COMPANY, 
LIMITED 

CONTINENTAL INSURANCE CO. 



THE EMPLOYER'S LIABILITY 
ASSURANCE CORPORATION, LTD. 
ORIENT INSURANCE COMPANY 



INSURANCE COMPANY OF NORTH AMERICA 

E. E. ELSER, INC. 



GENERAL AGENTS 



COR. OF 13TH & BOSTOtf STS. 
PORT AREA, MANILA 



Telephone 2-24-28 



December, 1939 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



48! 



Administration. Chief Justice Ramon Avancefia 
is awarded honorary Ll.D. degree. 

Gen. Teodoro Sandiko, revolutionary leader and 
one of founders of Nacionalista Party, although he 
later helped organise the Democrat* Party, one- 
time Governor of Bulacan, member of Senate, and 
Vice-President of Constitutional Convention, dies, 
aged 79. 

Oct. 20. — President Quezon renders decision 
finding Governor R. Samonte guilty of abuse of 
authority and acting arbitrarily in Cavite election 
inspectors case, but orders his reinstatement as 
period of suspension is deemed sufficient punishment. 

Insular Collector of Customs approves report of 
Board of Marine Inquiry holding Captain W. Gil- 
ray responsible for grounding of S. S. Ma von on 
May 5 and recommending suspension of his cer- 
tificate for one year; Milray has 30 days within 
which to appeal. 

Oct. 7/.— High Commissioner Sayre arrives in 
Manila. In impromptu speech of welcome, Pre- 
sident Quezon praises him for his keen mind and 
humanitarian heart, and for his part in securing 
needed help for this country from United States, 
and expresses hope "he may be the man to turn 
over to first President of Philippine Republic the 
authority and sovereignty of the United States over 
these Islands". Mr. Sayre states he is happy "to 
throw in lot with people of Philippines to help work 
out problems that lie before us.* 4 Seldom if ever 
has a great nation in height of its power, because of 
its profound faith in liberty and democracy, helped 
to create out of its own territory, a new nation seek- 
ing to work out its independent destiny based upon 
those same principles. Particularly in these tragic 
days, when world is torn with bitter struggle, when 
rulers of certain nations are throwing restraints of 
morality to winds and would commit world to rule 
of brute force and international anarchy, when very 
fundamentals of our hard-won civilization are at 
•take-— -in these dark days it is good to have part 
in this concrete manifestation of our unshakable 
faith in great principles on which our common nation 
was built and to which it is consecrated. The 
happy thing is that relationships between our two 
peoples do not rest upon contest or upon struggle 



D*M-C 



AVOID TIRED FINGERS by 
employing the smooth, uniformly 
round and very pliant D-M-C 
Knitting Cottons. Garments 
knitted with D-M-C neither 
shrink nor stretch, are moth 
proof, fadeless, comfortable to 
wear and never become fluffy. 



|u|lu|t(tifilij 




can be procured from aH art needlework 

stores. If difficult to obtain, write to 

F. E. ZUELLIG. INC., P. O. B. 604, MANILA 





















V... 



and hostility, but upon community of purpose and 
ideals. Do you remember President Quezon's 
ringing words to National Assembly last month? 
'Our loyalty to America', he said, *is built on faith 
in the great principles and ideate for which Stars 
and Stripes proudly wave over a free and happy 
people'. That, I believe, is the truth. Our ob- 
jectives and fundamental interests are the same. 
Both peoples alike believe in freedom and in dem- 
ocracy based upon law. Both peoples have con- 
tributed richly to these ideals. The achievements 
of Filipino people within single generation have 
been outstanding and remarkable. Sharing com- 
mon objectives, surely I need not tell you that 
people of United States genuinely and sincerely 
desire to further best interests of Filipino people so 
they may continue their forward march as out- 
standing exponents in Asia of these great ideals. 
Until their independence is consummated, Filipino 
people are integral part of American nation. We 
are fellow-Americans. As High Commissioner to 
Philippine Islands, I shall not lose sight of this 
central fact. I shall continue as in past to devote 
myself wholeheartedly and unreservedly to pro- 
moting best interests of our nation — and this means 
interests of both peoples. Whatever future holds, 
I know that in our common ideals of liberty and 
democracy, in our unyielding determination to 
uphold a civilisation based upon law, upon moral 
restraints, upon Christian ethics, we along with all 
free peoples of world who prise democracy and 
human liberty, will stand united and ultimately 
triumphant." 

Oct. 22. — High Commissioner Sayre states in a 
press conference that political independence is 
compatible with trade agreement extending over 
period of years providing for gradual elimination 
of preferences. "Question of independence is 
beset with innumerable difficulties and complications, 
but fundamentals of the problem seem clear. During 
40 years that United States has exercised sovereignty 
over Islands, Filipino people have been repeatedly 
assured by both Democrats and Republicans of 
intention of our government to grant them in- 
dependence. . . Tydings-McDuffie Act as modified. . . 
is law of land which only Congress can change. 
Unless and until Congress does alter this Act, it 
is duty of American and Philippine officials faith- 
fully to carry out its provisions. To my mind 
passage by Congress of this Act and acceptance 
by Philippine people of Constitution based upon 
its provisions, constitute moral obligation not to 
withdraw independence program or to alter fun- 
damental provisions except by wish of both peoples. 
If ever day should come when Filipino people should 
decide to change their minds and alter policy to 
which they have unyieldingly adhered for over 40 
years and should bring such a request before Congress, 
it would be for Congress and for Congress alone to 
decide upon what course of action United States 
should pursue. Such decision, I need hardly add, 
would have to be made in light of such conditions 
as may then exist in world and in Philippines; and 
what these will be no one can foretell". 

Vice-President Osmefia receives rousing reception 
and declares in statement, later repeated in radio- 
cast, that though many observers felt task of avert- 
ing major disaster to Philippine trade within next 
few years was hopeless, danger has been dispelled, 
many factors contributing to this happy outcome — 
sympathy and friendship of President Roosevelt, 
able and unremitting efforts of High Commissioner 
Sayre, sense of fairness and justice of Congress and 
American people, and encouragement, support, and 
guiding hand of President Quezon. He states new 
Economic Adjustment Act "saves four of our in- 
dustries and extends new concessions to another 
(cordage), which employ thousands of people and 
are source of livelihood of thousands more. Law 
has deeper significance. It constitutes in sense a 
ratification of confidence of American government in 
administration of President Quezon. . . implies 
American government believes in our ability to 
carry out program of preparation for complete 
independence in 1946. New legislation which 
means so much to our welfare is other evidence of 
soundness of policy of goodwill and friendship we 
have pursued to American people. ... In chaotic 
world, rent by strife and disturbance, violence and 
lawlessness. . . states and nations can not stand by 
themselves alone. Bach one, including most power- 
ful, seeks friendship and understanding with others. 
A small nation such as ours can not be exception. 
From whatever angle we may examine record of 
past 40 years, we must conclude that Philippines 
can not find better friend than United States." 

Opposition elements meet in Manila Opera House 
and adopt resolution opposing proposed amendments 



Try 

Saxolite Astringent 
The Delightful 
Skin Freshener 

Saxolite helps tighten skin tissue 
and produces a temporary contrac- 
tion of the skin. Aids also in re- 
ducing excess surface oil. Just dis- 
solve Saxolite in one-half pint witch 
hazel and pat this lotion on the skin 
several times daily. 

Sold at all Cosmetic Counters. 




. . need Extra Supply 
of certain food-factors 
in their diet! 

FOR baby's sake as well as your 
own, you need an extra amount 
of certain food-factors in your diet, 
before baby comes and when you 
are nursing him. If your diet is not 
rich enough in certain vitamins 
and minerals, your health will suf- • 
fer and your baby will fail to show 
proper development. 

That is why so many women, 
the world over, drink Ovaltine be- 
fore baby comes and in the nursing 
period. Ovaltine supplies Vitamins 
A, B, D and G, Calcium, Phos- 
phorus and Iron and other essen- 
tial food-elements. 

Thus it helps to round out your 
diet and insure better growth in 
your child. 

In addition, Ovaltine is very 
easy to digest and has other advan- 
tages. Add it to your diet before 
your baby is born and while you 
are nursing him. (Use with either 
plain or evaporated milk.) 



■ Ed. A. Keller & Co., Ltd., Dept. 20-1 I 
I 178 Juan Luna, Manila . 

■ Please send a trial tin of OvatHne. I J 
I enclose P. 10 to cover handling and I 
| mailing. | 

J Name J 

I Address I 

I _ I 

■^^own j 



2 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



December, 1939 




Whitens 

The Skin, Secretly and Quickly 

La Crema Bella Aurora is a won- 
derful skin bleach. Your mirror 
will truthfully tell you of its beau- 
tifying virtues. After the use of a 
single jar you will have a lighter- 
toned complexion and a lovelier 
and softer-textured skin so desired 
by all women who give thought to 
facial charm. 

Removes C Whitens 
Freckles J The Skin 




to Constitution regarding reelection of President of 
Philippines, restoration of Senate, creation of Elec- 
toral Commission, and increase in salaries of legis- 
lators. 

Oct. 24. — Country holds plebiscite on incor- 
poration of terms of new Economic Adjustment 
Act into Ordinance appended to Constitution. 
President Quezon calls extra session of Assembly 
on November 2 to canvass returns. By executive 
order he also invests Emergency Control (anti- 
profiteering) Board with power to issue subpoenas, 
examine books, etc., and directs it to inquire into 
supply, distribution, and prices of "foods, clothing, 
fuel, fertilizers, chemicals, building materials, im- 
plements, machinery, equipment, and other articles 
of prime necessity, both imported and locally 
manufactured". 

Ocr. 25. — Malacafian announces that though 
Vice-President Osmefla resigned as Secretary of 
Public Instruction, he did not cease to be member 
of Cabinet and as Vice-President is its Vice-Chair- 
man, presiding at its sessions in absence of the 
President. 

Ocr. 26. — President Quezon at state dinner in 
honor of High Commissioner states that if he knows 
views of High Commissioner on Philippine inde- 
pendence, they are one and united in intention to 
see Tydings-McDuffie program through not only 
because they personally believe in it but because 
they think it their duty to execute it. Nevertheless, 
he states, he would "not discourage, much less 
prevent Filipinos who see dangers in independence, 
from stating their views, as question of independence 
in light of new world events has not been discussed. 
Turn in world events which has made small nations 
victims of stronger ones has created doubt in minds 
of some as to whether Philippines might not go 
through same experience". He gives High Com- 
missioner high praise and states he is not one of 
those Americans who favor scuttling Philippines to 
get rid of American responsibility and that he lent 
strong support to Economic Readjustment Act 
against apparently unsurmoun table odds. High 
Commissioner responds, offering cooperation in 
common task of faithfully carrying out independence 
program and solving mutual problems. He 
states he was able to work shoulder to shoulder 
with President Quezon and later with Vice-President 
Osmefla in Washington and that he believes same 
team-work will not be hard to duplicate here. He 
praises Quezon as a true, beloved, and enlightened 
leader of his people and states the program of Que- 
zon's administration has been upheld by Congress. 

President Quezon orders increase of domestic 
sugar quota from 95,000 to 150,000 tons with view 
to lowering price and increasing domestic consump- 
tion; move has been long advocated by planters but 
opposed by centrals; rice has risen from P6.00 to 
5P7.50 a picul since European war began. 

Supreme Court denies petition of Levy Hermanos, 
Inc., French-controlled corporation, seeking to 



compel Sheriff of Occidental Negros to issue deed of 
sale of 7 parcels of agricultural land purchased at 
public auction after foreclosing of mortgage on 
ground that Philippines is neither a state nor or- 
ganized territory of United States and that com- 
mercial treaty of 1853 between United States and 
France is not applicable to Philippines. Corporation 
held that its right to own land in Philippines is 
recognized by this treaty. 

Six new planes reported delivered to Philippine 
Army last week, bringing total to 29; 12 more are 
due for delivery next month. 

Empress of Japan, British liner, arrives in 
Manila armed with 4 and 6-inch guns and with 
port-holes shrouded; purser refuses to give out 
usual passenger list. 

Ocr. 27. — High Commissioner Sayre in press 
conference reaffirms his stand for extension but 
gradual elimination of trade preferences after in- 
dependence and states this would not violate any 
treaties or trade agreements but does run counter 
to present trade policy of United States to encourage 
elimination of trade barriers throughout world. 
He states preferential treatment of Cuba was based 
on historical factors and geographical propinquity 
and that some members of Congress had brought 
up the point of granting similar permanent con- 
cessions to Philippines; he declines, however, to 
make statement as to probable attitude of majority 
of Congress as to this. 

Reported Philippines has held fifth position among 
customer countries of United States for first 6 months 
of year. 

Ocr. 31. — President Quezon issues executive 
order creating National Defense Department with 
offices in Malacafian charged with duty of supervising 
national defense program and with executive super- 
vision over Philippine Army, Bureau of Aeronautics, 
Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey, Philippine 
Nautical School, and over establishment and oper- 
ation of all radio stations other than those main- 
tained by Bureau of Posts. He also orders conso- 
lidation of harbor police agencies under authority 
of Collector of Customs. 

Nov. 1. — President Quezon administers oath of 
office to Secretary Sison and states that creation of 
Department shows "we are going ahead with our 
preparations for independent existence". He says 
Philippines, however, can not overlook lessons of 
the present and that there is "no assurance that 
Philippines may not become victim of aggression 
even if we arm every man in our country. But we 
are going ahead with preparation within limitations 
of our resources, for if we are to be independent, 
we must assume responsibility of defending our- 
selves against external aggression. . . . Under In- 
dependence Act, President of United States is au- 
thorized and requested to open negotiations with 
foreign powers with view to securing neutralization 
of Philippines. . . . Four years have now elapsed 
since inauguration of government of Commonwealth, 
and it seems to me that time is ripe for taking steps 
toward neutralization of Philippines. Let me not 
give impression I place full reliance on agreement of 
neutralization. . . . International treaties during 
last few years have been violated again and again, 
and it is not inconceivable that neutrality of Philip- 
pines if achieved, will be violated. Nevertheless, 
it may prove important factor in preserving in- 
tegrity of our country. We shall have obligation 
to perform if our country is neutralized and that is 
obligation to defend that neutrality. The powers 
called upon to sign treaty of neutralization would 
be more willing to enter such pact if they know that 
we will not depend exclusively on their strength, 
ability, or willingness to defend us because we have 
our own forces to maintain our neutrality. ..." 

High Commissioner and Mrs. Sayre, on occasion 
of All Saints' Day observance, lay wreath on grave 
of child of President and Mrs. Quezon. 

Nov. 3. — At dinner in honor of Vice-President 
Osmefla, President Quezon traces briefly history of 
Philippine politics, emphasizing disastrous effect 
of two-party government and again pleading for 
amity. President Quezon appoints joint executive 
and legislative committee to survey school system. 
In addition to regular appropriation of Pi 7,000,000, 
additional outlays of PI, 700,000 and later of P2,- 
500,000 were authorized, and this not being enough 
a further appropriation of PI, 600,000 is under 
consideration. 

Assembly passes resolution certifying result of 
plebiscite and adjourns. With only Cagayancillo, 
Palawan, unheard from, total number of "yes" 
votes was 1,393,452 and of "no" votes, 49,633. 

Assem. Pedro Sabido resigns seat in Assembly to 
assume position of President and General Manager 
of new Government Abaca and Other Fibers Cor- 
poration, objects of which are to improve products, 
lower costs of production, encourage cooperative 
selling, and if necessary buy hemp directly from 
farmers for export. 

Nov. 6. — Secretary to the President Jorge B. 
Vargas tells press government is willing to furnish 
carromata drivers with auto-calesas to get horses 
off Manila streets; estimated outlay would be return- 
ed in taxes within a few years. 

Ifov. 8. — "Philippine Committee for Japanese 
Embargo", composed of representatives of Friends 
of China, Youth League of Philippines, League for 
Defense of Democracy and Collective Security, and 
Chinese Y.M.C.A., submits petition to High Com- 
missioner Sayre, accompanied by albums containing 
pictures of Sino- Japanse conflict, signed by more than 
48,000 people who viewed pictures at exhibition 
held in Manila last August, asking Congress to 
declare embargo on "shipment of war commodities 
to Japanese aggressors in Far East", the petition 
also citing Japanese threat against Philippines. 
Organizers claim millions of signatures could have 



NEW SHIPMENT JUST ARRIVED 

100% Factory Rebuilt Underwood, Royal, REMINGTON, 
typewriters. Heyer Mimeograph Machines Supplies. 

The latest crea- 
tion in speed and 
accuracy — at a 
moderate price. 

Leading a new 
line of Stencil 
Duplicators to 
cover the low 
price field, the ECONOMY MODEL "C" Lettergraph 
shown above is equipped to automatically feed post cards, 
half sheets and letter and legal size paper. 




MODEL 



FACTORV 
REMANUFACTURED^SS 

UNDERWOOD] 

New machine performance and ap- 
pearance. •CHROMIUM PLATED 
ports • EYE-EASE keyboard •Non- 
Glare front panel AH the superioc, 
qualities for which the Underwood is 

j famous. FULLY GUARANTEED. 

| jCgmeJri and see it 



SAVE 

40 



Ask for a demonstration at our 
OFFICE EQUIPMENT 
display room. 

ATTRACTIVE DISCOUNTS TO DEALERS 

Philippine Education 
Co., Inc. 

(Exclusive Distributors) 
ESCOLTA Tel. 2-35-37 MANILA 



X" XX X XJ X X~ X X A"* U ATA A~» VJi *» A A ■» M^m 



been obtained if systematic effort had been made. 
Sayre indicates to press he will transmit petition, 
but refuses to express opinion. 

Charles Summer Banks, well known entomo- 
logist formerly with Bureau of Science and Uni- 
versity of Philippines, dies of asthma complications, 
aged 64; he came to Philippines in 1901 on the 
transport Thomas and never left the Islands even 
for vaction. 

Nov. 10. — President Quezon issues executive 
order listing maximum prices permitted to be charged 
for prime necessities, effective after 48 hours; al- 
lowance is made for transportation costs in areas 
outside Manila. 

At request of Speaker Jose Yulo, President Quezon 
recommends appropriation of Pi, 3 7 1,1 50 to As- 
sembly, newly called into special session, balance 
necessary to open 3,599 extension classes, President 
stating he makes recommendation because people 
has been led to understand government would provide 
money for schools if they provide site and building, 
but that after this he will not recommend such ap- 
propriation unless people in a locality have previous 
consent of Bureau of Education to establishment 
of such schools. He states that because of rapid 
increase in number of schools and teachers since 
inauguration of Commonwealth, Bureau of Educa- 
tion has been forced to employ teachers of lower 
academic and professional qualifications and that 
as this is unfair to children and wasteful of public 
funds, he has instructed authorities that teachers 
must have at least high school education and that 
vacations be used for normal instruction. Since 
Commonwealth, 11,836 new teachers have been 
appointed and total new teachers under present 
appropriations will reach 5,835. Assembly puts 
through bill in record time: session opened at 6:45 
P.M. with reading of message and measure was put 
to final (third) vote about 7:00; President signed 
bill in presence of his children at 8:30. 

Nov. 11. — President Quezon caught in traffic jam 
in Manila, for 30 minutes directs traffic himself. 

Nov. 12. — High Commissioner Sayre at Armistice 
Day observance of American Legion, says United 
States stands ready today as in 1917 to defend with 
force of arms if necessary integrity not only of own 
territories but also of fundamental principles of 
international law and respect for pledged word on 
which civilization must be based. 

Nov. 13. — In speech before American Chamber of 
Commerce High Commissioner Sayre contrasts 
policy of economic nationalism with policy of fur- 
thering international trade, stating latter seeks more 
abundant lives for individual personalities and not 
governmental power. He states independence for 
Philippines necessitates far-reaching economic read- 
justments but that new foundations to be laid will be 
more sound and permanent than present highly 
artificial situation. Independence will not mean 
end of Philippine-American trade, nor end cooper- 



ation between Filipinos and Americans. Philip- 
pines "will need again and again the resourcef ulness 
and energy and vision which Americans since days 
of 1898 have freely contributed. In face of such 
need I feel confident that new nation will not fail 
to extend its friendly protection, encouragements, 
and support to such a group of dauntless builders 
as have gathered here under American flag". (See 
editorial in November Philippine Magazine) 

Nov. 14. — Assembly adjourns after adopting 2 
bills implementing Economic Readjustment Act — 
one providing President may allocate export quotas 
to United States and other instituting export tax 
on exports to United States; also another bill sub- 
mitting Reserve Bank Act to President of United 
States for approval, High Commissioner Sayre having 
advised Commonwealth government this would be 
necessary. 

Nov. 15. — President Quezon in extemporaneous 
Commonwealth Day speech on Luneta states he will 
aim during remainder of his term at placing Philip- 
pine retail trade, now largely in hands of Chinese, 
in hands of Filipinos and at organizing Philippine 
agriculture and industry into cooperatives to eli- 
minate unnecessary middle-men. 

United States 

Oct. 15. — Reiterated in high Washington quarters 
that no German request to mediate has been recei- 
ved and that government will ignore informal invi- 
tations. 

Sen. E. Lundeen urges that government demand 
British and French surrender their posessions in 
western hemisphere to United States in payment 
for their defaulted war debts, and Sen. R. R. Rey- 
nolds suggests Britain cede Newfoundland and parts 
of Canada as well; proposals arouse sharp protest. 
Sen. C. Pepper states American republics should 
sink or intern any foreign submarines violating 
Panama Declaration. 

Roger Babson, returning from Far East, states 
in San Francisco that European war is over-empha- 
sized in United States and that what is happening 
in Orient is of vastly more importance to America. 

Oct. 16. — Sen. D. W. Clark accuses Britain of 
selling out Poland to inflame United States against 
Germany and calls Britain "most outstanding exam- 
ple of aggression world has ever known. Trail of 
British empire is built on blood and treachery. Bri- 
tish word of honor is worth no more than Hitler's. . . 
It ill behooves Britain and France to refuse at least 
to treat for peace." Sen. A. Capper states lifting 
arms embargo would be "almost equivalent to decla- 
ration of war". Sen. K. Pittman agrees to amend 
neutrality law to eliminate 90-day credit to belligerent 
nations to ease path for approval of measure. 

Governor C. L. Olson of California commutes 
sentence of W. K. Billings, codefendant with T. J. 



Mooney, granted pardon earlier this year. 

Ocf. 17. — Sen. G. M. Gillette states cash and 
carry provisions in proposed new neutrality bill 
would be direct blow to China; states United States 
is vitally concerned in Orient and should consider 
possible effect there of any legislation. Sen. W. R 
Austin tells press loopholes in proposed legislation 
would prevent discrimination against China. 

Executive group of inter-governmental committee 
reports in Washington that plans have been per- 
fected for starting almost immediate settlement of 
European political refugees in Philippines, Domini- 
can Republic, and Haiti; other sites in Rhodesia and 
British Guiana are still being studied. 

Oct. 18. — President Roosevelt sends message to 
Stockholm Conference stating United States joined 
with other governments of American republics in 
expressing support of principles of neutrality and 
order under law "for which nations represented at 
Stockholm Conference throughout their history 
have taken consistent stand". 

Senate Foreign Relations Committee accepts in 
principle plan to modify American shipping restric- 
tions in neutrality bill permitting traffic between 
American and belligerent ports in other than combat 
areas. 

Oct. 20. — Sen. A. W. Barkley, majority Floor 
Leader, states cash-and-carry provision in neutrality 
bill "involves greatest sacrifice a nation ever made 
in history of mankind in order to avoid war". Sen. 
Austin states, "It is necessary for purpose of promot- 
ing peace and security of United States that allies 
win European war"; statement precipitates fur- 
ious debate, drawing criticism especially from 
isolationists. 

Former President Herbert Hoover proposes that 
United States prohibit sale of bombing planes and 
submarines but permit sale of light pursuit planes 
to be used in defending civilian population. He 
states dictatorship would immediately follow in 
United States after a declaration of war, which 
would continue for a generation, if not forever. 

Oct. 19. — President Roosevelt issues proclama- 
tion banning belligerent submarines from United 
States waters unless they have suffered some acci- 
dent, in which case they must proceed on surface; 
flying their national flags, and depart in same manner; 
proclamation does not define United States terri- 
torial waters. 

Associated Press reports that "officials" in Wash- 
ington say Ambas. J. Grew's speech in Tokyo 
faithfully represented view of American government. 

Oct. 22. — Sen. W. E. Borah in radiocast attacks 
Marquis of Lothian, new British Ambassador, for 
his bold denouncement of existing Neutrality Act 
and states powerful British influences are trying to 
draw United States into war; he declares "issue in 
Europe is territory and political power and not 



your peso goes farther 

Since 1929, at the dawn of the mining age in the Philippines, Marsman Trad- 
ing Corporation has been actively engaged in the marketing of mining equipment. 

Our experience with the leaders of the mining industries has been exception- 
ally complete exceptionally successful. 

Founded in 1929, just at the beginning of the great era of Philippine Mining 
Expansion, Marsman Trading Corporation (then the merchandising dept. of Mars- 
man & Co.) has taken part in every phase and aspect of that growth. For more 
than a decade it has been our privilege to be associated with the mining leaders 
of the Philippines. In that time we have gained an intimate relationship, an in- 
timacy born of devoted service. Above all we have made it our business to specialize 
in the art of supplying the proper equipment for every need, of servicing clients after 
every purchase, of giving the most value for the money. 

Your peso goes farther in Marsman Trading equipment. 

MARSMAN TRADING CORP. 

MANILA BAGUIO PARACALE SURIGAO 



484 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



December, 1939 



Nazism which had no better friend since coming 
into power than the government of Britain". 

Col. Theodore Roosevelt states in Pittsburgh that 
United States can not retain responsibility without 
authority in Philippines and that Islands should be 
given up. "We have already given country internal 
autonomy and can not unscramble scrambled eggs." 

Oct. 23. — Earl Browder, head of Communist 
Party, is indicted in New York on charges of filing 
false passport applications in 1937 and 1938. 

U. S. District Court of Seattle approves sale of 
S. S. Madison of American Mail Line to Filipino 
capitalists headed by Assem. Jose Cojuangco for 
P700,000 cash; ship has been idle for past few years. 

Zane Grey, novelist, dies of heart-attack at Pasa- 
dena, California, aged 64. 

Oct. 24. — Senate approves amendment to neu- 
trality bill permitting American merchant ships to 
sail to practically all belligerent ports except those 
in European war zone; Senate also agrees to exempt 
all goods carried to certain designated areas, includ- 
ing Canada, from provisions of bill which would 
require transfer of title on exported goods; the con- 
troversial 90-day credit provision is removed. 

Ocr. 24. — American freighter City of Flint re- 
ported captured by German warship Emden in North 
Atlantic and brought to Murmansk, Russia, Amer- 
ican Ambass. L. Steinhardt asks Foreign Commis- 
sariat in Moscow for particulars as it is still unknown 
what happened to crew. Ship was on way from 
New York to Manchester with cargo of tractors, 
leather, grain, and fruit. Russians reported to have 
detained ship and interned 18 German seamen 
aboard. 

Oct. 25. — State Department discloses that Europ- 
ean belligerents have detained 21 American ships 
since September 1, most of them being held for only 
a few days. 

Russian Ambassador in Washington informs State 
Department crew of Flint is safe aboard vessel and 
Germany informs Department that it is discussing 
question with Russia. Russian spokesman states 
German prize crew has been released from intern- 
ment but that ship is being held for time being for 
"verification of nature of cargo". 

Oct. 26. — Secretary of State Cordell Hull says 
he will demand that Russia release Flint and its 
cargo to its American crew. 

Security Commissioner Paul V. McNutt states 
in New York speech that "if it is considered judg- 
ment of majority of American people that we should 
get out of Far East, then let us get out, lock, stock 
and barrel . . . but such exit would mean abandon- 
ment of 3 principles — Open Door to China, territo- 
rial integrity of China, and freedom of seas and air; 
America also would lose voice in Oriental diplomacy. 
If decision be to remain, it would be proper and 
logical to stay in Philippines where we have perfect 
right to be by conquest, by purchase, and I have 
every reason to believe, by invitation if and when 
we give any indication that such invitation would be 
accepted". He repeats Philippines should be allowed 
all autonomy absorbable, United States retaining 
control of foreign affairs, immigration, tariff, cur- 
rency, and public debt. 

Ocr. 27. — Senate after 4 weeks' debate passes bill 
revising Neutrality Act by vote of 63 to 30; bill 
repeals arms embargo, forbids American ships from 
trading with Or carrying passengers to belligerent 
ports except those distant from war zone, allows 
cash-and-carry sales of munitions to belligerents, 
prohibits American merchant ships from carrying 
anything but small arms, forbids Americans to 
solicit subscriptions or receive contributions for 
belligerent nations except for purposes of relieving 
suffering, and authorizes President to regulate use 
of American ports by belligerents. 



American Ambassador in Moscow informs State 
Department Flint has been "assigned" to Germany 
and ordered to leave Nurmansk "in same status that 
it entered the port". 

Ocr. 28. — State Department reported irritated 
by conflicting Russian and German statements and 
inability of American Ambassador to communicate 
with American crew of Flint. 

Oct. 29. — German Foreign Office informs Amer- 
ican Ambassador it has no information about Flint 
but believes ship is running British blockade on way 
to some German port. 

Ocf. 31. — President Roosevelt in Thanksgiving 
Day proclamation asks people to offer thanks "for 
hope that lives within us of coming of eventual world 
peace". 

Norwegian report states Flint, convoyed by 
armed German merchantmen, sailed from Tromsoe 
yesterday. American government reported to have 
asked British and German governments to avoid 
exposing American crew to unnecessary danger. 

Nov. 1. — President Roosevelt evidently in reply 
to Foreign Commissar V. Molotov's charge of Amer- 
ican "meddling", releases text of message to him 
from Premier M. Kalinin of April 16 sent at time 
Roosevelt urged Hitler to preserve peace for 10 years: 
"May I express profound sympathy for your noble 
appeal? You may rest assured your initiative finds 
most ardent response in hearts of people of Soviet 
Union." He discloses to press plans for expansion 
of Pacific Coast navy yards and proposal to build 
up steel industry there through use of cleap water- 
power. 

Rep. J. W. McCormack demands recall of Amer- 
ican Ambassador to Moscow as protest against 
Molotov's charge that repeal of arms embargo is 
"violation of international law". 

State Department spokesman, commenting on 
President Quezon's statement, says no steps nave 
yet been taken toward negotiation of treaty of neu- 
tralization of Philippines and declines to say whether 
present is considered propitious time. He states 
such proposal has not been formally presented to 
Washington and that under Tydings-McDuffie Law, 
President of United States has broad discretion as 
to when to initiate such negotiations. However, 
such pact has not been seriously considered here in 
recent years because of unstable Far Eastern situa- 
tion and world-wide break-down of treaty structures. 

Nov. 3.— Congress adjourns after House passes 
new neutrality measure, 243 to 181, the margin 
being 3 times what had been expected, interpreted 
as dramatic endorsement of Roosevelt foreign po- 
licy. President tells press he is "very glad" and 
that measure "restores historic position of neutrality 
of United States". He states Declaration of Pa- 
nama creating neutral zone around western hemis- 
phere is now in force. Understood United States 
will patrol north Atlantic and north Pacific; Brazil 
Uruguay, and Argentine east coast of South Amer- 
ica; Chile and Ecuador west coast. State Depart- 
ment spokesman says this does not imply force will 
be used. 

Rep. L. Kocialkowski, Chairman of Insular Af- 
fairs Committee, states he is sure President Quezon's 
views represent attempt to make secure the long- 
range welfare of Philippines, but that it is "obvious 
fantasy at present moment to consider neutralization 
pact when shells are exploding in every direction 
and that Philippines would certainly not feel safe 
in assurances of powers whose armies are on the 
march". 

Reported Norwegian government interned German 
prize crew of Flint for twice violating Norwegian 
neutrality and set ship free. Berlin spokesman 
states this is "exceptionally unfriendly act." 

Nov. 4. — President Roosevelt signs Neutrality 
Act. 



Nov. 5. — President Roosevelt issues proclamations 
revoking September arms embargo proclamations 
and declaring state of war to exist between Germany 
on one hand and France, Poland, United Kingdom, 
Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Union of South 
Africa, and India on other; defining combat zones 
which American merchant ships may not enter; 
establishing priority commission to prevent British 
and French war-orders from interfering with Amer- 
ican defense program; reiterating "moral embargo" 
on shipments of planes and bombs to nations making 
practice of bombing civilian centers; and forbidding 
use of United States ports and territorial waters 
by belligerent submarines. One proclamation reiter- 
ates non-recognition of conquest of Poland. Amer- 
ican ships may not proceed to any port in United 
Kingdom, France, or Germany, or to Ireland, Nor- 
way south of Bergen, Sweden, Denmark, Holland, 
Belgium, and Baltic ports; neutral ports in Mediter- 
ranean and Black Seas as well as belligerent and 
neutral ports in Pacific and Indian Oceans, and all 
ports south of Canaries in Africa, are open. 

Nov. 6. — State Department announces that Am- 
bassador Grew, denying press reports, has informed 
Department by telegraph he made no threats of 
economic sanctions either in substance or tone in his 
conversation with Foreign Minister Nomura. Pitt- 
man states "Japan's entire attitude in China has 
been in total disregard of rights of United States 
and other countries. It must be remembered that 
governments can retaliate against wrongs without 
going to war; economic retaliation by a great power 
like United States may be more effective than 
battles." Unless American- Japanese relations im- 
prove before expiration of trade treaty in January, 
Congress will undoubtedly enact his resolution em- 
powering President to embargo all exports to Japan, 
he states. 

Norwegian Admiralty rejects German protest 
against seizure of Flint stating it declined Germany's 
request ship be held pending negotiations as contrary 
to its neutrality and revealing that commander of 
prize-crew disregarded Norwegian orders to proceed 
because he had received orders from Germany to 
remain at Haugesund; claim that sick American 
crew member needed sanctuary was proved untrue 
by Norwegian physician's inspection. Reported 
Flint will return to United States with full cargo in 
compliance with Neutrality Law. 

Nov. 7. — Hull objects to proposed transfer of 8 
United States Line ships to Panamanian registry 
as contrary to spirit if not letter of Neutrality Act 

Nov. 8. — U. S. Maritime Commission reports to 
President that transfer of American ships to Pana- 
manian registry would not violate Neutrality Act. 
Standard Oil Company of New Jersey states that 6 
of its tank-ships were transferred to Panamanian 
registry during past 6 weeks. 

A. J. Dimond, Alaska delegate to Congress, urges 
increasing Alaskan fortifications. "If Russia and 
Japan ever move, they won't try to cross 4000 miles 
of ocean and crack strong Hawaii defenses, but pick 
Alaska to get foothold in western hemisphere". 

Washington Post states President Quezon's rem- 
arks on neutralization of Philippines constitute 
"trial balloon for something else, namely continua- 
tion of link between United States and Philippines 
after 1946" and advocates re-examination. New 
York Times comments similarly but adds that 
"having proposed unqualified freedom, United States 
government can scarcely propose something less 
complete". 

State Department official with reference to Philip- 
pine petition for arms embargo of Japan states Amer- 
ican government does not give legal sponsorship to 
boycott movements but that there is nothing to 
prevent private groups from organizing them. 

(Continued on page 515) 



The Incomparable 
in Taste — 
Quality 

and refreshing goodness — 

fanlTligtitl 

brewed by the 

San Miguel Brewery 

famed for high quality brews 





December, 1939 



r 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



485 



Believing that the Philippine Magazine 
fulfills the need of an independent 
monthly devoted to Filipino and Amer- 
ican interests and to cultural develop- 
ment in the Philippines, and that such 
a publication should be supported by 
all, we donate this page. Having 
nothing to advertise, however, this 
firm prefers to remain anonymous. 



486 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



December, 1939 




THE BUILDING OF THE PHILIPPINE NATION 



!Z7/i£ (invasion of Jlimakoncj 



HARDLY had the Spaniards established themselves 
in Manila, when on November, 1574 a large fleet 
of 62 Chinese warships entered the Bay. This fleet was 
under the command of Limahong, the corsair. Next in 
command was Sioco, a Japanese captain. In this expedi- 
tion were 3,000 men and a large number of women who 
were to form the nucleus of' a new Chinese settlement 
in the country. 

In 1574 Sioco led the first attack of the invaders 
with 700 men during which encounter Goiti was killed. 
The invaders were driven back and Manila was saved. 
Failing in an attempt to stir up a Filipino revolution 
against the Spanish government, Limahong settled at 
Lingayen. Here he was surprised by 2,500 Filipinos and 
250 Spaniards under the leadership of Salcedo. The 



Chinese fortifications were captured and Limahong's 
fleet destroyed. This broke the pirate's power. 

Like the old heroes who repulsed the piratical 
Limahong and preserved the Philippines for future 
Filipino generations, so likewise, the Filipinas Life As- 
surance Company has been shielding its policyholders 
against the attacks of the pirates of the body and spirit. 
Filipinas helps make your life free from financial worry, 
free from want in old age, and gives protection to your 
family at a time when it is most needed. A Filipinas 
Life policy enables you to build immediately an estate 
for your family and at the same time accumulate enough 
money to retire on when no longer able to work. There 
is a Filipinas Life underwriter in your community. Ask 
him to explain our plan for making life more happy 
and secure. 



Editorials 



It may be taken for granted that the Com- 
mon wealth Government, in what has been called ^NTN 

its program of "nationaliz- 
Nationalization ing the retail trade" of the fijlk 
of the Retail Trade country, would not wish to mfc$ 

take any steps that would 
contravene treaties which the United States has entered 
into with foreign nations. Yet that the Government 
should begin an effort to put an end|to the anomalous 
situation in which it is said as much as eighty per cent of 
the retail trade is in the hands of aliens, mostly Chinese, 
and, latterly, Japanese, is nothing less than a duty of those 
who have been entrusted with the management of govern- 
mental functions. 

Such a move is not at all to be interpreted as one hostile 
to respected foreign merchants here who have for so long — 
as indeed their predecessors have for centuries — played an 
important part in the economy of the country. 

In considering the questions that arise in connection with 
this problem, it is necessary to take into consideration the 
fact that the Chinese have been for hundreds of years in 
virtual control of retail trade throughout the whole of 
Malaysia and the Pacific islands. The Chinese are ad- 
mittedly superlative traders, enterprising and fearless, 
often going to undeveloped and even savage regions where 
no other trader would dare to go, self-denying and thrifty, 
content with the smallest profit. As such they have been 
valuable agents of civilization and social progress. 

But this is not the whole story. The region of the world 
referred to has long been a colonial area in which the native 
peoples themselves exercised no or very little control over 
their own affairs. And despite oppressive regulations at 
times enforced against the Chinese and the perpetration 
even of occasional massacres of these ubiquitous traders, 
the various colonial governments always found it advan- 
tageous in the long run to cooperate with them. As one 
writer put it (A. Vandenbosch: "The Dutch East Indies", 
1933): 

4 *They|[thejChinese] asked only for the opportunity of improving 
their economic position, and in this they met with no opposition from 
the Dutch, for the Dutch found their presence necessary for the ex- 
ploitation of the islands. Their interests complemented each other as 
the Chinese served as the trade intermediaries between the natives 
and the Dutch." 

In the Philippines, after the various decrees of banish- 
ment, the Chinese were always invited to return again "as 
the private interests of the officials did not happen to coin- 
cide with those of the Creole traders; the consequence was 
that the Chinese soon streamed back again in incredible 
numbers". So wrote Feodor Jagor iin his "Travels in the 
Philippines" (1873). He went on: 

"The [Spanish] colony certainly could not maintain its position with 
out the 'Sangleys', who came annually in great numbers in the junks 
from China, and spread all over the country and in the towns as shop- 



keepers, artisans, gardeners, and fishermen: besides which 
I^Jl^ they were the only skillful and industrious workers, as the 
\g jfa Filipinos under the priestly domination had forgotten alto- 
f £jjmk gether many trades in which they had engaged in former 
MmM times." 

The activities of the natives! were everywhere 
restricted to working the soil. They were pur- 
posely kept in a stage of practical peonage. In the Phil- 
ippines, wrote Regidor and Mason ("Commercial Pro- 
gress in the Philippine Islands", 1905): 

"In the early period of Spanish sovereignty, the authorities at 
Madrid had decreed that no Filipino could be held liable for the 
repayment of any loan above twenty-five dollars, which restriction 
was evaded later on by securing the loans by mortgage. The ori- 
ginal intention of the law was to protect the natives from falling 
into the hands of rapacious money-lenders, but in practice the sys- 
tem became tyrannous." 

It is obvious that the native peoples everywhere in Ma- 
laysia had very little chance in trade against the virtual 
monopolies, at least semi-organized, which were established 
by the Chinese and more or less overtly backed by the 
various imperialist governments. 

It may be true, as has often been stated, that the genius 
of the Malays does not run to what is called "business", 
that they are too "indolent, pleasure-loving, and impro- 
vident", but such subjective judgments are worth very 
little. Racial psychologies, if such there be, are not easily 
analyzed and such broad generalizations are usually as 
inaccurate and misleading as they are easy to make. The 
psychology of a people must in the end be determined 
largely by the conditions of their lives, and environmental 
circumstances usually bring out the necessary aptitudes 
and qualities. While a people naturally would be indolent 
and improvident on some "Eden Isle", if life became more 
difficult for them, hardier qualities would certainly develop. 
Also, as Rizal pointed out, if the "Indios" were "indolent" 
it was because industriousness benefited only their mas- 
ters, and not themselves. 

And even if the Filipinos as a people could never become 
the "natural" traders the Chinese, or some of the Chinese, 
are; if they have, let us say, characteristics that lead the 
generality to other pursuits than the penny-splitting of 
the shopkeeper, it would be enough if only some of them, 
a few thousand of them, were given an opportunity 
gradually to get a foothold in the retail business. In any 
case, it would still appear self-evident that the least the 
now practically autonomous Philippine Government is in 
duty bound to do, is to see to it that the people whom it 
represents get the encouragement and the protection in 
business in their own country to which they are entitled 
by natural right. 

Who would have said a few score years ago that the 
hermit Japanese were "natural" traders? It is well known 
that it is the Japanese Government which has sent Japanese 
merchants abroad in the Pacific, trained in special schools 
even to the point of how to arrange their show-cases and 

487 



display their goods, backed by aggressive banking houses, 
supported and defended everywhere by their Government. 
^ No autonomous people could tolerate a situation in which 
almost the entire retail trade is in the hands of foreigners, 
especially foreigners who are not to be assimilated; traders 
who their lives long continue to maintain their homes in 
the country they came from; who maintain their own com* 
muni ties, associations, and schools; who obey their own 
local officials, in many cases not even known to the local 
authorities; traders who through the power of their home 
government, if not in sheer numbers and organizations 
are inj^a position to bring dangerous pressure to bear on the 
people among whom they live. 

A distinction should here be made between the Chinese 
andjthe Japanese. The Chinese are not the subjects of an 
imperialistic and aggressive State, at least at the present 
time. They have performed and still perform a most 
important function. They have intermarried with the 
local population to a large extent; a considerable proportion 
of Filipinos, in fact, have Chinese blood and bear Chinese 
names, or names of Chinese derivation, pointing to a long 
and fruitful association that has been of definite benefit 
to the country. 

Yet the Chinese as Chinese should realize that changes 
are taking place in this country that are wholly natural 
under the circumstances. They will haye to reconcile 
themselves to a trend which will reduce the importance of 
their position in the retail trade at least relatively; not 
necessarily absolutely. They would do well to take this 
in good grace and to adopt only such attitudes as conform 
to the general rightful policy of the Government. 

The Government, on the other hand, should recognize 
that a situation that has existed for centuries can not be 
abruptly altered.. It would make a serious mistake in 
attempting to change the existing economy too rapidly. 
The general aim should never be lost sight of, but progress 
toward it should be through a general policy rather than 
through a set program. There should be no attempt at 
dispossession, no injustice, no discrimination even. All 
the people of a country are entitled to the equal protection 
of the law. A negative policy could only do harm, seriously 
disrupting the country's economic and social life and dis- 
turbing relations with neighboring countries. 

The policy must be the positive one of encouraging 
native enterprise rather than discouraging foreign enter- 
prise. This can be done through the organization of coop- 
eratives, extension of credits, and, most important, through 
education, preparation, training. The matter is not simply 
one of organization and credit, but involves aptitudesi 
training, and experience. Millions of pesos might easily 
be wasted in an unsuccessful attempt to establish unsuit- 
able people in the retail business. The whole movement 
might easily degenerate into what is often contemptuously 
characterized as "politics", for the aggrandizement and 
profit of a few at the cost of all. 

Furthermore, the movement should be pushed forward 
persistently* but cautiously, and without undue advertise- 
ment, taking care *iot to arouse bitter resentment and 
resistance on the one side and prejudice and antagonism 
and the spirit of injustice on the other. The whole matter 
should be looked upon as a major problem of statesmanship 

488 



not to be lightly undertaken and completely solved in a 
few years' time. 

The informing spirit should be the determination to 
provide opportunity for the native, not to dis- 
criminate against the alien. The foreigners among us 
of this generation, particularly the Chinese, are in no wise 
personally responsible for the existing situation, are only 
intent on making an honest living like any good citizen, 
and constitute together one of the most useful elements 
in the population. 

If the trouble between Russia and Finland 
is the result of a calculated effort on the part pP^^^^ 

of Britain and Fran - '^^^^ ^ 
Russia and Finland ; ce to create a diver- J^^BL- 
Defense or Conquest? sion, directing world ^WJP^ 

attention from the 
half-hearted "European War" — which no one wants to 
fight — and centering it upon the "Russian Bolshevik me- 
nace", with the further aim of enlisting American sympa- 
thy in a possible moral if not military offensive against the 
Soviet Union, the effort, to judge by the world press, 
seems to be succeeding. Washington officials, however, 
have, after the first few days, begun to show a little 
more caution. 

What should lead to earnest thought, is the fact that 
those who are now among the loudest condemners of Russia, 
besides Britain and France, of course, are such powers jas 
Italy and Japan — Italy, which besides destroying Ethiopia, 
only a few months ago ravaged Albania; and Japan, whose 
armed forces have made large sections of China their war- 
ground and killed Chinese, non-combatants as well as 
combatants, by the hundreds of thousands. 

^Russia's air radis of Helsingfors and a few other points 
along the Finland border by groups of five or six warplanes, 
when it could have sent great air fleets, and all its other 
measures so far, are indicative of a restraint hardly to be 
expected from a power engaged in warfare without a limit- 
ed objective. 

Though the Finns are giving a brave account of them- 
selves in the resistance to their powerful antagonist, the 
Finnish Government, reconstituted only a day or two after 
the onset of the Russian attack, has already attempted to 
open peace negotiations. Why, then, that stubborn oppo- 
sition to the Russian demands, which from so small a coun- 
try, faced by such overwhelming odds, was, on the face 
of it, so hopeless, not to say foolhardy? 

The answer can only be that advanced in the first para- 
graph of this editorial. The Finnish Government served 
as a cat's-paw. The Government of the Soviet Union 
must have been well aware of the situation and of the effect 
that the action it finally took after weeks of unsuccessful 
negotiation, was likely to have on world opinion and the 
shaping of world forces, and must also have had reason to 
relegate these considerations to secondary position. 

It is easy enough to condemn the course of Russia out- 
right, despite the fact that one thus finds himself joining 
in a chorus in which the voices of other and far more con- 
firmed aggressors ring high and shrill. It is, in fact, difficult 
not to join in the general chorus, whether sincere or not, 
raised against this new act of aggression by a great power 
against a small nation. 

Yet those who oppose aggression on principle, need not 



by any compulsion of logic or fairmindedness, condemn 
every and all resort to force by one nation against another. 
Even aggression itself is, by definition, "a first or unpro- 
voked attack", "the first act of injury or first act leading 
to war or controversy", and there is always room for argu- 
ment, valid or specious, as to whether an act of supposed 
aggres3ion is actually the first, or an unprovoked, act. But 
there is no need, and the writer has indeed no desire, to fall 
back on what might be considered quibbling. There 
never was a time when frank and unequivocal expression 
of opinion was more necessary. 

With far greater justice than in the case of Japan in 
Manchuria, for one example, may the Russian action 
against Finland be looked upon as a strategically necessary 
preventive measure. The chief concessions Russia asked 
were that Finland cede, in exchange for certain Russian 
territory, a Finnish area lying in closest proximity to th* 
important Russian port city, Leningrad, which alone cont- 
ains a population almost half as large as the population of 
the whole of Finland; and that it agree to the lease or pur- 
chase by Russia of a number of strategically situated islands 
in the Gulf of Finland as naval bases, this Gulf being vir- 
tually an inland Russian sea. Russia also asked for certain 
concessions in the Far North for the safe-guarding of the 
important Russian Arctic port, Murmansk, and the highly 
strategic railroad that runs south from there. Russia 
made demands of a similar nature on Estonia, Latvia, and 
Lithuania in recent months, which were accepted without 
great delay or protest. 

It should be remembered that all these present-day 
nominally independent states were before the World War 
parts of Czarist Russia, constituting important sections 
of its coastline in the Baltic Sea and the Arctic Ocean. 

It is also important to recall that during the World War, 
the Allies maintained a military front in northern Russia 
through 1918 and 1919 (the year after the armistice), the 
Archangel sector protecting Finland's flank and this enab- 
ling the Finnish armies to hold the Bolshevist troops based 
on Petrograd (now Leningrad) in check. Recognition and 
assistance from the Allies started Finland on its national 
career. Invaded earlier in the War by a German force, 
the Russo-German Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, signed on 
March 3, 1918, had confirmed Finland's "independence", 
though four days later, on March 7, Finland signed a treaty 
with Germany making it Germany's ally and vassal. The 
Germans pursued the ulterior aim of securing Finnish 
military cooperation against the Murmansk Railway which 
was guarded by a British expeditionary force, and, accord- 
ing to the Encyclopaedia Britannica: 

"The claim of the [German] liberators upon the gratitude of the 
Finns was assuming the most peremptory forms known to diplomacy 
when, on July 18, the Allied offensive on the West diverted Germany's 
forces. Thus valuable time was gained until the Armistice of Nov- 
ember 11, 1918, orientated Finland towards the democratic regime 
associated with England and America. Scinhufud was succeeded 
on December 12 by Mannerheim as regent, who formed a coalition 
government The German troops, in part mutinous, were con- 

veyed back to Germany. . . . When, at the end of May, 1919, the 
British 237th Brigade. . . reached Lake Onega, Mannerheim offered 
cooperation in return for Petrozavodsk. The offer being declined, a 
Finnish volunteer force nevertheless assaulted the town, but without 
success. Again, at the close of the year, when the White Russian 
General Yudenitsch marched on Petrograd, Mannerheim sounded the 
Allies on Finnish intervention. He received no encouragement from 
Paris or London. ..." 

When the supposedly so clever Joachim von Ribbentrop 
signed away Germany's regained interests in the Baltic 



area, in exchange for what seems to have been nothing in 
particular, it was a foregone conclusion that Russia would 
make an effort to nullify in so far as possible the forced 
break-up of its former territories. The first step was to 
regain military control of the western continental coastal 
areas on the Baltic; the present effort is made with the aim 
of securing better protection of Leningrad and preventing 
the possible bottling up of the Russian fleet in the Gulf of 
Finland. 

A matter that undoubtedly helped to bring the situation 
to a head was the announced intention of Finland, with the 
cooperation of Sweden, to fortify the formerly Russian 
and highly strategic Aaland Islands, at the mouth of the 
Gulf of Finland, to which plan Germany, some months 
ago, "withdrew its objections"! 

But Finland, even if its intentions were Simon-pure, 
unfortunately occupies a dangerous flanking position with 
respect to Russia. The Soviet Government undoubtedly 
visualizes the possibility of the little country being used 
again, with or without its consent, as a base of attack. 
Finnish assurances in this regard were, of course, of little 
practical value. 

The menace of the Finnish position was clearly illustrat- 
ed by the reported sinking of a number of Russian warships 
by Finnish coast defenses during the first few days of the 
fighting; also the report that Russian troops met with 
"unexpected difficulties" in the Karelian Isthmus, just 
north of Leningrad, leads to speculation. 

Who can say that Russia could afford to disregard the 
menace, not of course, of little Finland itself, but of the 
geographical position it unfortunately occupies? 

The whole situation brings up the problem of the rights , 
of great nations versus the rights of small nations. It may 
well be said that a great nation represents not only a great 
political power, but a correspondingly large section of the 
whole of mankind, whose interests naturally have priority 
over those of smaller groups of people on the principle of 
the greatest good for the greatest number. It is a corol- 
lary, however, that the greater power of some nations 
carries with it a greater responsibility to the whole of man- 
kind. 

Certain great powers, such as Britain, France, and the 
United States, have through centuries of history demons- 
trated more or less satisfactorily their worthiness to exercise 
great power in the world; they have developed some sense 
of responsibility to others as well as to themselves, exercised 
at least within the limits set by the competitive system. 
It is for this reason that it rarely occurs to any one to object 
to, say, the control of the Panama Canal by the United 
States, or of the Suez Canal by Britain, or even to British 
possession of such bases as Gibraltar and Singapore. Amer- 
ican and British control of the two great ocean canals of 
the world has not resulted in discrimination against the 
shipping and trade interests of other nations. Control 
of the Mediterranean by Britain has not meant the end 
of Spain or of Italy and many smaller nations. 

The Soviet Union, like Japan, is a new power in the 
world. Japan, favorsd by some success in recent decades, 
has shown no realization of the responsibility of a great 
power to the world at large. It has misused its power and 
brought death and destruction and suffering to millions 
of people. Therefore, even those who would not question 



489 



be right of Russia to establish itself and consolidate its 
K>sition, must look with some anxiety upon its present 
ourse. 

Will Stalin show himself to be the great leader of a great 
>eople, or will he prove to be just another despot, dreaming 
>f world-coxiquest? Are his actions of the past few months 
ustifiable measures of high strategy or do they but mark 
he beginning of an effort to impose his will upon the world 
>y violence, as Hitler, who acted as if small nations have 
io rights at all, essayed to do? 

That this is not the spirit of communism, is not entirely 
eassuring, for as far as the outside world can judge, Stalin 
ippears to be a practically absolute ruler. 



Note — The foregoing was written within the first few days after the outbreak 
»f the fighting. Since then, the munitions and other help sent to Finland, the 
ricky expulsion of the Soviet Union from the League of Nations (Japan and Ita- 

Lwere never expelled; they only resigned in disgruntlement because the League 
pped them on the wrist), the increasing anti-Soviet propaganda all over the 
rorfd — all would seem to prove Russia's justification for taking defensive measures. 



At this Christmas season, like so many in the 
>ast, war on earth, hatred among men, is the sad 
factual antithesis to the glad cry^ 
Christ-mass "Peace on earth, good -will to men". 

"So hallow'd and so gracious is 
lie time — that season wherein our Saviour's birth 
is celebrated", wrote Shakespeare, "that the bird of dawn- 
ing singeth all night long: and then, they say, no spirit 
:an walk abroad: the nights are wholesome: then no planets 
strike, no fairies take, nor witch has power to charm." 

Alas, foul spirits are abroad, the days are full of terror as 




armies strike, and there is weeping instead of song in many 
parts of the world. 

"Christmas", as a word, is derived from Christ and 
Afass — "the sequence of prayers and ceremonies con- 
stituting the commemorative sacrifice of the Body and 
Blood of Christ under the appearances of bread and wine". 
But while priests and the pious generally break the sacred 
bread and drink the wine, the great human sacrifice goes 
on and men's bodies are broken and their blood is shed 
on the battlefields as for thousands of years past. 

Perhaps not until the last syllable of "Christmas" comes 
to connote Christ's spirit inspiring and guiding the masses 
of the people, the great body of mankind, and their leaders 
as well, shall we be able to commemorate a great individual 
sacrifice while not ourselves despairingly in the midst of 
a world holocaust. 

And that time will never come so long as the masses allow 
themselves to be ruled and brought to slaughter through 
the prevailing system of competitive greed that makes 
all wars, and that is yet upheld and extolled by too 
many who profess the name of Christ but serve the 
Antichrist that has the world in its se rpent's coils. 

As Christ, who was born in a stable and who 
lived with nowhere to lay his head, died a crimi 
nal's death because his enemies said he wanted to 
be king, so the masses, disinherited and betrayed, are cru- 
cified by the millions today, though the fear still lives that 
one day they will establish their kingship. Under their 
democratic sovereignty, the world at last would have peace, 
and hallowed and gracious would be that time. 



Manila from the 16th to the 18th Century 

From "Voyage dans les Mers de L'Jnde" (Paris, 1781) 

By M. Le Gentil 

Translated from the o/igihal French 

By Fred C. Fisher 



Of the Political Status of Manila from 1565 to 1775 
(Continued) 

THE Royal Audience, in turn, made itself feared in 
Manila. This tribunal was vested with the right of 
appointing one of its members to govern ad interim 
when the office of Governor was left vacant. This prero- 
gative emboldened the Royal Audience to such a point 
that it laid hands on the person of the Archbishop of Ma- 
nila. This prelate was imprisoned by the Royal Audience 
and at the same time deprived of his archbishopric. The 
affair, which caused a great stir, occurred during the term 
of office of the Governor of whom I have spoken. I do 
not know whether the Governor took part in the affair or 
not, or what the outcome was. 

I find nothing remarkable in the actions of the governors 
who followed. 'They all more or less upheld the name 
which Manila had acquired under the preceding governors. 
Their most important action was to reconquer the provinces 
of Luzon, which rebelled a number of times, and which 
they succeeded in doing without much bloodshed. 

490 



This brings us down to the year 1663. By this time 
Manila had suffered a considerable decline. The Gov- 
ernor who was appointed in 1663 held office only until 
1668. In this year he was arrested and imprisoned by 
order of the Inquisition, the Commissioner Resident in 
Manila having brought a number of charges against him 
concerning his methods of government. In 1669 that un- 
fortunate Governor was sent to Mexico, as a prisoner. He 
died on the way across. The Holy Tribunal of Mexico 
decided that the judgment of the Commissioner of the 
Holy Office in Manila against the Governor was void, 
unjust, and unwarranted. 

Man, wherever he may be, always endeavors to dominate 
and oppress his fellow. I have just shown how the Royal 
Audience imprisoned the Archbishop of Manila and depriv- 
ed him of his office. Now it was a mere Commissioner 
of the Inquisition, an empty-headed Jacobin, who dared 
to lay hands on the Governor, and concoct false charges 
against his enemy to destroy him; for it appears that it was 
by reason of personal hatred against the Governor that this 
Jacobin was led to become his accuser. This affair made 



;uch a stir in Manila that the people were still talk- 
ng about it in my time. The military men were 
>articularly indignant about it; and so were the 
nembers of the Royal Audience, whom I heard 
\ay more than once that such an outrage was 
10 longer possible. It |is important to note 
Jiat the Governor was not arrested for any matter con- 
lected with religion. The result was that the Commis- 
sioner of the Inquisition was driven away, and the office of 
Commissioner of the Holy Office was held for several years 
Dy Agustinian friars. 

By an ordinance of the Court of Spain of April 2, 1664, 
xnfirmed by another of October 22, 1669, whenever there 
vas a vacancy in the office of the Governor of Manila the 
government was to be carried on by the Royal Audience 
mth respect to civil and political matters and by the Senior 
Justice of that Court with respect to military affairs. Thus 
it was that the Royal Audience, which was by no means 
[oath to extend its power, very willingly assumed the powers 
left vacant by the Governor. During this period I perceive 
that Manila was going downhill day by day, until this city, 
which had formerly dominated the whole of the Philippine 
Archipelago and the Moluccas, which had repulsed one of 
the most powerful nations of Europe, and had even humi- 
liated it on more than one occasion in this part of the world, 
now lies prostrate, without strength and without vigour. 

In 1715 the Royal Audience still enjoyed the right of 
carrying on the government whenever the Governor's 
position was left vacant. This power was exercised by it 
for the last time in this year and it was a truly tragic event 
which appears to have been the cause of the change in this 
system — an event which could only have occurred at the 
end of the world, — that is to say, in a place too far from the 
capital to be kept constantly under the eye of the monarch. 

The Governor who came to Manila on August 9, 1717, 
to assume the command of the government had been here 
less than three years when he was murdered in his palace 
on October 11, 1719, together with his son, who was the 
commander of the citadel. I have been unable to ascertain 
what was the cause of this horrible occurrence. All that 
I have been able to learn was that the principal citizens 
of Manila took refuge in the convents. It is not known 
whether the Archbishop was one of the instigators of the 
conspiracy, but it is a singular coincidence that the Gov- 
ernor had arrested that prelate on October 11, the very day 
of the murder. The Governor had foreseen everything. 
As he suspected that something might happen, he had sup- 
plied himself with loaded pistols and muskets. He had 
doubled his guards, but they w«re corrupted as well as the 
halberdiers whose special duty it is to guard the person of 
the governors, for the murderers met no opposition when 
they arrived. The conspirators left the Agustinian con- 
vent in a procession and went directly to the palace. On 
entering they found the unfortunate Governor without 
guards. One of them struck him a blow which stretched 
him on the ground. On hearing him make outcry some 
people came to his assistance; the conspirators were driven 
back and the Governor! was raised from the ground so that 
his wound might be dressed. One of his abominable as- 
sailants, having mingled with the crowd under the pretext 
of assisting those who were carrying the unhappy victim 
away, plunged a dagger into his back, inflicting a mortal 
wound. During all this time a priest was exhorting him 




to prepare for death. The Governor's son was 
at that time in the citadel. Having heard the 
disturbance and having seen a great crowd in 
the street, he mounted his horse and came to 
the assistance of his father; but he arrived too late. 
He was arrested and killed by the first of the 
traitors he met. 

This zealous son made a mistake; his first impulse carried 
him away — he thought of nothing but going to the assistance 
of his father, without reflection as to the best course to 
pursue. If, instead of mounting his horse he had made 
use of the cannon of the citadel he would soon have scat- 
tered that cowardly band, for the guns of the citadel directly 
command the two streets which connect the Agustinian 
convent with the Governor's palace, and also command 
the Governor's palace itself. This would have been the 
only means of overcoming the effect of the conspiracy. 

From the Governor's palace the conspirators went to the 
citadel. The populace joined them and released all the 
people whom the deceased Governor had caused to be im- 
prisoned. They proclaimed the Archbishop as the new 
Governor. The latter pretended to be unwilling, but made 
a show of yielding to insistence. He took the reins 
of power in hand. The dead were buried, and peace 
was restored in Manila. His government continued 
for about two years; but no mention is made during 
this period of the Royal Audience which, nevertheless, as 
we have observed, was legally entitled to assume the powers 
of government during the period of vacancy. So here we 
find Manila in a state of revolt, with an ecclesiastic at the 
head of its civil and political affairs. This rebellion caused 
a great sensation in Madrid. The King sent Don Toribio 
Jose de Cosio y Campa, Marquis of Torre Campo, to Ma- 
nila, where he arrived in 1721. The Archbishop turned the 
government over to him on August 6. Never before had 
Manila received a Governor provided with such a number 
of names! Perhaps his selection was due to this nomen- 
clature, as tending to overawe the rebel city. He was 
vested with great authority and sent out with express 
orders to avenge the death of his predecessor; but he found 
so many difficulties and obstacles in his way that he did 
not dare to attempt to carry out his instructions. Never- 
theless, it was necessary to make a report to the King; and 
in order to avoid the necessity of taking action against the 
murderers, whom he feared, he reported that they were 
dead. This was very easy to do in such a distant country, 
which no one could leave without the permission of the 
Governor and from which it was no less difficult to trans- 
mit information to Europe without his consent. It must 
be confessed that Manila had indeed fallen from her high 
estate. There were no longer any regular troops to sup- 
port an enterprise of that kind which, so to speak, involved 
the subjection of the whole city — a city which had at its 
head a prodigious number of friars. Thus it was that the 
Governor decided to follow the path of prudence, and so 
succeeded in holding his office until 1729. 

The History of the Franciscans highly praises his admin- 
istration, saying that he governed with all requisite saga- 
city and prudence. If he had acted in any other manner, 
he would certainly have been in danger of losing his life; 
or at the very least, he would have been excommunicated. 
I have recounted this occurrence just as it was narrated to 
me in Manila by several persons; for the History of the 

491 



Franciscans it silent concerning its details. I have been 
told that not long ago one of the descendants of the prin- 
cipal murderers was still living in Manila, but in great 
poverty. 

The Governor who came out to Manila in 1729 was the 
bearer of some instructions concerning this affair; but 
nothing came of them. 

The History of the Franciscans terminates with this 
period, the year 1729. 

The Marquis of Obando was the Governor in 1750. It 
is said in Manila that he was an energetic man, and that he 
ruled the city firmly. He re-organized the service of the 
Acapulco galleons. Before his time the Manilans used to 
carry water on the ships in jars or in leather water bags 
which they hung in the rigging. The vessels often ran 
out of water and were obliged to depend on the rains. The 
Marquis of Obando had water tanks made and gave orders 
that a sufficient number should be carried for the whole 
voyage. He organized the crews of the vessels and limited 
each one to his ration. In short the Acapulco trade was 
brought up to the European standard. 

Nevertheless, this Governor, an educated man of excel- 
lent judgment, was of the opinion that the Acapulco trade 
should be abolished as being contrary to the formation of a 
strong colony in the Philippines, and I believe that he was 
right; but he should have included in his plan a reformation 
of the Inquisition and the elimination of the prodigious 
number of friars of the different orders, who have always 
appeared to me to be the greatest obstacle to the success 
of a solid establishment in the Philippines. Senor Arandia 
was the Governor of Manila from 1754 to 1755. He was 
one of the most energetic governors that had ever come to 
Manila, and was still so spoken of in my time. He was a 
man singularly zealous in the service of the King and greatly 
attached to His Majesty's person. It was he who organ- 
ized the military force better than it had ever been before. 
Before his time there was no sort of regimental organiza- 
tion in Manila. The soldiers went about barefooted, badly 
dressed, and poorly paid. Sefior Arandia proposed to the 
Court of Spain that two thousand soldiers should always 
be kept in Manila, organized and equipped as well as Euro- 
pean troops are. To this the King consented. This wise 
and astute Governor, observing what had happened to two 
of his predecessors, of whom one had been imprisoned by 
the Inquisition and another murdered, was mild and ingra- 
tiating as long as he saw that he was not in a position to 
oppose the Manilans successfully. He organized his regi- 
ment without ostentation and gave the military organiza- 
tion the importance it deserved. The soldiers were well 
paid and well cared for. He maintained friendly relations 
with the officers, associated with them exclusively, and 
entertained them frequently as guests at his table. In short, 
as soon as he considered that he was in a position to offer 
resistance to the schemes of his opponents, he changed his 
policy, became firm, and insisted upon the execution of his 
orders. He soon dominated that rebel city. To all this 
must be added the statement that he was an honest and 
incorruptible man. He was the sworn enemy of the 
friars and was soon hated by them; but he could not be 
accused of any act of injustice. He was hated only because 
he was an honest and faithful servant of the King, because 
he could not be bribed, and because he was the enemy of 

4§2 



the friars who had on their side the support of all the city. 
I have been informed of these facts by disinterested persons 
who have always spoken with impartiality. What hap- 
pened to him? He was not murdered; but his death is not 
regarded in Manila as having been a natural one. He died 
in 1759. He was a very vigorous man, but was carried off 
almost suddenly. A post mortem examination was held 
and the surgeon charged with this operation subjected his 
person to indignities. I should not dare to say or even to 
think what I was told, however, which was that a Francis- 
can friar boasted of having poisoned him. 

Governor Arandia was succeeded by the Archbishop of 
Manila, Manuel de Roxo. It was during his incumbency 
that the city was taken by the English. He died of a brok- 
en heart in 1763. The English restored the city to Don 
Simon de Anda y Salazar, the Se,nor Justice of the Royal 
Audience, who had taken a leading part during the war — 
holding the provinces in subjection to the King, as I shall 
relate further on. 

The Court of Spain changed its ancient practises, and 
about this time sent a Lieutenant-Governor to Manila, 
to whom Justice Anda transmitted the wand of office; but 
shortly after that Don Jose Raon was sent to Manila to be 
the Governor there, and Justice Anda returned to Europe 
with the title of Counselor of Castile, which the King con- 
ferred upon him in recognition of his services. I was 
acquainted with Justice Anda. He was a most zealous 
servitor of the King and a very honest man. He con- 
stantly threatened the Manilans that he would tell the King 
what was going on here. He embarked on the Buen Con- 
sejo in 1767. 

In the art of enriching himself without causing an outcry, 
Don Jose Raon was one of the most astute governors Ma- 
nila ever had. In 1768 Manila was in the same condition 
in which the English had left it in 1763 — without artillery 
and without powder, her soldiers badly fed and poorly paid. 
I shall have occasion to say more about the Governor in 
the following chapters. 

The King decided to send Justice Anda back to Manila, 
which was accordingly done. Upon his arrival Governor 
Jose Raon was put in prison, together with his son and his 
Secretary. The new Governor, who had arrived full of 
energy, made Raon endure an extremely severe "residence". 
Those who had been most distinguished as the recipients 
of his favors were the first to make complaints against him. 
He died of chagrin. His Secretary was sentenced to banish- 
ment in Africa. That is all I know about the matter. 

Governor Anda devoted himself to the re-establishment 
of order and justice. According to letters I have received 
from Manila, he conducted an inquiry into the conduct 
of persons whom I thought, while I was living in Manila, 
he was inclined to favor. However, this man, although 
endowed with vigorous health and inured to work and to 
the climate, did not govern for more than three or four 
years. The news of his death, published about a year 
ago, indicates that he died in 1775 or 1776. 

There seems to be a fatality attached to the Governors 
of Manila, as I have said. It is morally certain, when they 
go there, that they will never leave the country alive. 

(To be continued) 



The Koronadal Valley, Cotabato 

By Dominador Z. Rosell 




The South Koronadal at Dadiangas. Mount Matutun rises to 
the right. 

MINDANAO, next to Luzon, is the largest island in 
the Philippine Archipelago. It has vast natural 
resources, many of them practically untouched by 
civilized hands, although haphazard exploitation of a few 
easily accessible areas has been going on for generations. 
The Koronadal Valley, chosen by the National Land Set- 
tlement Administration for colonization, is one of the most 
promising of the undeveloped regions. 

The word "Koronadal" is a corruption of two Maguin- 
danao words, namely, koron (kalon) which means cogon 
grass and nadal (dalal) which means plain. Generally, 
the valley is an extensive plain which was formed by deposi- 
tion and emergence. It is not really a valley at all but a 
raised plain that was once a sea-bed. The dominant ve- 
getation is made up of grasses, mostly cogon, talahib, aguin- 
gay, and salibon, and some parang type of trees. Forests 
are found in patches while second-growth forests are com- 
mon along the creeks and on the hillsides. Buri palms 
grow in the southern, while bamboos are very common 
in the middle and northern areas of the Koronadal. 

The valley is situated in southern Mindanao, reaching 
from the northern shore of Sarangani Bay at Dadiangas 
in a northwesterly direction to Lutayan barrio on Buluan 
Lake, approximately eighty kilometers in a straight line. 
There are two mountain ranges, for which the names Que- 
zon Range and Roxas Range have been suggested. The 
most important landmark on the east side of the valley 
is Mount Matutum in the Quezon Range. This is a vol- 
cano, probably of Pleistocene origin, which rises majestic- 
ally to an altitude of 7,376 feet above sea level. Viewed 
from the sitio of Polomuloc on a cloudless day, it rivals 
Mayon Volcano in symmetry and beauty. 

During my travels in the twenty-seven leading agricul- 
tural provinces of the Philippines, I have seen no other 
such extensive region distinguished by practically a single 
soil formation, good climate, easy accessibility, and free- 
dom from malaria. The soil of this valley is even better 
than that of the famous Davao Penal Colony Farm, as 
is admitted by the Superintendent of the Colony himself. 

Three distinct areas in the valley are spoken of, namely, 
South Koronadal, Middle Koronadal, and North Koro- 
nadal, though the soil is all of the same formation. It 



consists of a recent alluvial deposition of sandy materials 
probably derived from the disintegration and weathering 
of the volcanic rocks in the Quezon and Rcxas Ranges and 
Matutum Volcano. Except for the differences in altitude, 
vegetative cover, amount of moisture, and temperature, 
the soil of the valley is practically the same in texture, 
structure, and constitution throughout the valley. 

The South Koronadal comprises part of the Buayan 
Plain and part of the Makar Plain, with the Buayan River 
on the east and the Makar River on the west. The 
Siluay and its tributary, the Klinan River bisects the mid- 
dle portion of the South Koronadal. The soil of this part 
of the valley consist of sandy loam, very fine sandy loam, 
and coarse silt loam. These soils belong to the same group 
of soils as the Angeles, La Paz, and Luisita soils of Pam- 
panga and Tarlac provinces, where the best sugar cane 
in Luzon is grown. For intensive farming this group of 
soils need only sulphate of ammonia for commercial fer- 
tilizer. 

Before the settlers of the National Land Settlement 
Administration arrived in this part of the valley in Feb- 
ruary, 1939, the South Koronadal was populated by *nly 
a few* Filipino Christians and Spanish overseers of cattle 
ranches in the area. There are, however, many Moro 
residents at Makar and Buayan as well as a number ol 
Bila-an groups throughout these two Municipal Districts. 
Most of the Filipino Christians are from Luzon and are set- 
tlers of less than ten years standing. Mr. Francisco Nativi- 
dad, Mr. Julio Hilado, Mr. Gregorio Limjap, and Mr. Salva- 
dor Natividad are among the outstanding figures in this part 
of the valley. Cattle-raising is their mainstay. How- 
ever, coconuts, abaca, coffee, cacao, and citrus trees have 
also been planted. Goats, hogs, and poultry are raised. 
A number of coconut plantation are already in full bearing 
and producing copra. The plantations at Buluan, Ab- 
dalal, and Konal sitios are owned by Moro residents, while 
those at Makar and Buayan are owned by the Filipino 
Christians. Corn and palay are also planted by the Moro 
and Bila-an groups in this part of the valley. The estab- 
lishment of the barrio site of the Settlement Administra- 
tion at Lagao has encouraged the people, Moro and Bila-an 
as well as Christian, to plant many kinds of crops. Before 

the establishment of 
the settlement in this 
place, interisland 
boats called only 
once a month at Da- 
diangas, or even more 
rarely. Today, from 
two to three inter- 
island boats call at 
Dadiangas every 
week. They come 
from Davao, Manila, 
Cebu, or Zamboanga. 

About twenty-six 
kilometers northwest 

(Continued on page 507) 
493 




Liguasan Marsh I 



A Mandaya is Born 

By Jose Maiigune 



THE stork is hourly expected to visit a 
Mandaya's hut. Loyal kin, solicitous friends, 
and well-meaning neighbors, each of them 
bearing a brand of firewood with a glowing tip, si- 
lently make their way to the house of the ex- 
pectant mother. They all quietly and solemnly 
deposit their firebrands under the house, as usual built on 
stilts, so that their incandescent points, like sharp and 
fiery eyes, will keep careful vigil, far into the night if neces- 
sary, until the child has been born. The lighted brand 
gives license to the bearer to climb the notched, one-post 
ladder and to sfquat on the bamboo flooring, as he awaits 
the consummation of the blessed event. The glowing 
stick of firewood is a token of good-will and a sign of friend- 
ship; and, carefully tended by loyal kin, it will drive away 
the tagbanuas (witches) and the busaus (ghosts and evil 
spirits) from the immediate vicinity. 

Comes the final birth-throe. The magsikad, who is 
almost always an old hag of the tribe, mumbles an invoca- 
tion, supplicating her god to steady and guide her hands 
and conjuring the good spirits to make her present offices 
a success. Without making even a pretense at cleansing 
her dark and gnarled hands, she assists at the birth, then, 
with water freshly taken from the nearby river, she bathes 
the new-born babe. With a snear of studied nonchalance 
playing on her wrinkled face, she unfeelingly cuts the 
umbilical cord with a sharp- edged piece of bamboo and 
dabs the coarsely pulverized powder of the burned coco- 
nut husk on the uneven edges of the wound. Finally, 
muttering fervent thanks to' her god and to the good spirits 
for not having failed her, she slowly and ceremoniously 
traces with her bloody index finger the lips of the little one, 
in order to make them red, full, and beautiful (so the tribe 
believes). 

Then arises the problem of giving the infant a name. 
There is originality and plenty of native color in the Man- 
dayan system of giving a name to the new-born. Liberty 
in the choice of names, guided only by the rules of euphony 
and the aesthetic sense, is absolutely unknown to the Man- 
dayas. Chance, alone, rigorously controls the Mandayan 
naming of a babe. 

Peals of healthy cries coming from new and virile little 
lungs fill the hut. No sooner has this wave of delightful 
music blended with the hushed stillness of the sylvan sur- 
rounding, than triumphant shouts, shrill shrieks, discordant 
laughter, rend the air. And, forthwith, the exultant 
father rushes out of doors; runs as fast as he can and as far 
as his wind will take him, until his pounding heart, heaving 
breast, and leaden legs, altogether resist the inertia of conti- 
nued motion, and he falls exhausted to the ground, uncon- 
scious of the world. After a time he comes to his senses 
with a sudden start. And the kabog (bat), whose coveted 
solitude he ha? so unceremoniously trespassed, indignantly 
flaps its wings to seek a more secluded spot. But the Man- 
daya father is satisfied. Thorn-scarred and weary, but 
with a flushed and exulting countenance, he slowly retra- 
ces his steps to his home; and gleefully and proudly names 




his new-born child — Kabog. Or was it a bato 
(stone) he first saw as he recovered his senses? 
Then with a sardonic grin on his sweaty visage, 
he rejoicingly calls his little one Bato. In fine, 
the name of the first object (be it animal, bird, 
tree, or some inanimate thing) that catches the fa- 
ther's eyes as he comes to himself, becomes the infant's 
name. 

If, when the happy event cccurs, the father is ill, or a 
storm makes it impossible to go out of doors, or the night 
is pitch-dark and objects can not be seen, then the task 
of obtaining a name for the new-born becomes less stre- 
nuous, though quite expensive for the poor Mandaya. 
Under any of the circumstances mentioned, tuba and 
basi flows aplenty. These native beverages go 1 "round 
and 'round" until the erstwhile strutting father drops 
ingloriously into a drunken stupor. When he comes out 
of his daze and perchance thinks of cleaning his dirty 
self, he goes with unsteady and wobbling legs to the 
nearby river and gives himself the luxury of a long over-due 
and much needed, bath. Returning, then, to his house, 
he sheepishly names his child Limpieza. (May he always 
be clean). Or did he resolve to help in digging up the 
daily meal of camotes? Then, more blatantly he calls his 
new-born Tumabang (meaning Helpful). What a heaven- 
sent! Another slave is added to the family. Thus, the 
first notion of anything that comes into the father's foggy 
brain as lie rallies from his drunken stupor, invariably 
becomes the infant's name. 

These primitive ways of naming the new-born child indis- 
criminately after objects, actions, and even ideas, render 
it impossible for a stranger to determine from the name 
alone the sex of a Mandaya. Only a Mandaya can cor- 
rectly determine, from the intonation and behavior of the 
speaker, the sex of a mentioned individual. 

In the primitive manner of naming an infant after natural 
objects, can be explained, in a way, the close affinity be- 
tween a Mandaya and nature. Unconsciously, the child 
as he grows up, strives to emulate or live out the charac- 
teristics of what he is named for. Kabog, for instance, 
will eventually develop the difficult feat of unerringly 
finding his way through thick forests and in the darkest 
night with nothing to guide him other than his kabog 
instinct. And Bato, through unconscious efforts, will 
grow into a strong and hardy man. 

Logically, a Mandaya has no surname other than the 
name of his tribe. For the tribe, and never the indivi- 
dual, is the, primary and paramount consideration in the 
primitive jungle life of the Mandayas. The adoption of the 
name of the tribe as a common surname develops a strong 
sense of unity and tribal consciousness which makes their 
assimilation with other population groups exceedingly 
difficult. The common surname weaves them into one 
large and loyal family, ever aloof from their Christian 
neighbors and extremely suspicious of them. 

lThe Mandayas are a group of non- Christians constituting one of the tribes 
in the Province of Davao and living mostly in the municipal districts of Tagum, 
Kapalong, Saug, and Kamansa. They still live a primitive life. 



Three Wives 

A Lanao Folk Tale 

By Mangoda Magiringa 



ONCE upon a time in the Sultanate of To- 
diombero, there was an aged man who, 
when he was about to die, called his only 
son and gave him this last advice: 

"My son!" he said in a failing voice, "I am 
leaving you no precious treasure, but accept my 
last advice. For a wife do not take a balu (widow), nor 
a bituanen (divorcee), but marry a raga (virgin). 

Some time after the old man's death, the son married 
a raga, but not until later, when a child was born to his 
wife, did he remember the advice of his father. 

"My father did not tell me why I should not marry a 
balu or a bituanen! Suppose I try to discover what rea- 
sons he had", he mused. 

He talked pleasantly to his wife, asking her consent for 
him to marry two more women. 1 The wife consented; 
so, he married two more — one a balu, the other a bituanen. 
They all lived together in one house. 

Years passed but the man found no difference in his 
wives. All were beautiful, kind, faithful. He felt as if 
he was the happiest man on earth. 

"What my father told me is not true" he thought. "All 
my three wives are good. I love them all." 

It happened that about this time a new Sultan came to 
the throne in Todiombero who was very hard on his people 
and issued strange decrees. He had, for instance, a beau- 
tiful rooster which he let loose, at the same time announc- 
ing that anybody who should steal or kill the fowl would 
be put to death. 

The man heard of this. He knew how cruel the Sultan 
was, and it struck him that here was an opportunity to 
test his wives. 

He stole the rooster and brought it home. 
"Now," he said to his wives, "I stole the rooster of the 
Sultan. We shall have it for supper tonight!" 

The women were alarmed. "We shall lose our lives", 
cried the three. "The Sultan will kill us all!" 

"Wait," whispered the man. "In the meantime, I'll 
hide it." 

To observe his wives, he crept under the house unnoticed 
by them. They were all trembling with fear. "What 
shall we do?" the raga asked the others. 

"Well, Aki (friend)," replied the balu falteringly, "I 
will leave you here, for I don't want to die with a husband 
whose blood is as the blood of a swine! 2 My blood, too, 
would be like that of a swine if I die with him!" 

"So with me, Aki," said the bituanen. "I am going 
away. I, too, will not sacrifice my life for a husband who 
is a sinner — a thief!" 

But the raga spoke courageously: 

"As for me, I will not leave my husband, even if it means 
death for me. I will die with him!" 

The two other wives began packing up their things. 
When the man saw them ready to leave, he came up saying 
to himself, "This must be what my father told me, I am 
glad I learned the truth". Turning to the raga, he said, 



"Oki,3 you are a faithful one. I know now that 
your love for me is true." 

While the family was thus in a state of con- 
fusion, the sakop (slaves) of the Sultan happen- 
ed by, and looking into the house they saw 
in the arm of the man the Sultan's rooster. 
Without giving him a chance to speak, they took him 
before the Sultan. 

"So you are the man who dared to steal my rooster!" 
thundered the Sultan. 

"Yes, Datu," was the man's meek reply. 
"He is a thief. Put him to death !" pronounced the Sultan, 
The man pleaded to be allowed to tell his story. "The 
kitab (book of .laws or the Koran)", he pleaded, "provides 
that an accused may not be punished without first giving 
him permission to speak in his own defense. If I turn out 
not to be a thief, you, O Sultan, will have committed a sin 
before Allah in taking my life. I beg that you base your 
judgment upon my story." 

"Go ahead, tell your story," the Sultan exclaimed im- 
patiently. 

"When my father was dying," said the man, "he gave 
me this last advice: 'My son take neither a balu nor a 
bituanen for a wife. Marry a raga.' Before he could 
utter another word, he died. Although I did not under- 
stand the reason for this advice, I married a raga. Soon 
after my wife had given birth to a child, I married two 
women of the kind my father had told me not to marry. 
For many years, I found no difference among them. They 
were each as good and as beautiful as the others. When 
you gave an order about your beautiful rooster, and I 
caught it, I did not really intend to steal it. I only wanted 
to use it as a means to test my wives." 

"How is that?" the Sultan inquired, evidently interested. 

"When I arrived home with your rooster," the man con- 
tinued, "my wives were alarmed. The last two rebuked 
me and showed they despised me. They feared that I 
would be the cause of their death if you found me out, and 
decided to leave the house without my consent, nay, even 
against my will. On the other hand, the raga firmly de- 
clared that if you killed me she would die with me. And 
so through your rooster, I discovered what my father want- 
ed me to understand — that a woman who has passed from 
one man to another ..." 

"My good man!" the Sultan exclaimed, not waiting for 
the man to finish, "You have taught me a useful lesson. 
For a long time now I have been unable to tell the differ- 
ence among my wives. Tomorrow I shall expell all the 
balu and bituanen from my household. You are a wise 
man. You shall not die!" 

And the man and his faithful raga went home and lived 
a happy life ever after. 

l Though plural marriage is practiced in Lanao, a man may not marry another 
woman without the consent of his first wife. If the man disregards this law, tb* 
wife has the right to a divorce. 

2The Maranaos compare the blood of a sinner to that of a swine. 

*Used in addressing one's beloved. 

49S 

/ 




Sunday in Tulinda 

By Luis Ladonga 



TULINDA is a somnolent little barrio, 
situated between two bald hills, eight kilo- 
meters to the south of Carcar, a town of 
southern Cebu. It is a beautiful little world, of 
fifty or so farmer-families; linked in legend with 
the olden days, and now famous for its fruits 
and vegetables. 

This is early Sunday morning, only a little past three. 
But it is time for Maria to wake and put the family pot 
onthefire. There is, infact, already a bustle in the kitchen— 
the clink of china, the throaty gurgle of the nutshell dipper 
hastily sunk into' an earthen jar full of water, and the 
squeaky screech of a clam shell scraping the cooking pot. 
Soon the fire in the stove crackles, and Maria lifts the cover 
of the pot to pour in the corn meal. Then she shifts some 
of the firebrands to another place on the hearth and soon the 
appetizing odor of roasted dried fish flows into your nostrils. 

Andoy sits up and rubs his eyes with the back of his 
hand. It's time to feed the beasts. The boy goes down, 
grabs two armfuls of grass from the stock behind an im- 
provised rack and throws them before the cows. Another 
armful is for the carabao under the ipil tree. Then he 
goes down the spring for the water, taking a long bamboo 
tube on his shoulder, and he looks a lean little fellow as he 
descends to the spring against the background of the 
early morning. 

Yo Basyo knows, too, that the time for sleep is over. 
He is now sitting up and yawning. He takes his clay pipe 
from a hook on the wall and fills it with tobacco, lights it 
and puffs out a cloud of smoke with a grunt of satisfaction. 

It's daybreak and breakfast is past and done. Clucking 
hens run about in the yard, waiting for their feed. There 
are voices of children laughing and shouting; of women, 
admonishing and scolding, lest the children soil their 
clothes before reaching the church. Yo Basyo tells his 
household it is about time to dress. There is a rumpus 
in the little room, next to the living room, where Maria is 
dressing the younger brothers and Andoy is noisily searching 
for his underwear. For Yo Basyo, it's enough that the 
children go to church. He stays to take care of the beasts, 
and the young corn in the caingin has to be protected 
against the monkeys which otherwise would ravage the 
fields. 

But most of Tulinda goes to town. 

Here are swains dressed in their Sunday's best. The 
sun-blanched hair on their heads covers half their ears and 
is long overdue for a cutting, but every head is well annoint- 
ed with coconut oil or with a centavo's worth of Chinese 
hair grease. No face powder, please. Mountain gentle- 
men see femininity in talc. And besides, what powder 
in the world could beautify such coarse and sun-hued 
faces? Shoes, yes. Rubber-soled canvas shoes will do. 
Those who can afford them wear Chinese tan-leather 
shoes— flat and exceedingly generous to the spread of the 
feet. A suit, of course, and a loud tie. 



Buxom lassies in their sweet sixteens and 
generous twenties — neat and prim in their holi- 
day garb. No curls in the hair except those of 
kind Nature. Only wenches who are none too 
good curl their hair, the old folks say. Usually 
the hair is just a bundle of fine blackness skewered 
in a conservative knot at the back of the head. 
Face talc, yes, but no lipstick, and no penciled eyebrows! 

Old women of the nineties— aflapping in voluminous 
skirts and drooping pi£a sleeves. Hoary headed elders, 
who prefer to go bare foot the rest of their lives, in starched 
maguey camisas and tight-fitting pantaloons. 

There is a truck waiting for them at the road in the low- 
land. Some take it, others, to save five centavos, go afoot. 
They walk in groups along the edge of the road, because 
it is safer there and easier on the feet. 

Comes the more enterprising group of the community- 
women and girls from ten up, sturdy men and bent old 
men, each woman with a basket on her head, each man with 
either a bundle or a kaing on his back. It's Tulinda's 
contribution to the local trade. Bananas, oranges, pa- 
payas, mangoes, guavas, jackfruit, breadfruit, pomegran- 
ates; green vegetables yams, sweet potatoes, tomatoes, 
eggplants, squashes, and the like; chickens and little pigs, 
and even lizards for the town chinos (a kind of lizard which 
Chinese consider a delicacy abounds in Tulinda); and 
such cooked and baked stuff, as rice and yam cakes, pre- 
pared in coconut oil, cooked sweet potatoes and yams, and 
fried bananas. 

Lcwlanders wait for them by the wayside. They buy 
their stuff by the centavos' worth. Usually, by the time 
the villagers reach the town, they have nothing left in 
their baskets. 

In the afternoon, when they return, they will be bringing 
salted and dried fish, salt, sugar, one or two undershirts 
cr pants, if sales were good, and many other things. Kero- 
sene for the lamps are carried in bottles tucked somewhere 
inside the basket; soap, in bars and in thin square cakes; 
all bought at the Chinese stores. Five or ten cents' worth 
of soap is enough for the whole week. 

An eight-kilometer walk with a load on the head or on 
the back, and but a meagre number of centavos to show 
for it! Yet, they are happy in their humble hearts! 

In the afternoon, an open field on a shady lane is the 
gathering place. There are a number cf impromptu and 
unlicensed cockfights and other forms of gambling are 
indulged in. There is also a foot race. Young men in 
shorts vie for the honor and the small money-prize that has 
been collected. Children run around and climb into the 
trees to get an eye on the race. A man counts "One, two 
three," and the youths dash off. There are yells and shouts 
from the onlookers; lassies wave their handkerchiefs. 

Here is the winner. Tall, slim, and beaming with a smile 
of pride. People flock around him. Hail the champ! 
(Con tin tied on page 504) 



496 



Cabesang Andang and Pepay 



By Pura Santillan-Castrence 



EVEN if kindly Cabesang Andang is a very ^ 
minor character in Rizal's ' 'Filibust erismo' ' , still JF 
the reader is happy to know her, and for ?T 
much the same reason as one enjoys the acquaint- |Hl 
ance of the sweet-faced old grandmother of the 
noisy children across the street: the simplicity of her 
life, its honesty and practicalness, render her more 
interesting than her more complicated, more self- 
important neighbors. Cabesang Andang, Placido Peni- 
tente's mother, was of no personal distinction; she was 
nothing more nor less than a good old woman who loved 
her son. And Rizal loved her and painted her as sympa- 
thetically as he painted other women in his story who loved 
their children. Of her he wrote in almost tender accents, 
describing Placido 's thoughts of his mother: 

"He recalled the struggles and privations his mother was suffering 
in order to keep him in Manila, (Placido was a student) while she went 
without even the necessities of life." 1 

When the son wrote her again of his desire to abandon 
his studies, 

"his mother answered that he should have patience, that, at the 
least, he must be graduated as a bachelor of arts, since it would be 
unwise to desert his books after four years of expense and sacrifice on 
both their parts." 2 

Cabesang Andang was a mother one would recognize in 

any epoch and at any place. She lived in her son, and for 

her son. She was ignorant and pious, and appealed to him 

with touching though humorous simplicity: 

"Ay! I promised your father that I would care for you, educate 
you, and make a lawyer of you! I've deprived myself of everything 
so that you might go to school! Instead of joining the panguingui 
where the stake is a half peso, I've gone only where it's a half real, 
^enduring tfce bad smells and the dirty cards. Look at my patched 
camisa; for instead of buying new ones I've spent the money in mas- 
ses and presents to St. Sebastian, even though I don't have great con- 
fidence in his power, because the curate recites the masses fast and 
hurriedly . . Ay ! wfcat will your father say to me when I die and 
.see him again!" 3 

Rizal's inclusion of the most irrelevant things in her re- 
proachful speech showed his keen knowledge of her char- 
acter, or of the character such as women of her type pos- 
sess. It is a speech one might hear even now from a Fili- 
pina mother enumerating her sacrifices for her son or daugh- 
ter in accents which make one wonder if she is merely en- 
joying her recital or actually begrudges her child the un- 
selfish things she has done for him. 

As to Cabesang Andang, however, the reader need have 
no doubts. She was doing everything she could for her 
poor, bewildered son, and went through the recital of her 
sacrifices more in the manner of a preachment than as 
counting them against him. 

With what joy she must have set out for Manila to visit 
Placido and bring him the things he liked best — "jerked 
venison and silk handkerchiefs" 4 and, of course, a little 
money. And when he began to tell her of his troubles in 
school, didn't she fence and ward off the blows to her plans 
for him, didn't she smile at him and soothe him and remind 
hirn again of "their sacrifices and privations ?"• She was 



clearly afraid, afraid of displeasing the friars, yet 
MTW proud that Placido would not submit to them* 
n ^ She tried not to listen to him, to pass off his 
U^rt story lightly; she talked of Capitana Simona's 
' son, "who, having entered the seminary, now carried 
himself in the town like a bishop, and Capitana Simona 
already considered herself a Mother of God, clearly so 
for her son was going to be another Christ"/ adding, 
as she watched Placido 's serious and gloomy mien: "If 
the son becomes a priest, the mother won't have to pay 
us what she owes us. Who will collect from her then?'* 

She realized soon enough, however, that she could not 
make light of Placido's troubles; so, woman-like, she changed 
her tactics. She wept, she pleaded, — and counseled pa- 
tience. Patience, which was the undoing of the Filipino 
then, and which is still supposed to be a panacea for all 
earthly troubles. No matter what the abuse, the counsel 
that one received from all sides was to have patience, to 
wait, to bide one's time, until of her own sweet accord Fate 
righted the wrong. 

Cabesang Andang was such a defeatist, yet she showed 
she was not without a sense of humor as she lamented over 
her son's misfortune, which augured such ill for herself as 
well as her son: 

"What will become of you? They'll call you a filibuster and gar. 
rote you. I've told you that you must have patience, that 
you must be humble. I don't tell you that you must kiss the 
hands of the curates, for I know that you have a delicate sense of 
smell, like your father, who couldn't endure European cheese. But 
we have to suffer, to be silent, to say yes to everything. What are 
we going to do? The friars own everything, and ifthey are unwill. 
ing, no one will become a lawyer or a doctor. Have patience, my son, 
have patience!" 8 

Cabesang Andang herself must have possessed much, of 
this desirable virtue she was seeking to inculcate in her son, 
for she fought off his arguments with it. Placido com- 
plained that he had suffered for months and months the 
tyrannical treatment of the friars in the University. Ca- 
besang Andang countered that she was not asking him to 
be a partisan of the friars, for she herself was not one — and 
here she showed a surprising independence of opinion: 
"it was enough to know that for one good friar there were ten bad, 
who took the money from the poor and deported the rich. But one 
must be silent, suffer and endure— there was no other course".* 

The line of action she was advocating had, one has to 
admit, its excellent points. It was, in modern parlance, 
the course of passive resistance. Placido was to wait, 
study, be humble, even though he hated his masters, for 
that was the only way to get on. One can not but sym- 
pathize with her in her desperate attempt to assure her 
boy's future for him. As she said, there was the servant 
who rose to a responsible position, who hated the friars as 
much as they did, and that other — 

"who was rich and could commit abuses, secure of having patrons 
who would protect him from the law, yet who had been nothing more 
than a poor sacristan, humble and obedient, and who had married 
a pretty girl whose son had the curate for a godfather." 10 



497 



Yet all her counsel availed nothing. The old woman 
racked her brains for a solution to her problem, using her 
panguingue hours to think out a plan to restore Placido 
to the good graces of the Dominicans. Ah, at last she had 
i t — s he would interest the Agustinian procurator in her 
son's case, and then she would have peace again, as she 
skimped and saved for the completion of her son's educa- 
tion. 

Sheldidnot know that her boy had in the meantime found 
the way to avenge the insults he had received from the 
hated priests: he had entered into the violent plot being 
prepared by Simoun. But women of Cabesang Andang's 
timbre know how to fight back no matter what blows are 
in store for them and their rebellious sons. 

Pepay 

Pepay was a dancing-girl. Her rather dubious role in 
the story is that of a political instrument for the effect- 
ing of the Filipino students' petition for the establishment 
of an academy of Castilian. Politics worked then in pretty 



much the same way as now, and one had to go through 
channels, official or otherwise, to get anything, however 
worthwhile, undertaken by the government. The Captain- 
General had the final say in this matter of a Castilian 
academy, but it had been referred to Don Custodio, a 
high government official. There were two ways to get 
to Don Custodio, through Senor Pasta, his attorney, 
"the oracle before whom Don Custodio bows", 11 and 
through Pepay, the bailarina, Don Custodio's special 
friend. Isagani, serious and earnest, thought delicately 
that it would not be the best of taste for the students to 
avail themselves of Pepay's aid and decided to "work on" 
Senor Pasta first; if they failed there, the students con- 
vinced the high-principled Isagani that the only way would 
be to turn to Pepay. 

What was Pepay like? "This Pepay was a showy girl," 12 
to whom everyone who wanted to get anything out of the 
influential Don Custodio went for help. She was good- 
natured and easy-going, and rather proud of her question- 
able relationship with the famed adviser. When the stu- 
(Continued on page 504) 



Basi 



By Jose Resurreccion Calip 



FOR centuries, no one knows how long, the 
Ilocano has been making basi wine from 
sugar-cane, — and has always been careful 
not to make it too strong. 

He is as proud of his basi as the Japanese is of his 
sake. He intrudes into the forests to get the samak plant 
which gives the drink a reddish color and the addition of 
burnt rice gives it further flavor. He believes that by 
using the dangla plant for fuel when boiling the sugar cane 
juice, the quality is insured, and it is also thought that 
putting a piece of charcoal into the pocket of the manu- 
facturer without his notice, gives him the ability to mix his 
ingredients with greater skill. 

Although generally sweet, there are three kinds of basi, 
basi ti babai (woman's wine), basi ti lalaki (man's 
wine), which is a little stronger; and kirog made with the 
burnt rice, which is considered the strongest. 

The Ilocano keeps the basi in earthen jars called burnay, 
buried in the ground under the house, where it may stay 
for scores of years. He has a bamboo instrument which 
he uses to take out some, on occasion, for visitors. He 
knows that[the longer it stays in the ground, the better it 
becomes; only really old basi will he call basi a baak, 
or old basi. Carelessness in keeping the basi often changes 
it into a vinegar which the Ilocano calls simmuka. He 
thinks this a good medicine for headache, and may even 
sprinkle it on the posts of the house during the rainy 
season to drive away the lightning. 

Two hundred fifty-two years ago, in 1687, William Dam- 
pier mentioned basi in his book, "New Voyage around the 
World". The English navigator describes the basi drink- 
ers of the two northernmost islands of the Philippines and 
was amazed at the quality of the drink he quaffed there, 
comparing it to English beer. He named the two little 

498 




islands the Bashi Islands and the body of water 
separating them from the islands of Formosa the 
Bashi Strait. Some historians refer to the whole 
Batanes group as the Isla de Basi or Basi Isles. 
The wine monopoly declared by the Spanish govern- 
ment in 1787, stopped open manufacture of basi, but as 
this was an important source of the people's livelihood, 
illicit manufacture became a common thing in the hinter- 
lands. Heavy penalties were imposed and as a consequence 
the mountain people of Ilocos Norte rose up in the so-called 
Basi-Revolt in 1806 or 1807. Municipal documents of 
Laoag, Ilocos Norte, give August, 1806, as the time of 
the revolt in that province. A number of government 
officials were killed and houses of revenue collectors were 
burned down, after which the people retreated to the 
mountains. Some of the leaders were later caught, tried 
in Manila, and hanged. 

Even to this day, whenever people gather in the hills 
under the moonlight, the story of the revolt is recalled and 
listened to with unfailing interest. And though this all 
happened almost a century and a half ago, there are people 
who say that the odor of basi may still be detected in the 
mountain retreats of the moonshiners, and there are even 
some who say they smell human blood, not basi. 

The right to make basi was eventually restored to the 
Ilocanos and today, whenever occasion offers, bowls of 
basi are generously passed about, especially at baptismal 
or marriage celebrations, just as centuries ago. And 
then, as the drink fires the imagination, tall stories are told 
of old deeds of bravery in the mountains of Ilccos Norte, 
and tax collectors and the Spanish friars are cursed again. 



See F. T. Adriano: "Basi", Philippine Magazine, November, 1933, for a more 
scienti6c account of the making of basi. 



Holy Wedlock In Lepanto 

By Dalmacio Maliaman 



IN a little town up in the wilds of Lepanto, 
Equing and I slept in the same bed and rub- 
bed elbows together in our fifth-grade classroom. 
He was a model boy, in a way. He had a perfect 
twice-daily mission church attendance record, but 
like most human beings, he had his weaknesses. 
He used to be out of bed several nights a week to make love 
to a girl in a village eb-gan. He would come fumbling 
into our bed along about midnight, waking me up. As if 
I didn't know, I'd always ask him where he had been and 
what he had been doing. He always said: "You wouldn't 
understand. You are too young.'* Being only a fifth- 
grader at eighteen, a head taller, and at least four years 
older than the next oldest boy in the class, irked him, and 
despite our attempts at persuading him to stay, he left 
school without finishing the term. When I saw him again, 
three years later, I asked where he had been keeping him- 
self and other personal questions, and he confided his story 
to me. 

As soon as he left school, he defied all the village conven- 
tions by starting to housekeep with the village girl who 
had been the object of his frequent evening visits. One 
day, v hile he and his "wife" were in their hut eating their 
meagre supper of boiled camotes and green beans, two old 
men, bent and almost toothless, entered their hut. 

Equing invited them to eat, as is the custom. 

"We finished," the men said. 

Equing set a jar of tapo' and a coconut-bowl in front of 
them. One filled the bowl, drank half of its contents, then 
handed it to his companion who emptied it. 

"You know what we came here for?" one man asked. 

"I know! I know!" Equing said. 

Again the men took a drink. Then they proceeded to 
admonish him. "Do you not know that according to 
Lumawig, before you live together as man and wife, you 
must have gone through a year's courtship and then marry 
ceremonially? Do you not know that your union must 
be sanctioned by Kabunyan if you want to have chil- 
dren, prosper, and live a long, happy life? Do you not know 
that if you do not comply with the customs, you will be 
sorry?" 

Neither Equing nor his wife said a word. 



"Better have your pasya tomorrow or the 
next day before you go on living together, other- 
wise . . .," one of them warned. For the third 
time they filled the bowl with tapoi and downed the 
liquid, having by now quaffed almost half the jar. 
As they got up to go, the other man said 
finally: "If you know what is good for you, better have 
your pasya soon. We shall be back for your answer to- 
morrow." 

Before daylight came, Equing and his girl secretly left 
the house and the village. They went to Baguio, got jobs, 
and stayed there three years. 

What was it that Equing was dodging? The ceremonies; 
nothing else. Of course, they both knew that marriage is 
holy; so did everybody in their community old enough to 
think. A man and a woman living together without hav- 
ing gone through the ritual are committing a gravely im- 
pious deed. And such people become outcasts. Unconsec- 
rated matings, therefore, are few. A man and a woman 
may sin secretly, but the violators of Lumawig's decree 
are eventually apprehended and exposed, and the people 
then take action to end the scandal. 

There are three ceremonies which a couple must have 
performed if they want to maintain an approved standing 
in the community. The first is the pasya, a sort of a pre- 
liminary marriage. This is the culmination of the twelve- 
month, or longer, courtship period. Both the boy and 
girl arrive at the conclusion that each is meant for the other, 
that he will not cast amorous glances at any other girl, and 
vice- versa. The pasya is theoretically a bethrothal; prac- 
tically, it is much more than a pledge to marriage, for they 
are as good as married from the time that the girl, dressed 
in all her finery and carrying a bowl of cooked meat or a 
basket of cooked rice, solemnly walks from her house to the 
house of the bridegroom. As she reaches her objective,, 
she finds all her relatives, friends, and some old men gathered! 
before and inside the hut. She goes in, puts down the bas- 
ket or bowl and seats herself beside her intended husband,. 
The little of food that she brings symbolizes that they are? 
now united. The old men utter a short entreaty to Luma- 
wig that the young couple who are now being joined togethe; 

(Continued on next page) 




O Land of Volcan 

Albert W. C. T. Herre 



IN Tagal land old Banahao 
Leaps high toward the sky; 
The rising mist clings to its peak 
With clouds of glory sailing by. 

In Bikol land great Mount Mayon 

Adds beauty to the land — 

But on it sulphur ever burns — 

Oft Mayon groans and shakes the strand. 



In far Davao huge Apo vast 
Looms far o'er land and sea; 
It broods upon its mighty past 
And guards a people free. 

O land of volcan, plain, and reef, 
From Sulu isles to Y'Ami far 
Let strength and peace and harmony 
Unite to be your guiding star. 



499* 



00 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



December , 1939 



mMm 




For Holiday Journeys 



BENGUET AUTO LINE 
★ 

LUZON BUS LINE 
★ 

MINDANAO MOTOR LINE 

★ 

MANILA RAILROAD 
STEAMSHIP LINES 

★ 

MANILA HOTEL 

★ 

PHILIPPINE TOURIST BUREAU 
★ 

MANILA PORT TERMINAL 



Go MRR 



Railways — H i ghway s — Waterways 
The Way of the Nation 

To enjoy a vacation, to spend a holiday 
in a resort, or to go home for a family reunion 
during the season, take the MRR System by 
train, bus or ship. 

SAFE * FAST o DEPENDABLE « ECONOMICAL 

For holidayers there is a choice resort 

• Tagaytay 

• Bagnio 



All on the MRR Way. ..for spring passage 
the air-conditioned expresses ...for de luxe enjoyable 
cruise, the S.S. Mayon to the southern waters. 

Jflerrp Cf)risitma£ 

anb 

Jjappp J5eto fear 




Manila Railroad Company 

The National Transport System 
Main Office: 943 Azcarraga, Manila — Tel. 4-98-61 



December, 1939 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



SOI 



be not put asunder. After this the gathering takes part in 
an already prepared and sumptuous feast. 

The pasya, held any day of the year, literally joins the 
boy and girl together, except for one thing —they do not start 
housekeeping just yet. The boy continues to live with his 
folk. The girl goes on living with her parents and sleeping 
in the cb-gan. In the eb-gan, however, in consideration 
of her having gone through the pasya, she is allotted one 
corner of the room, a few feet away from the rest of the girls 
so she may have her man sleep with her. They possess all 
the connubial prerogatives except that of keeping house 
together. He helps her parents in the fields, and cuts fuel 
for them. She reciprocates by helping his parents in the 
fields and fetching water from the sac-dowan, community 
well. 

In such a manner the couple live a few weeks or months, 
depending on when the pasya was held. If it was per- 
formed in June, they only have to wait about a month 
before they can live in a house all by themselves, for the 
babayas, day of wedding, falls about the last of July, the 
month after the mid-year rice-harvest. 

The babayas is the day of days. Everybody puts on his 
holiday costume and has his choice of a dozen centers of 
festivity to go to, and usually attends every one in part 
before the twenty-four hour celebration is over. 

At each home-to-be of the bomayas, the couple being 
married, the middle-aged and old men, for twenty-four 
hours, sing the liw-liwa, a prayer to the spirits in behalf 
of the young couple. The men come and go, but the liw- 
liwa goes on uninterruptedly all day and all night. One 



man sings it; the others sing the refrain. With its ramifi- 
cations here eliminated, a typical entreaty of this sort runs 
essentially: "May you (referring to young couple) bear 
thirty children." In unison the others sing "Agay", the 
refrain which means "Amen". The men take turns in 
singing the liw-liwa, and each endeavors to out-liw-liwa 
the other. I mean they strive after the cleverest and sub- 
tlest rhymes. Regardless of the sanctity of the occasion, 
it is not unusual for some of the men to drink to excess and 
then exchange profane words which may lead to fisticuffs. 

Outside the house, the young men and women dance to 
the beat of a couple of drums and a half dozen gangsas, 
gongs, of varying overtones. The dancers are encircled by 
some two hundred or more interested spectators, some of 
whom come to participate actively in the dancing and are 
waiting for their turn, some to feast their eyes on the beau- 
tiful girls and handsome men, some to see famous dancers 
perform. At one side of the hut, away from the throng, 
are several big jars and pots of rice, camotes, meat, and 
vegetables of various kinds cooked in readiness for every- 
body to eat when mealtime comes. Somewhere near the 
door of the hut are the young couple themselves, sitting 
side by side, keeping a twenty- four hour vigil, watching 
the people come and go, taking in sopon, presents of money t 
palay, chickens, etc., and in return giving out small chunks 
of cooked meat which the bridegroom takes with his hand 
from a large jar by his side. The couple themselves must 
refrain from eating while the twenty-four hour ceremony 
is in progress, nor may they sleep. When it is all over, 
then they may surfeit themselves, if they wish, with food 





Movies of your family 
now so inexpensive with 

• In thousands of homes today people are 
making living history with a Cine-Kodak Eight, 
the economy movie maker. It gives you a scene 
of about twelve seconds on the screen for little 
more than the price of an average snapshot . • . 
and movies are just as easy to make. Processing 
of film at no extra cost. And recently the low 
price of Cine -Kodak Eight, Model 20, was 
reduced! See your Kodak dealer for details 
and demonstration, without obligation. 
KODAK PHILIPPINES, LTD. 
434 Dasmarinas, Manila 



HOME MOVIES WITHIN THE REACH OF MANY 




501 



and drink, for from now on they may start housekeeping. 
They are now a full-fledged married couple — though one 
more ceremony is yet impending. This is a repetition of 
the one just past. It is to be held in another half-year, 
or at any time in the future while they are still young. 
This will be the confirmation, a finale. 

Perhaps Equing and his girl were fools to evade these 
ceremonies which would seem to spell nothing but hap- 
piness for all concerned, including the whole conmunity, 
at the cost of twenty-four hours of self-denial on 
their part. But when the cost of the three marriage 
ceremonies is considered, the matter takes on a somewhat 
different aspect. The few dissenters generally come from 
among the poorer classes. Equing and his girl come from 
that class. The average pasya requires the slaughter 
of at least one carabao, a pig, and several chickens. 
To go with the meat, several gantas of rice, and loads of 
vegetables are required. For the babayas, the expense to 
the parents of the young man and woman are also consider- 
able, involving the cost of at least two carabaos, three or 
four pigs, numerous chickens, several cavanes of rice, 
baskets of camotes and vegetables, not to mention several 
jars of tapoi, all to be served to the kin, invited guests, and 
the general public. The sopon makes up for only a frac- 
tion of the expenses* 

In spite of the fact that every head of a family keeps 



one or two head of carabaos in the pasture and at least one 
female pig in the large, circular five-foot deep excavation, 
called lomeng, adjacent to the door of the hut, as well as 
two or three coopfuls of chickens, poor families, are hard 
pressed to meet marriage expenses, and it may take years 
of hard labor to recover from such a blow-out. When one 
or both of the marrying parties come from well-to-do fami- 
lies, however, it is common to hear people mumble, "This 
is a good chance for them to have some of their palay and 
animals eaten instead of idly stored in their overflowing 
granaries and crowding the pastures." 

There is also, of course, the " vested interest" of the patri- 
archs of the village who call themselves old priests on ac- 
count of their seniority, and zealously enforce the marriage 
ceremonies, for they mean much free meat and tapoi. 
While the young people dance outside, the old men inside 
the huts not only sing the liw-liwa, but also satiate them- 
selves with the very best food and drink. 

The rest of the intelligence which Equing imparted to 
me was his desire to marry according to the tribal way, 
thus restoring himself to good social standing. He said 
he could now afford it with plenty to spare after three years 
in the mines of Benguet, to which he would return after 
the three ceremonies had been performed. Yes, we former 
classmates of his, turned out en masse. 



The "China Incident" 

By Lin Yu 



LAST month's most sanguinary fighting took place in 
Kwangtung and Kwangsi, while there was a lull in 
Hunan, Kiangsi,' Anhwei, and Kiangsu. In spite of 
the popular belief that the Japanese had the situation in 
North China well under control, Shantung was the scene of 
severe fighting, with the Chinese taking the initiative. A 
Japanese attack on Laiyuan, northwestern part of Hopei, by 
one especially augmented brigade, failed when the invading 
troops were trapped in the mountains. The Chinese in 
Shantung taking the initiative attacked Jihchao, Hsiatsin, 
Poping, and Yihsien, and also trapped a detachment of 
Japanese troops in the mountains near Taierchwang, while 
the Japanese .offensive launched from Taian on Shan- 
kowchen was beaten back. 

In the far north, over ten miles of rail was removed 
from the Peiping-Paotow Railway in Suiyuan by the 
Chinese, and the Japanese troops sent out from Paotow 
failed to capture their objective, Hatamenkow. 

Despite the Japanese rumor that the 8th Route (former 
Red) Army had, owing to friction between the Kuomintang 
and the Chinese Communist Party, evacuated Shansi and 
gone back to Shensi, the invaders still found Shansi quite 
"hot" for them. Their garrisons in Hungtung, southern 
Shansi, were nearly wiped out. Their push from Changtse 
westward was repulsed, while the Chinese successfully 
attacked find raided Taikuo. Later their renewed attempts 
to mop up the Chinese guerillas in Houma, Wenhsi, Feng- 
ning, and Yungchi ended, like their previous efforts, in 
failure, and they found their garrisons besieged at Fencheng. 
The railways in the Lanfeng-Kaifeng sector, Honan, 

502 



were so thoroughly destroyed by the Chinese that com- 
munications by rail were paralyzed for a considerable 
period of time. After this a Japanese munition train 
was wrecked by Chinese mines at Sinhsiang, with the 
Chinese fighters capturing nearly all of the war supplies. 
The Japanese organized an attack on Tungming from 
Kaifeng, but it failed; failed, too, their attempts to attack 
Wulikow from Hweiyang, to take Hatamenkow, and to 
push eastward from Chusianchen. The Chinese, on the 
other hand, were able to beat the Japanese back to Taikang 
and to raid the city with a large loot of Japanese arms and 
ammunition, and also successfully to raid Wahsien. With 
the Chinese getting the upper hand in Honan, came the 
news that they, too, were victorious over the Japanese in 
southern Hupeh, in the Tungcheng region. 

The Japanese landing at Pakhoi was coordinated by 
their landings at Fancheng and Yamchow, two ports to 
its northwest. It was, however, from the latter city that 
the Japanese energetically pushed northwestward to 
Nanning. Timed to be captured at the same time with 
Nanning was Wuchow, the gateway to Kwangsi from the 
east. This port on the West River was to be captured 
by an attack from Samsui, but in this the Japanese did 
not succeed. Their pushes from Samsui to Hwangtang 
failed repeatedly, while on the southern bank of the river 
their offensive, based on Sinwei and Kongmoon, likewise 
ended not only in failure, but in the Chinese successfully 
attacking Sinwei, after regaining Lientang and Mayong. 
In the East River valley the Japanese base at Sheklong was 
(Continued on page 507) 



December, 1939 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



502 



Dont 
Guess t 



Electrical Gifts 



are always appreciated 




Give iSomething 
ELECTRICAL 

This Christmas 



Meralco Electricity Costs Less 



mmwmmm 



Cabesang Andang and Pepay 

(Continued from page 498) 

dents finally had recourse to her, for Isagani was not success- 
ful with Sefior Pasta, she was more than willing to give her 
aid, not so much because of sympathy for their cause, as 
of a desire to display her influence on the man upon whose 
favorable word the fate of their enterprise hung. She 
took the matter seriously, had written to the "illustrious 
arbiter", and had encouraged the students to hope for 
success. 

"So Makaraig was exchanging looks of intelligence with Pepay 
who was giving him to understand that she had something to tell 
him. As the dancing-girl's face wore a happy expression, the students 
augured that a favorable outcome was assured " 13 

Rizal's characterization of Pepay is unfortunately 
meager, yet whatever there is of it is rather well-done. 
Pepay the light-hearted bailarina was as flighty and un- 
dependable as she was bright and full of fun. In the pres- 
ence of Don Custodio, who was so extremely jealous and 
watchful that she dared play him no tricks, she appeared 
as proper and demure as you please. Here, for instance, 
was what people were saying of her as they gossiped, watch- 
ing her every move in the box the students had reserved 
for her at the theater, 

''that lady who is followed by a duenna is the celebrated Pepay, the 
dancing girl, but she doesn't dance any more now that a very Catholic 
gentleman and a great friend of mine — has forbidden it." 14 

Yet everyone knew that she had other friends, numbering 
among them the frivolous Juanito Pelaez, and that "death's 
head Z, who's surely following her to get her to dance 
.again". 1 

But Don Custodio was, for the moment, her prize and 
he indeed treated her with great indulgence. She was 
.confident in the hold she had on him, and demanded all 
sorts of favors and gifts. She hardly bothered to conceal 
the cheapness of her methods, and seized upon every op- 
portunity to extract money from her doting admirer. Once, 
sensing that he was harassed with big problems and fatigued 
of mind, she took immediate advantage: 
"executed a pirouette and asked him for twenty-five pesos to bury an 
aunt of hers who had suddenly died for the fifth time, or the fifth aunt 
who had suddenly died, according to fuller explanations, at the same 
time requesting that he get a cousin of hers who could read, write, and 
jSlay the violin, a job as assistant on the public works." 16 
A few more graceful pirouettes aided to assure Pepay of 
the favorable consideration of her various and rather color- 
ful, if questionable, "petitions". 

She had bright hopes with respect to the granting of the 
students' request. Not fully understanding what it was 
all about, she did not see through Don Custodio's honeyed 
words in the reply he had sent her. So that when she dis- 
played it to the students watching her box from one side 
of the theater, they began to congratulate each other, 
taking heart from her bright looks and smiles. They did 
not know then that this was what the letter contained: 

' 'My dove : Y ouc letter has reached me late, for I have already hand- 
ed in my decision, and it has been approved. However, as if I had 
guessed your wisjbi^f have decided the matter according to the desires 
of your proteges. J '11 be at the theater and wait for you after the per- 
formance. 

"Your duckling, 

"Custodining.-" 17 

SO* 



They did not know that what this meant was a simple 
suppression of their aims to have a lay-academy in Casti- 
lian, for the "decision" referred to was nothing more nor 
less than the placing of the school under one of the other 
religious corporations in case the Dominicans did not wish 
to incorporate it in their University. 

The students could not know that, this time, Pepay had 
overestimated her influence, and how could they fear that 
possibility when Pepay herself looked so pleased? 



0) 


Charles B. Derbyshire's 


"Reign of Greed," translation of Rizal's "El Fili- 




buateriamo," Philippine Education Co., 1931, p. 107. 


( 2 ) 


Op. cir., p. 104. 


(10) Id. 


(*) 


Op. cit., p. 177. 


(H) Op. cir., p. 138. 


( 4> 


Op. cir., p. 176. 


(12) Id. 


Id. 


(13) Op. cit., p. 212. 


(«) 


Op. cit., pp. 176-177. 


(M) Op. cir., p. 206. 


<*> 


Op. cir., p. 177. 


(15) Id. 


(8) 


Op. cit., pp. 177-178. 


(16) Op. cit., p. 187. 


(») 


Op. cit. p. 178. 


(17) Op. cit., p. 223. 



Sunday in Tulinda 

(Continued from page 496) 

There is an "indoor" baseball game going on. A contest 
between huskies of two neighboring barrios and there is 
more shouting and hollering. Men, shoeless and bared 
to the waist, sweating freely, play seriously. It is for honor 
and for money. Oop! there's a three-bagger from that 
fellow with a putong on his head. He bends forward 
ready to sprint as the pitcher throws the next ball. See 
the man at the bat, and the bulging muscles of his arm. 
There goes the ball, and the mountain Fox takes it with a 
fast swing. It's a home run and the bases are full! 

Sayao beats Mangy an in one of the most thrilling, hair- 
raising ball games in the history of Tulinda sports. 

A volley-ball game draws less of a crowd. It is usually 
played by the lowlanders who go up there to see the tabo. 

The afternoon is drawing to a close. There is 
nobody at my house to feed the pigs and bring the 
cows home, so I must be going. Like to come along 
with me? I think you city folks don't care much 
about spending an evening in the hills. You don 9 t 
care much about music — yes, our music. We in 
the hills live in music of evenings. We sing, we play 
the guitar and the bamboo Bute. We dance, but not 
the "rhumba" or the "big apple' 9 . 

Come with us for one evening. This is Sunday 
evening and there is plenty in the kitchen. Hear 
the whispering of the trees and the night birds calling 
to their mates. Hear the murmur of the brook, and 
the plash of the distant waterfall. That's our eve- 
ning, and if you are a poet you can write about it. 
Come, there will be moonlight tonight, and there 
will be young women who dance, too, like your sis- 
ters do. 

Oh, I almost forgot! I'll have to buy something 
extra for us this evening. Fresh fish, no. Now- 
adays fresh fish is dear, and ten centavos in the 
mountains is like one peso by your way of counting. 
Salted fish will do to go with the stewed pullet. Like 
it? It's a feast in this neck of the woods! 

This is Sunday evening in Tulinda. The moon is a huge 
golden disk set against a bank of fleecy clouds. The trees, 



December, 1939 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



SOS 



PHILIPPINE 

NATIONAL BANK 



MANILA. PHILIPPINES 




(Sole Depository in the Philippines of the Commonwealth) 

NEW YOPJC AGENCY 

25 BROADWAY. NEW YOKK CITY, NEW YOKK 
Complete 

BANKING AND TRUST FACILITIES 



Agricultural Banking 
Commercial Banking 
Deposit Accounts 
Commercial Credits 
Foreign Exchange 



Letters of Credit 
Travelers' Checks 
Cable Transfers 
Personal Trusts 
Corporate Trusts 



Executor and Administrator 



BRANCHES IN TEN PROVINCES 
AGENCIES AND SUB-AGENCIES IN 1010 MUNICIPALITIES 



Correspondents in All Important Cities of the World 



506 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



December, 1939 



Buy This Modern Toothbrush! 

Never Sheds ' — » Can't Get Soggy , Lasts Longer 




SEALED IN GLASS 
SURGICALLY STERILE 



tfs the ****** 
bustles 1 . 




TXUPONT EXTON— a marvelous fiber, 
the result of chemical research — made 
possible this new Dr. West's Miracle-Tuft 
Toothbrush which ends animal bristle troubles 
forever. 

Use the Miracle-Tuft Toothbrush just 
once. You will be amazed at its efficiency. You 
have never believed possible such satisfaction 



in teeth-cleaning as this new brush will give. 
No loose or broken bristles — no water -sogging. 
Exton fibers cannot possibly break off or come 
out in your mouth. 

Throw away your present toothbrush to- 
day! It's obsolete. Buy the Dr. West's Mira- 
cle-Tuft Brush in the glass tube — surgically 
sterile. 



For Sale at Drug Stores and Bazaars 



drooping in silver green, are like ghosts huddling together. 
It's after supper, and we are in the yard of this little farm- 
er's hut in the middle of a clearing. Here are neighbors 
each trying to butt into the conversation, some with a 
story or legend handed down from father to son for ages 
past. They tell of lovers, of princes and princesses, of 
heroes who fought for and won their lady love. 

Comes a gay little man with an old guitar. He is singing 
a beautiful ballad and his fingers are little doves, dipping 
and tripping, as he breaks a note on the chords. He is 
Siso, the blind troubador of the hills. As you listen to 
him, you will be reminded of tales of the wandering bards 
in Europe who sung for the love of it and for the little 
allowances that the innkeepers and the other people would 
give them. Siso is a different man. Though he is blind 
he has not given up. He is married and has children, 
and works in his home. He weaves baskets and the people 
in the lowland ask for them whenever they need baskets. 

The company is getting livelier. More of the neighbors 
arrive. Yonder, in that little clearing quite a distance 
away, the children are playing hide-and-seek. Big brothers 
and big sisters are doing their part in the pounding of the 
rice or husking of the corn. There seems to be no courting, 
though there really is; but no "necking." That would be 
considered shameful. Courting must be quiet, and im- 
plied rather than expressed. The parents arrange every- 
thing and all the young people have to do is to go to the 
church for the nuptials I 

But it is getting late and the country man never 
forgets he has work to do in the morning, especially 
now, as it is weeding time. 

Should you care to remain under the moon for a 
while longer or wander through the clearing or along 
the rivulet, you may go alone in safety. There is 
peace in these hills and every man knows the laws 
of God. 

You may see a lover talking at a window; see the 
daring Romeo gazing up at his Juliet, as they talk 
below their breaths. That is already a crime, say 
the old folks, though they themselves no doubt so 
erred in their younger days. 

Tomorrow, the sun will come early to wake you. 



The "China Incident" 

(Continued from page 502) 

raided and Chaoan was regained by the Chinese after 
repeated attacks. 

Nanning did fall into the hands 'of the Japanese, but 
their advance from that point was brought to a standstill 
about 30 kilometers north of the city. 

The fall pf Nanning had more a psychological than a 
strategic effect. In fact, it was very bad strategy. It is 
involving Japan more and more in the quagmire from which 
she has already found it hard to extricate herself. Psycho- 
logically the Japanese army could treat the Japanese 
people at home to another intoxicating "victory" drink, 
and assure for itself the lion's share in the next year's 
budget. It also had a good effect on the average news- 
paper reader abroad; the Japanese hope it tends to show, 
convincingly perhaps, that the Japanese army lis still 
strong enough to smash the Chinese army wherever and 



whenever it pleases. To a certain extent, this is true. 
But when all is told, the victory will have a 'rather 
devastating effect on the Japanese fighting machine, for 
the Japanese have used that portion of their army to 
attack Nanning which was intended for another Russo- 
Japanese war. In other words, they have definitely used 
up all the troops that they could spare to "punish the out- 
rageous Chinese". But the Chinese are still as "out- 
rageous", if indeed not more so, than before the Lukouchiao 
incident. The Chiang Kai-shek regime is still far from 
being "beaten to its knees". Viewed in this light, the 
Japanese weakness is exposed to a degree never known 
before. The Japanese are in a more precarious position 
than ever. Their weakness, however, shows up in yet 
another way. Mutinies of their "allied" troops (i.e., 
Chinese forcibly drafted into the Japanese fighting services) 
continued, and during last month at least one case was 
reported. In Changtai, Honan, over 1,000 such "allied" 
troops revolted against their Japanese masters and 
killed several hundred Japanese men and officers. The 
disaffection however, is not limited only to such "allied" 
troops but has also spread to the Imperial Army itself. 
Tired of war, several hundred Japanese soldiers sent to 
Tawenkow in Taian district from Tsinan, Shantung, 
mutinied while on their way to their destination. Later, 
the Japanese army headquarters in Tsangchow, Hopei, 
was searched for anti-war literature, which was found in 
great quantities, and 27 officers were found to have "erred" 
to such a degree that they were executed, also 37 soldiers 
were sentenced to imprisonment in a small island in North 
Riukiu. The disaffection in the Japanese army, whatever 
the cause, may one day become so serious that the whole 
war machine of the Japanese Empire will bog down, though 
that day is admittedly still very far. 

Wang Ching-wei, the ex-Kuomintang leader in whom 
the Japanese had placed very high hopes, disappointed his 
Japanese masters last month by demanding the withdrawal 
of Japanese troops from Chinese soil. This ought to show 
the world how united the Chinese people are in their de- 
mand of non-interference in their affairs by the invading 
Japanese; even the Japanese puppet found it necessary 
to have such a platform in order to gain some following. 
To do so would be for the Japanese to admit their defeat, 
but, believe it or not, Japanese financiers and industrialists 
(Con tinned on page 522) 



The Koronadal Valley 

{Continued from page 493) 
of Dadianga is the sitio of Polomulok, the residing place 
of Mr. Francisco Natividad. It is reached over a road 
passable for motor truck or automobile. The elevation is 
about 1080 feet above sea level. It is cool there most of 
the time, the climate resembling that [of Tagaytay Ridge, 
Cavite, 'during the|months from November to January. 
During the month of July, this year, there were sixteen rainy 
days with a total rainfall of 4 154.4 millimeters, while most 
of the provinces of Luzon were practically dry. 

There are several Christians in this sitio, mostly home- 
steaders and laborers on the abaca plantations. SomeBila- 
an people are scattered in the area. These pagan people 
grow rice, corn, ubi, gabi, and other root-crops. Their 
produce is brought to the nearest Christian store and ex- 

507 



508 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



December, 1939 



changed for clothing, canned goods, and salt. I had the 
opportunity of exchanging a handful of table-salt for a 
basketful of green sweet-corn. This amount of sweet-corn 
in Batangas province would have cost me twenty-five 
centavos and the salt cost less than a centavo. The barter 
system is the general method of commerce in this region. 

About sixteen kilometers north of Polomulok is the sitio 
of Tupi, which is situated almost in the center of the Middle 
Koronadal. Between Polomulok and Tupi lies the Muni- 
cipal District proper of Koronadal. This place, up to 
1932, was the stronghold of the Sultan of Koronadal, who 
with several thousand followers, ruled the valley. After 
his death, his leaderless people scattered. Tall coconut 
and acacia trees, and some abaca and banana plantations 
are silent witnesses to the past enterprise of the Sultan. 

The sitio of Tupi is the second barrio site of the Settle- 
ment Administration. Situated in the middle of the valley 
it is in a strategic position with respect to the South and the 
North Koronadal. To the south will lie the future cotton 
fields, and also Sarangani Bay, rich in fish resources, and 
the site of the future port of the region. To the north lies 
more rich land, and also Buluan Lake and the Liguasan 
Marsh, the best game sanctuaries in the Philippines. Tupi 
in ten years will no doubt become an important town. 

The Tupi Settlement Project will be devoted purely to 
plantation agriculture, with cacao and coffee as the major 
crops. Upland rice, corn, root-crops, bananas and other 
fruits, and vegetables will be grown for home consumption. 
Feeds for poultry and swine will be also obtained from this 
farm produce. f The native population of the Middle Koro- 
nadal are mostly Bila-ans. There are also some Moros 



but their number is small. 

North of Tupi, to Buluan Lake, stretches North Koro- 
nadal. The boundary of the settlement reservation is 
about twenty-one kilometers from Tupi. At the camp at 
Abdul's Place, where the best land of the reservation for 
lowland rice lies, the soils range from a very fine sandy 
loam to a light clay loam, with a clay loam substratum. 
The barrio of Lutayan on the southeastern shore of the 
Lake is about fifteen kilometers from Abdul's. The soils 
in this area make rich rice-land. The region has natural 
irrigation water throughout the year. The people in this 
place are mostly Moros, but recently there has been an 
influx of Visayans and Ilocanos. At Lutayan there are 
two Chinese sari- sari stores. 

Until the national highway from Lomupog to Makar will 
be passable, the only way to get to the Cotabato-Davao 
national highway from Lutayan is to take a motor boat or 
vinta across the Buluan Lake and Liguasan Marsh to 
Pedu Pulangi barrio. From here the Cotabato Valley 
Transportation Company, now owned by the Manila Rail- 
road Company, can bring the traveler anywhere in Min- 
danao where there are motor roads. The Cotabato-Davao 
national highway is another interesting long stretch of 
road passing through the two richest provinces of Min- 
danao. 

The foregoing notes were made by me during the month 
of October, 1939. Ten years from now there will be an- 
other Koronadal Valley, inhabited by a largely self-suffi- 
cient Filipino population, living in well organized com- 
munities. In ten years the "Social Justice Program" 
of President Quezon will be seen in full flower here. 



wondering about 
friends and rel- 
atives ux/w Live 
out of town. Vou 
probably can, 
! reac/i mem hy 
telephone. 




on the front 
pajes cf the tele 
phone directory 
for Concj Distance, 
telephone rotes to 
fnanu points in 
the Philippines and 
overseas countries. 



Ho fwru/car ooices 
from distant places 
brought into your 
hem £y theiorvj 
Oistance telephone. 

Josl as* for * 

LONG DISTANCE 



Dial 09 




Manila 



\ 



Deombtr, 1939 



PHILIPPINE M AQAZINE 



509 




Cebu Portland Cement Company 

MANILA, P. I. 

< 



510 



PHILIPPI 



NE MAGAZINE 



December, 1939 




ere's your 1940 
o m e — designed 
ith an eye to the 
it summer months 
■with a cool and 
freshing interior, 
ote the wide eaves, 
k e a wide-brim- 
ed hat, to keep off 
le heat. A gay 

0 1 o r combination 
ith the famous 
co Paints will 

ake it look more 
iendly and will 

1 v e it protection 
id beauty that 
ill last for years I 



FLAN 




01 



Writ* now for estimates in paint- 
ilkff thU model or your own house- 
with Yco! Experts will gladly 
giTO you on outline of the color 
•cheme suited to your purpose 




Four O'Clock 

In the Editor's Office 

A note on Le Gen til's continued account of 
"Manila from the 16th to the 18th Century" was 
published in this column in the August issue. 
His last sentence in the present instalment is in- 
teresting: "There seems to be a fatality attached 
to the Governors of Manila, as I have said. 
It is morally certain, when they go there, that 
they will never leave the country alive". Times 
indeed have changed. It was not so with the 
American Governor- Generals and, more recently, 
the American High Commissioners. Many of them left Manila to 
pass to higher spheres, but very much alive. 

Dominador Z. Rosell, who has written on the soils of a number of 
our provinces in past issues of the Magazine, sent in an article on the 
Koronadal for this month's issue. He is now at Dadiangas, Cotabato, 
with a Bureau of Science party which is surveying the soils of the 
Koronadal Valley, site of the Government's main colonization effort. 
"You know how important this valley is to the welfare of the Filipino 
people in general as well as to the people who are settling here . . . 
Everything is going very fine, especially so as we have had rain almost 
every day since August 15. The barrio site, organized only four 
months ago, is wonderful. Each settler has a 3000 square meter lot 
with his house. Vegetables are now growing like anything! Tom- 
atoes, upo, pepper, egg-plant, beans of all kinds, cassava, lettuce, mus- 
tard, water-melons, squash; fruit trees are also doing well. At present 
I am putting together some notes I gathered while traveling here- 
about. Would they interest you? Please let me know. . ." Of course, 
I wrote Mr. Rosell that I should be glad to have an article for the 
Magazine made up of such notes. 

Jose Mangune, who tells of how the Mandayas name their chil- 
dren, is Justice of the Peace at Kapalong, Davao. He states he 
is an "avid reader" of the Philippine Magazine. It is such articles 
as his that make avid readers. 

Mangoda Magiringa, who contributes a version of a popular Lanao 
folktale dealing with whom it is best to marry — virgin, widow, or a 
divorced woman, was born in Bacolod Chico, barrio of Dansalan. 
He calls himself a "pureblooded Maranao, descendant of the Lanao 
chieftains Muriatao Dato sa Rapitan and Muriatao Ba-i" and spent 
his early boyhood in the sitio of Masiu, a Lanao region noted for its 
stories and songs. He was formerly a student in the Lanao High School 
and now lives in Manila. 

Luis B. Ladonga calls his "Sunday in Tulinda" an "informal essay" 
and stated in a letter to me, "I have endeavored to present in 
so far as I can the simplicity and humility that most mountain folk 
possess, and if I failed, it is because of lack of experience in 



T>03c* 421 m n Tel?-?792 



SheafferS 

LIFETIME 0 



If you want your Gift to 
be the best, give a LIFE- 
TIME Ensemble. Grace- 
fully designed, Feather- 
touch Smoothness, easy 
One-Stroke filling mech- 
anism, vacuum or lever 
type and now, with the 
new FINELINE penci 
SHEAFFER'S is the 
Ensemble you will be 
proud to give or to own. 

The LIFETIME guaran- 
tee assures you of ever- 
lasting service and pleas- 
ing performance. 




CAMERA SUPPLY COMPANY 



138 Escolta, Manila 



Philippines 



December, 1939 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



51 



writing. May this first attempt of mine meet with your favorable 
consideration." He was bora in of 1914 in a little barrio not far 
from the setting of the sketch, and is a student in the College of Law 
of the Colegio de San Carlos, Cebu City. 

Jose R. Calip is a member of the staff of the National Library. 

Dalmacio Maliaman, author of "Holy Wedlock in Lepanto,' is a 
native of Bontoc who has now lived in the United States for many 
years. He lives in Seattle, Washington. 



In connection with the editorial in the November issue of the Maga- 
zine and the general problem of "readjustment" which the Philippines 
appears to face, the following letter from a young writer, half Filipino, 
half Japanese, is of interest: "... Young men of my generation now 
suffer from a perplexing doubt, or vague fear, having gone through a 
stage of our country's development which now seems doomed to be 
turned back upon itself. If we could go on in the way we have been 
taught in the public schools, we would brave the future with more 
confidence, but patriots and nationalists insist we have been trained 
on a wrong pattern and inspired with unsuitable ideals. We are not 
ourselves, they say. We must go back to our own. This generation 
constitutes nothing more than a gap between the period of the Kati- 
punan Revolution and the future Philippine Republic which must be 
bridged over. We do feel crushed and are sad that the day will come 
when we will have to return to America that which we apparently only 
temporarily borrowed". One wonders, reading this, what influences 
have been brought to bear on the young writer. I have always held 
that the schools have not trained our young people here away from 
themselves, have not attempted specifically to make Americans of 
Filipinos, but have sought and largely succeeded in training them for 
life in a modern Philippines in the world of today. Critics, especially 
foreign critics, have inveighed against the American ideas of education 
introduced here exactly because this has tended to bring the Filipinos 
up-to-date — something they did not welcome for various reasons of 
their own that could not stand examination. My young correspon- 
dent's generation does not constitute a "gap", but is itself a bridge 
between the Philippines of the past and the Philippines of the future, 
a vitally necessary link. This generation has not borrowed, but has 
assimilated, and should not allow any one to talk any other false notion 
into them, whether he is a patriot, nationalist, or foreign propagandist* 
these are sometimes hard to tell apart. Young Philippines should treat 




No . 



FOR HER! 



• What girl doesn't thrill at the 
thought of a corsage from the man. 
of her dreams! But there is one 
girl who can never know this joy 
—the girl men avoid because of 
underarm perspiration odour. 

It's such a pity! Because it is 
so easily avoided — with Mum. 
This dainty deodorant cream 
takes only half a minute to ap- 
ply. Then you're safe all day. Use 
Mum anytime, even after dress- 
ing — it's perfectly harmless to 
clothing. And so soothing to sen- 
sitive skin! 

Mum doesn't prevent natural 
perspiration, just the ugly odour. 
Why risk your daintiness when 
Mum will protect it so surely? 
At all Chemists and stores. 





With the introduction 
of PUYAT JR. Furni- 
ture you were offered 
quality Furniture at 
popular prices, style f 
and reliable workman- 
ship at the price of 
inferior grades. To cap 
it all, you are now 
offered these same 
PUYAT JR. Furniture 
on the extraordinary 
T5.00 monthly -pay- 
ment -plan. See the 
different models I at 
our showrooms. 



GONZALO PUYATtSONSJ 

219 SOLANA,W.C. 628 RIZAL AVE., MAM) 

BRANCH: BACOLOO CITY 



TAKES THE ODOUR OUT OF PERSPIRATION 



You can easily earn from F5.00 to F50.00 
extra money per week, during your idle 
hours, in pleasant and lucrative employ- 
ment that will increase your circle of friends 
and your influence in the community, 
by acting as agent for the 

PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 

We have different plans, either cash remu- 
neration or premiums, from which you 
may choose the one suited to your require- 
ments. 



For detailed infoi mat ion write to the 

Philippine Magazine 



217 Dasmarifias 
Telephone 4-93-76 



Manila, P. I. 
P. O. Box 2466 



S12 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



December, 1939 




INTERNATIONAL 
HARVESTER 



Home Light Plants 

Many provincial homes are really delightful dur- 
ing the day but the lack of cheerful lights make them 
monotonously dreary at (night. Lamps will give you 
light but electric lamps do away with inadequate, sooty, 
troublesome kerosene lamps and give instead the clean 
radiance of electric light. 

When you have electricity in your home, you can 
have innumerably other comforts in addition to electric 
light. Radio sets, (electric fans, irons, refrigerators, and 
other electrical appliances can be operated by simply 
turning a switch , The same engine can also be used for 

operating water pumps, 
rice mills, corn grinders 
and other belt-power 
machines. 

International Har- 
vester Home Light 
Plants are available in 
different sizes — f r o m 
fifteen 20-watt lights 
and up. Write us for 
complete information. 

International Harvester Company 

OF PHILIPPINES 

MANILA 

ILOILO . BAGOLOD TcEBU . DAVAO . LEGASPI . BAGUIO 
GAGAYAN, MIS. 




with contempt any ideas of turning back, any return even in thought 
to the days of peonage and ignorantism, for that, exactly, it what this 
kind of talk means. In the days to come, the generation of today will 
need more than ever what they learned from America. 



A letter from an ex-superintendent of schools challenges the Laubach 
system of teaching in Lanao (Philippine Magazine, August 1939, and 
June, 1932), but has a good word to say for the government's adult 
education work: "Dear A. V. H. — Two men in our bodega are teach- 
ing classes of adults and the results they are getting bear out my opinion 
that there isn't anything remarkable or miraculous about the so-called 
Laubach system. I have felt all along that a fundamental fault in the 
Laubach system is precisely what he claims is distinctive and vital : the 
combination of vowels with the consonants, since a pupil has to recognize 
a hundred or more symbols which is far more difficult than learning to 
recognize about twenty. Even for learning English where the idea is 
more suited because of the greater number of vowel sounds, I did not 
find the phonetic system of teaching practical; and I never strongly 
felt that it made a bit of difference if Filipinos did not pronounce English 
perfectly — our main objective was to give them a common secondary 
language and incidentally they'd learn to read and write their own home 
languages... In the case of teaching Maranaos to read and write 
Maranao, there is no sense in phonetics; it is merely a^matter of learning 
to recognize and duplicate symbols — and only about twenty at that. 
It seems nonsense to teach a hundred or more and burden adult minds 
with silly illustrations for association. Now to return to adult educa- 
tion here: The two teachers are volunteers, both have been working 
for us for ten years, but some time prior to that, one had a year's teach- 
ing experience and the other 6 or 7 years, the former a high school grad- 
uate, the other 7th grade. One is from Samar and the other from 
Cebu. They have classes of 50 each, mostly men from our own bodega, 
ranging in age from 16 to 55 years, most of whom are Visayans of all 
kinds, but seme Tagalogs and others. They hold classes for two hours 
on Friday and Saturday nights, and not every Friday and Saturday is 
attendance a hundred per cent, yet in two months they can teach 
the majority to read and write whatever dialect the individual 
k nows,and which are not the same for all. They teach in Cebuan 
supplemented by Tagalcg, but they don't teach the dialect; they teach 
E nglish. They start with the alphabet — teach them to read and write 
jt and then go at once into teaching simple sentences in English. At 
the end of two months they may not know how to read or write any- 
thing except the simplest English, but they read their dialect quite readily 
and write it a little. There is no particular method or system, just 
what these two ex-maestros happen to remember of the public school 
m ethod. They say the pupils insist on being taught English, which 
is not according to the original intention and which takes longer, but 
serves as agood medium here where the classes have members who speak 
different dialects. The teachers say that if they were teaching their 
own dialect to adults speaking their own dialect, they could teach such 



I MUST BUY 
AT ONCE 
A JAR OF 

MENTHOLATUM" 



XL 



MENTHQLATUM 

MILLIONS ARE USING IT 
EVERY YEAR FOR 

COLDS 



AN INVALUABLE 
HOUSEHOLD REMEDY 




Menthol 0.3 Qm., Camphor 3 Gin., OL. Eucalyptus 0.1 Gm., Boric Acid 3.0 Gm., OL. 
Piaus PumilioO.l Gm., OL. Gaultheria 0.1 Gm., Bxcipients to make 30 QMS. 



December, 1939 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



513 



groups to read the newspapers and write simple letters in a month, say 
8 to 10 lessons of two hours to classes of 50. That is approaching Lau- 
bach's claims. Since the classes started, I had noticed that some of our 
laborers who didn't know any English were trying to use a little on me 
and I also saw them obviously practicing to read newspapers at odd 
times. It was in this way that my curiosity was aroused and I was led 
to inquire what it was all about. Some of our other men, who know 
English, drop in on the classes and they say the classes are making good 
progress. A few of these pupils had learned to read a little and to 
write their names, but generally they were to be classified as illiterates. 
A smart-aleck student now and then pretends he is illiterate, but the 
teachers discover this quickly and he is kicked out. I haven't attended 
any of the classes as the time is inconvenient and I'd probably want to 
make tests and otherwise butt in. . . Furthermore, I have seen thous- 
ands of Filipino kids, 6, 7, or 8 years old, learn to read and write a little 
English — a foreign language — in a few weeks; so I'd expect adults to 
learn to read and write much quicker. To read and write their own 
dialect it would take only so long as necessary to drill recognition of the 
alphabet and imitate it in writing. In Moro writing, the symbols are 
more complicated and would be harder for a Moro to learn to read and 
write, but there is nothing unique about Laubach's use of Latin script 
in place of Arabic. The Spaniards did it and the Americans after them. 
But the exact sounds can not be rendered by the Latin alphabet any- 
more than the English or French. I'm certain that for a phonetic 
language, Laubach's method is slower and more difficult, particularly 
for anyone to whom the language is native. Here in the Philippines, 
if the demand for English instruction in this province is a criterion, 
I'd work up a vocabulary of Basic English to teach reading and writing 
o illiterate adults. It is easy to understand the desirability of using 
English as a medium if one considers that many of these adults have 
children who not only have learned to read and write — but read and 
write English. They'd be rather ashamed to openly study their own 
language, but be proud of studying English. I'd have them learn the 
alphabet of the dialect and work in the English gradually — just enough 
to keep them interested — and avoid all words that are not spelled some- 
where nearly phonetically. Under no circumstances would I try to 
teach them phonetics — it is completely confusing and of no use to anyone 
but a very advanced student. 'Can' would be 'can' and 'cane', 'cane' 
and no tommy-rot about short a's and long a's and why one is this and 
the other that. Some of my pedagogical friends would hold up their 
hands in holy horror at teaching the alphabet — they say it slows up 
reading speed because the pupil reads by spelling, or something of that 
sort. I doubt it. Too many of the older generation who learned the 
alphabet first are rapid readers. Slow readers are slow for other causes. 
Time I ceased ranting. I hope I haven't bored you to death. I wonder 
if I've missed favorable comments on your 'News Summary' in the 
Magazine. You must know it is appreciated or you wouldn't 
keep it up. I have always forgotten to mention how highly I think 
of it. I still read 'Four o 'Clock' first and may or may not finish 
by at least glancing through the 'News Summary'. I may have had 
most of it from other sources but, since I always have the Philippine 
Magazine bound, I know I have a permanent source of information, 
well written and well selected. . . Sincerely yours, etc." 

A very gratifying letter came from Mr. Samuel F. Gaches, President 
and General Manager of H. E. Heacock Company, and also President 





Brighten your smile 
with KOLYNOS 

For brilliant, glistening teeth 
and healthy gums— and a mouth 
as sweet and fresh as the 
flowers— use Kolynos. 





The sore, scientific dentifrice 
—so economical, too. 



A Royal Gift 
For The Family 

ST 




A modern, efficient 

SERVEL 

ELECTROLUX 

GAS Refrigerator 



No other gift will give so much 
pleasure and comfort to so many, 
and for so long a time. 

No Moving Parts 
No Expensive Repairs 
No Interruptions 
No Disappointments 
No Wasted Food 
Low Operating Cost 

MANILA GAS CORPORATION 



&&y\ $m>\ %&y\ &&y\ 





514 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



December, 1939 



China Banking Corporation 

MANILA 

Authorized Capital F10,000,000 

Paid-up Capital, Surplus & 

Undivided Profits, over .... 9,000,000 

Banking business of every 
description transacted. 



Branches: 
Shanghai & Kulangsu, 
China 



Correspondents in all the 
Principal Cities of the 
World 



COMPLIMENTS 
OF 

BENIPAYC PRESS 



PHOTO -ENGRAVING 

PRINTERS — ENGRAVERS — STATIONERS — PUBLISHERS 

548-552 MISERICORDIA, STA. CRUZ PHONES: 2-29-60 

MANILA, PHILIPPINES 




A MAGAZINE SUBSCRIPTION 

Give thoughtful year-round entertain- 
ment to your friends or relatives. Give 
a magazine subscription! Too late? 
Never. Start the Christmas number 
(and subsequent issues) from our stand 
until your subscription arrives! 

An infinite, variety of magazines to suite every taste. 

PHILIPPINE EDUCATION CO. 

Complete Magazine Catalog FREE on request 



of the American Chamber of Commerce, during the month. Mr. 
Gaches wrote: "I have just received a copy of your November issue 
and wish to congratulate you on the editorial with reference to re- 
examination [of the Philippine problem]. Your analysis of Mr. Sayre ' 
introductory talk before the American Chamber of Commerce is very 
excellent. The artificialities of which Mr. Sayre speaks are not today » 
nor have they ever been, any more than such artificialities of trade as 
were based on freedom of transport, communications and trade with 
the United States. You bring out this point excellently. I have not 
had an opportunity to talk this matter over with Mr. Sayre, but I 
expect to do so. Another article on which I wish to congratulate 
you is the article by Dr. Walter K. Frankel on 'The Strategic Impor- 
tance of the Philippines — as Seen by a Dutch Observer in 1626'. I am 
greatly interested in this article as I have maintained for thirty years 
that the Philippines is the gateway to the north and south Pacific 
and that whoever holds this gateway can prohibit the fulfillment of 
the Japanese ambition to control Asia from the extreme north to the 
extreme south. I am pleased to see that the strategic importance 
of the Philippines was recognized three hundred years ago. I again 
congratulate you on your most interesting November number." 



The News Summary of the Philippine Magazine made the 
editorial page of the great Baltimore Evening Sun last month. The 
editorial was headed, "A Belated Nightmare", and read, in part: 
"The August issue of the Philippine Magazine, to which we have a 
subscription, arrived yesterday. [Note that the editor lost no time 
glancing at it.) This is a strange publication, containing poems in 
unusual English by poets with Filipino names, proverbs in the Tagalog 
dialect, articles on buri flour, etc., and a great deal about the activities 
of the Japs. It publishes in horribly fine print, a news summary — 
this issue covers the news from June 17 to July 15. Doubtless this 
day-by-day chronicle is useful, but we find it rather terrifying to get 
a month's bad news all at once and in small type, instead of having 
had it spread out over a whole month with the familiar black head- 
lines to guide and reassure the eye. The latest news about Europe we 
were able to glean from the Philippine Magazine is to the effect 
that Hitler's "battle of nerves" over the Danzig question has been 
called off for the time being and that Foreign Minister von Ribbentrop 
advised Hitler that Britain is only bluffing. So much has happened 
since the August issue of the Philippine Magazine was printed, that 
we cringe at the very thought of what it will contain when the Sep- 
tember issue arrives in its leisurely fashion — on or about November 
19." Now that last crack, I say, is a libel. The mails can't be that 
slow, even if we don't send the Magazine to America by the Pan- 
American Clippers. And am I responsible for what von Ribbentrop 
told Hitler? Am I responsible for all the bad news that happens and 
the dailies dish out in such a scrappy fashion from day to day? As 
for the fine print, that I must sadly admit. Time was when so little 
happened in the world that we could print the News Summary in 
8-point type and get it all into three or four columns. But ever since 
the Manchurian incident, there has been so much hell popping every- 
where that the Summary began of necessity to spread out and out until 
we were simply forced to use smaller type (6-point) to keep it from 
filling the whole Magazine. Anyway, it is something to make the 
Sun editorial page again; also, for the Sun to make this page. 

Well, a merry Christmas and a happy and a prosperous New Year 
(as the banks always say) to us all! 



CORNS? 




slop that pain 
instantly with 

GETS-IT 

the infallible 
corn cure. 



Better 
because it's liquid. 




Salicylic Acid 4.0%; Zinc Chloride 2.6%; Ether 7.2%; Alcohol 0.9%; 
' Flexible Colodion q.s. 



December, 1939 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



DID 



News Summary 



(Continued from page 484) 
Other Countries 

Oct. 12. — Reported from London that meeting 
between Japanese Foreign Minister Adm. K. No- 
mura and British Am bat. Sir Robert Craigie Wed- 
nesday foreshadowed important Anglo- Japanese 
development involving certain concessions to Japan. 

Reported Gen. W. von Fritsch was shot in back 
by aide-de-camp who was Gestapo agent on orders 
from Chancellor Adolf Hitler himself and that 30 
officers of lesser rank were executed for high treason. 

Oct. 13. — Chinese claim victory in Changsha area 
is greater than that at Taierchwang. 

Nazi press chief Dr. Otto Dietrich states "only 
United States can now still intervene to prevent 
most horrible shambles in history". German patrol 
attacks on Western front have stopped. Allied 
command states they are fully prepared for any Ger- 
man offensive but are not themselves contemplating 
big-scale offensive because of bad weather conditions. 
"Hitler can not wait until spring; we can and will 
be stronger then and Germany weaker". 

Oct. 14. — British Admiralty announces sinking 
early Saturday morning of battleship Royal Oak; 
only some 400 of 1200 officers and men aboard are 
known to have been saved. Announced that 3 
jerman submarines were sunk during day. German 
press headlines sinking of battleship and one paper 
states "This represents further bitter lesson to Eng- 
lish who believe they can wage war of starvation 
against Germany without great risk". British 
Institute of Public Opinion reports test-ballot vote 
showing 314 of voters favor continuation of war. 
British Council of Action for Peace and Reconstruc- 
tion, headed by D. Lloyd George, begins campaign 
for "durable peace" and approves resolution de- 
scribing Premier Neville Chamberlain's speech as 
"quite inadequate." Lloyd George states peace 
conference should be called "before passions are 
further aroused" and that British should refrain 
from laying down conditions but merely state their 
aims. 

Oct. 15. — London reports state 4 additional allied 
ships have been sunk. Paris L'Oeuvre states Field 
Marshal von Blomberg, former German commander- 
in-chief, and 5 other high officers have been arrested. 

Oct. 16. — Premier N. Abe states in interview with 
Japanese press thct "it may not be possible tempo- 
rarily to extend 1911 urade treaty with United States 
but it may be possible to negotiate new treaty as 
provisional measure". 

Premier H. H. Kung tells United Press it is not 
so much question today of China making peace 
with Japan as of Japan giving up it* policy of ag- 
gression against China. He appeals to United 
States for material assistance as well as sympathy, 
stating Japanese conquest of China would be fol- 
lowed by attempt to invade America. 

Scandinavian countries consider German eva- 



cuation of Baltic states as big blow to Germany. 
Germans reportedly allowed to take out only a 
bicycle, SO Reichsmarks, and 2 days' food; German 
banks and newspapers are closing. 

Germans claim submarine that sank Royal Oak 
also put British cruiser Repulme out of commission. 
Claim also that in raid on Firth of Forth, 2 British 
cruisers were hit and 2 British planes shot down; 
they admit loss of 2 German planes. London reports 
that German attempt to bomb east coast of Scot- 
land was repulsed. Admiralty announces 15 officers 
and men were killed in raid of 12 German planes on 
Firth of Forth naval base but that 5 of planes were 
shot down. French reports state German auto- 
mobiles are racing along Western front with loud- 
speakers blaring peace-talk, including parts of 
Hitler's speech to effect Germany has no quarrel 
with France. 

Oct. 17. — Isveatia reports Russia is remaining 
neutral but will supply Germany with raw materials. 
Premier M. Kalinin advises President Roosevelt 
that Russian-Finnish negotiations are conducted 
in conformity with recognition of Finland's independ- 
ence and with sole aim of strenthening friendly co- 
operation between them and guaranteeing their 
mutual security. 

German air raiders strike twice at Sea pa Flow 
naval base, first with 4 and later with 6 bombers; 
Admiralty claims no damage was done. Foreign 
Secretary Lord Halifax reported to have told Russian 
Ambassador Britain is prepared to send trade mis- 
sion to Russia and possibly political mission later. 
First Lord of Admiralty Winston Churchill states 
Royal Oak was torpedoed at night while at anchor 
in Scapa Flow and that it is still matter of con- 
jecture how enemy submarine was able to penetrate 
harbor defenses "which must be considered remark- 
able exploit of professional skill and daring". As 
ship was lying at extreme end of harbor some 600 
officers and men were drowned. Churchill states 
that of 21,000,000 tons of British mercantile shipping. 
156,000 tons have been lost to German submarines 
and 18,000 through mines and accidents; British 
captured 29,000 tons of enemy shipping, and in 
mean time 104,000 tons of new shipping has been 
acquired, while also Britain has destroyed from 1 /4 
to 1/3 of Germany's original 60 submarines. Severe 
damage to Repulse is denied. British White 
Paper published today contains former Ambas. Sir 
Neville Henderson's report on negotiations during 
last weeks of August; it describes Hitler as megalo- 
maniac surrounded by "yes-men" but alludes to his 
"friendly, reasonable demeanor during negotiations 
up to August 29" and to "his admiration for British 
aristocracy as most successful of Nordic races". 
Paper describes Hitler, however, as no more bluffing 
in September 1938 than in August 1939, but that 
he was "disagreeably astonished" at reaction to 
German policy produced in Britain and elsewhere 
as Foreign Minister J. von Ribbentrop is "consis- 
tently giving him false counsel". Henderson ex- 
presses conviction also that Field Marshal H. von 



Goering would have preferred p e a c efu l solution but 
that Hitler's decision alone counted, 

French outposts reported driven back by Germans, 
but French claim this was "on a line foreseen". 

Oct. 18. — United States naval officials announce 
withdrawal of American forces from Kulangsu, 
Amoy's international settlement, following agree- 
tnent reached yesterday with Japanese; British and 
French withdrew their landing parties at outbreak 
of European hostilities. 

Sir Charles Vyner Brooke, "White Rajah of 
Sarawak", offers British government $1,000,000 in 
securities as "token of his subjects' desire to con- 
tribute to prosecution of the war." 

Premier R. Saydam, after return of Foreign 
Minister S. Saracogin from Moscow yesterday, 
states Turkish-Russian talks have failed, as pro- 
posals made were different from those scheduled. 
German Ambas. F. von Papen leaves Ankara hurried- 
ly for Berlin. 

Stockholm Conference opens. King Gustav pre- 
sident K. Kallio of Finland sends message of thanks 
to President Roosevelt for his "valuable personal 
assistance and interest in Finland's fate and its 
difficult problem". 

Some 150,000 German troops reported engaged 
in attacks on French in 8aar area; German losses 
estimated at over 6,000, according to French reports, 
Berlin spokesman states Germany's move to re- 
patriate Germans in Baltic countries "shows Hitler's 
earnest will to peace." He states repatriation is 
"voluntary" but that no one has refused to go, 
though "speed was necessary, for if we debated each 
minor difficulty, we never could make progress 
toward large-scale resettlement". 

A. Anderson, travel bureau operator, one of 
passengers on board of torpedoed British line Athe- 
nia, files affidavit with U. S. State Department 
declaring officers of ship told him it has been re- 
enforced with gun mountings and had plenty of 
guns in hold, and could have been used as raider on 
return trip to England. 

Oof. 19. — J. C. Grew, recently returned from 
leave in United States, tells American- Japanese 
Society in Tokyo that public opinion in United 
States strongly resents some of things Japan's forces 
are doing in China — bombing indignities and mani- 
fold interferences with American rights, wholly 
needless. American people regard with growing 
seriousness violation and interference with American 
rights by Japanese armed forces in China in dis- 
regard of treaties and agreements. They feel that 
present trend in Far East if continued will be des- 
tructive. They believe real security and stability 
in Far East could be attained without running 
counter to any American rights whatever. . . I am 
making plea for sympathetic understanding in 
interest of old and enduring friendship between our 
two great nations." 

Domei reports that group of Russian advisers 
including 2 generals and numerous technical experts 
reached Chungking yesterday; also that Gen. Ho 



"REGENT 

PIANOS 



95 




As low as 

F680.00 
for cash. 

On i n s t a 1 1- 
ments P20. 00 
monthly, 
and a small 
down pay- 
ment. 



Sole Distributors: 



JOSE OLIVER SUCCESSORS CO. 



317 Carriedo 



MANILA 



Phone 2-15-37 



THE NE W MOTOR OIL 

WON'T DRAIN OFF . . . 
WON'T SCRAPE OFF 



1 




Fill up with 
TYDOL MOTOR OIL at your 
nearest ASSOCIATED DEALER 



516 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



December, 1939 



Yao-tsu arrived in Moscow yesterday for negotiation 
of readjustment of Russo-Chinese relations. British 
authorities reported alarmed bv rumored arrival of 
Russian motorized force in Sinkiang. 

Military censorship and disruption of telegraph 
and telephone services in Estonia in connection 
with Russian military occupation of parts of country, 
causes alarm. Germany starts move to repatriate 
some 4000 Germans living in Finland, causing dis- 
tress as some have large investments there. Stock- 
holm Conference adjourns after deciding not to 
attempt to mediate in present European war though 
stressing countries represented would "greet with 
deepest satisfaction any signs of possibility of under- 
standing among belligerents or any conditions en- 
abling neutral nations to work for peace and security". 
King Gustav in speech stresses importance of com- 
mon neutrality among Nordic nations and value of 
solidarity among them; "in maintenance of our 
neutral rights we rely on mutual assistance and 
cooperation of all states which have same policy of 
neutrality as our own." 

Hitler ratifies Russo-German friendship pact 
dated Septembr 28 and protocol dated October 4 
delineating Russian and German interests in Poland 
and establishing boundaries about same as before 
World War and surrendering most of conquered ter- 
ritory to Russia. He announces formal annexation 
of Pomorze, Pommerellen, and Polish Upper Silesia, 
and decrees formation of provinces of West Prussia* 
with Danzig as capital, and of Posen with city of 
Posen as capital. United Press correspondent with 
British army on Western Front states that from all 
appearances big-scale offensive not likely before 
spring and that present status will continue through- 
out winter unless Germans decide to strike blow. 
Heavy firing again heard in North Sea northeast of 
Kiel. German aircraft again raid Scotland coast but 
are repulsed. 



Britain and France announce formal pact with 
Turkey for mutual assistance in Mediterranean 
area, Chamberlain stating pact was signed at Ankara 
today, delayed 3 weeks to enable Turkey to consult 
Russia because of Turkish hopes this might result in 
a parallel Turko-Russian treaty, but that these 
talks were suspended "because Russian demands 
conflicted with the tripartite pact". He states 
treaty is "no temporary arrangement to meet a 
pressing emergency, but solid testimony to deter- 
mination of governments concerned to pursue long- 
term policy of collaboration". Treaty consists of 
9 articles providing that Britain and France are 
to assist Turkey in event it suffers aggression; mutual 
assistance if Turkey, on one hand, and Britain and 
France on other, are involved in war in Mediterranean 
as result of aggression; Turkey to assist Britain and 
France if hostilities arise as result of their guarantees 
to Greece and Rumania; consultation and benevo- 
lent neutrality toward Britain and France by Turkey 
if former are involved in any other European war; 
similar consultation with view to common action in 
event of aggression toward another European state 
which any of contracting parties have agreed to 
assist or in event of indirect aggression which menaces 
the security of any of contracting powers. It is 
affirmed that treaty is not directed against any 
country; that signatories, if engaged in hostilities 
as consequence of the treaty, will not conclude 
separate peace; and that treaty is to be valid for 15 
years and is automatically renewable for further 5 
years unless denounced at expiration of 1 5 years. A 
protocol exempts Turkey from obligations of treaty 
which would compel it to enter into armed conflict 
with Russia. French spokesman states treaty 
gives allies control of Germany's "back-door 
through Dardenelles if war should spread to Balkans, 
and terms pact an outstanding diplomatic victory. 
Italian circles express satisfaction over alleged 
Turkish refusal to modify status of Dardanelles in 



favor of Russia, Italy being adverse to seeing Russian 
navy become factor in Mediterranean; Italy also 
pleased over Turkey's maintenance of its pledges to 
Rumania. 

Oct. 20. — Japanese officials say they consider 
Grew's speech unofficial and indicate Japan will not 
reply. Part of press expresses antagonistic reaction. 

Chungking press reports deny rumor of possible 
Sino-Russian military pact and arrival of Russian 
mission to negotiate such pact. Six Chinese gun- 
men, believed agents of Ta Tao (Japanese Shanghai 
puppet regime), attack and kill two policemen on 
traffic duty; two of attackers also believed killed. 
Incident part of conflict over control of extra-Set- 
tlement roadways. 

Oct. 20. — Reported Germany is pressing Russia 
for positive action in view of allies' rejection of 
peace offer and Turkey's definite allignment with 
them. Reported that Russian and Turkish govern- 
ments have exchanged assurances of "unvarying 
friendship" despite suspension of negotiations 
between them Berlin officials remark that Turkey 
must not forget its real interests are linked with 
Russia and declare that its pact with Britain and 
France endangers its neutrality. United Press 
reports from London that it is understood when 
allied war aims are achieved Poland would not 
reclaim portion of its territory seized by Russia, 
this being said to be agreement reached among 
Chamberlain, Halifax, and A. Zaleski, representing 
Polish government temporarily established in France. 
Under Secretary of Foreign Affairs R. Butler an- 
nounces in written statement in Commons that 
Anglo-Polish pact covered only aggression by Ger- 
many and not by Russia or any other power. 

Oct. 21. — Nomura states Japan is "too strong to 
be changed or affected by interference from a third 
power. . . . We are aiming at creating in East 
Asia that which will contribute effectively to peace 
and progress of world. America and Japan should 



Cfjrfetma* Greeting 




— Beautifully illus t rated with 
new and modern designs 

Select your Christmas 
Greeting Cards from our 
large assortment which 
truthfully reflects the 
holiday spirit. 

Say your X'mas Greetings 
to your friends and rela- 
tives in a different way. 



PHILIPPINE EDUCATION CO., INC. 

101-103 Escolta Ground Floor 




BOOKS 

are 
wanted 
gifts 



Check this list of 

"MUST READ" BOOKS 

Non-Fiction 

MY DAY IN COURT 

— by Arthur Train 7.70 

WHY MEDDLE IN EUROPE 

—by Boake Carter 4.40 

INSIDE EUROPE 

—by John Gunther 7.70 

INSIDE ASIA 

—by John Gunther 7.70 

FICTION 

SHANGHAI '37 

—by Vicky Baum 6.05 

THE WINTER MURDER CASE 

—by S. S. Van Dine 3.85 

WATCH FOR THE DAWN 

—by Stuart Cloete 5.5Q 

EASY TO KILL 

—by Agatha Christie 4.40 

A*** * LOST SUNRISE 

^jgfc/aigA — b y K - Norris 4 40 

THE TREE OF LIBERTY 

—by Elizabeth Page . . . 6.60 
J 1 A GREAT DAY 

—by E. Seitert 5.50 




PHILIPPINE EDUCATION CO. 

INCORPORATED 



Ground Floor & Mezzanine 
103 Escolta 



December, 1939 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



517 



cooperate in defending peace in Pacific while striving 
at tame time to maintain peace in their respective 
territories". 

Shanghai Municipal Council protests to Japan 
against yesterday's "dastardly attack", stating roads 
in western area of Shanghai were built with Shanghai 
Municipal Council funds and have been controlled 
and policed by Council for years, no previous Chinese 
administration ever interfering in this well-ordered 
district. 

Izvestia states British -French -Turkish treaty 
creates new balance of power in Mediterranean and 
that Russian interests are affected, Britain and 
France having drawn Turkey "into orbit of war" 
Press prominently displays telegram from Turkish 
Foreign Minister to Foreign Commissar V. Mollotov 
stressing Turko-Russian friendship. Russian gov- 
ernment releases 3000 Germans from Russian prisons. 

Germany and Italy sign agreement for repatriation 
of Germans in Tyrol within 3 months. German 
press states Turkey made big mistake and that it 
will be betrayed as allies betrayed Czechoslovakia 
and Poland; Turkish desertion from ranks of neutrals 
menaces Italian interests also, it points out. DNB 
(German press service) states responsibility for 
sinking of Athenia rests "soley on Churchill" and 
that if ship had really been torpedoed, it would not 
not have remained afloat for 14 hours and "have had 
finally to be shelled and sunk by a British destroyer". 

Reported from Ankara that British, French, and 
Turkish military chiefs will cooperate closely and 
that Britain has granted credits to Turkey and 
promised large quantities of army and navy equip- 
ment. Paris press states Italy sees resurrection of 
hope for neutral Balkan bloc to resist Russian pres- 
sure. 

Oct. 22. — Nomura tells press he will seek full 
understanding with Grew regarding Japanese de- 
termination to establish new order in East Asia. 
It will be necessary for third powers, he hints, to 
fully understand Japan's side of question before any 
adjustments in Japan's foreign relations could be 
arranged. He states he will attempt to normalize 
relations with Russia and will continue to adhere to 
anti-Comintern pact in manner which would maintain 
friendly relations with Italy and Germany. 

Pravda denies Domei report that Russia has 
demanded of China right to keep troops in Mongolia 
and Sinkiang and sovietization of Northwest China 
under leadership of Chinese Communist Party. An- 
nounced in Moscow that trade relations with Ger- 
many have been extended, but French reports say 
Russia is demanding payment in gold for all materials 
delivered to Germany. 

DNB states operations by German warships 
against all shipping carrying contraband will be 
intensified and "extended to all oceans". Hitler 
reported to have informed Slovak Minister in Berlin 
that part of Poland will be granted to Slovakia. 
Propaganda Minister J. Goebbels states in radiocast 
that Churchill criminally ordered sinking of Athenia 
with hope of draging United States into war. United 



Press reports from London that neutral diplomatic 
observers believe Hitler is delaying "gigantic offensive" 
pending outcome of visit to United States by former 
Premier P. van Zeeland of Belgium who arrived in 
America recently to attend meeting of International 
Relief Committee but is believed to be unofficial 
emissary of neutral Oslo powers. 

Italian press praises Tyrol repatriation agreement 
as model one, stating it shows how such difficulties 
can be solved without violence. 

Working Committee of all India National Con- 
gress asks native members of government to resign 
in protest against British refusal to pledge self-rule 
for India in return for India's aid in war against 
Germany. 

Oct. 23. — Reported from Paris that Jospeh Stalin 
has consented to participate in joint German-Rus- 
sian declaration of present political situation, but 
refused to committ himself to anything of a military 
nature, this being one of reasons for his consent to 
Turkey's signing the pact with Britain and France; 
Stalin also reserved right to continue trade with 
Britain and United States to which Russia is ship- 
ping manganese which Germany needs. 

Reported from Switzerland that number of high 
German army officers have been removed from their 
commands accused of supporting restoration of 
monarchy. Continued small raids by German 
planes on British east coast believed to indicate test 
raids preparatory to possible large-scale attack. 
Reported from Ankara that Britain and France 
have agreed to loan Turkey £53,500,000 in credits. 

Oct. 24. — Japan Cabinet announces yen will be 
stabilized on dollar instead of pound sterling, and 
Manchukuo follows suit. Japanese military spokes- 
man in Peiping states military can and will attempt 
to avoid personal incidents involving Americans, 
but that Japan can not allow America or other nat- 
ions to engage in unrestricted commercial competi- 
tion with Japanese nationals in China; Japan's po- 
licy in East Asia is "matter of life and death" to Japan. 

Some 4000 Germans leave Tallinn, capital of 
Estonia; 6000 more will leave tomorrow Von Rib- 
bentrop in address in Danzig states: "Germany 
for years sought Anglo-German understanding and 
only ceased its efforts when compelled to recognize 
Britain did not desire this. War against Germany 
has been secretly but systematically prepared and 
Chamberlain did not come to Munich to prevent 
war but only to postpone it. Poland spurned Hit- 
ler's unbelievably generous offers, intended to serve 
as basis for permanent peace, at British instigation 
as Britain needed pretext. Hitler never touched 
vital interests of western democracies. There is 
not single doubt that French people were opposed 
to war, but Britain prevented settlement. Tradi- 
tional German-Russian friendship has been restored 
and peace in eastern Europe is now guaranteed for 
all future by Germany and Russia. Quarrel be- 
tween Germany and United States is impossible: 
Germany has absolutely no interest in American 
continent except for largest possible trade. Ger- 



many has always re s pected Monroe Doctrine while 
there are in existence many British colonies in west- 
ern hemisphere serving aa naval bases and coaling 
stations. By slandering Hitler, British want to 
alienate German people from their leader. Fully 
conscious that right is on our side we have done our 
best to avoid this war, but since it has been forced 
upon us, we shall see it through with all our energy 
and strength and in end there can be only great 
German victory. This is pledged by power of our 
nation and by our faith in man who it to us the great- 
est—our Fuehrer." British officials state speech 
was clumsy attempt to divide Britain and France 
and introduced no new element in situation. 

Canadian Ministry of External Affairs announces 
Athenia carried no war material either as cargo or 
stores. Mahatma Gandhi states attitude of Britain 
to establishment of dominion status in India after 
European war is "deplorable but not hopeless". 

Heavy rains on Western Front promise to eliminate 
possibility of big-scale German effort to break through 
allied lines. 

Giornale d'ltalia expresses doubts as to whether 
British-French-Turkish pact is "instrument of 
peace" and recalls that its origin was based on 
"Franco- British policy of encirclement. . . Italy will 
continue to watch sequence of events with sharp eyes". 

Oct. 25. — Gen. Pai Chung-hti, veteran Chi- 
nese strategist and Deputy Chief of Staff, says 
best way United States can uphold Open Door policy 
and Nine-Power Treaty is by embargoing sale of 
war material to Japan. 

Russo- Finnish conversations again suspended; 
stated Russian demands are heavier than Finland 
expected. 

German high command claims last French troops 
have been driven from German soil on Western 
Front. Signing of German-Swiss trade agreement 
is announced. Dr. Arthur Sayss-Inquart, Nasi 
Governor of former Austria, is appointed Deputy 
Governor of German-occupied Poland. Anthony 
Eden, Secretary for Dominions, states "patchwork 
peace and armed truce must be utterly unacceptable 
to us. War has progressed 2 months and already 
Hitler has lost the initiative. The aggressor's early 
advantage has been spent. . . Russia and Turkey 
have cut off Germany's road to the Bast. Britain's 
war aims are for international order that will be 
respected, for religious toleration, for denial and not 
worship of aggressive nationalism, and for liberty, 
security, and peace". 

Oct. 26. — Russia informs Britain it considers 
British war contraband list violation of international 
law as it includes such articles as foodstuffs, fuel, 
and clothing; "the blockade gravely impairs interests 
of neutral nations and destroys international trade 
in basic commodities for mass consumption, creating 
possibility of unlimited arbitrariness and endangering 
health and lives of peaceful populations"; note con« 
dudes that Russia considers blockade invalid and 
reserves right to claim compensation for any losses 
resulting from it. 



Madrigal & Co. 



COAL 
SHIPPING 

PHILIPPINE COTTON MILLS, INC. 
MADRIGAL OIL MILLS 
PORT LAMON LUMBER CO. 
RIZAL CEMENT CO., INC. 



Manila Offices 

8 M. del Banco Nacional 
Tel. 2-19-61 



Luzon Brokerage Co. 
Inc. 

CUSTOMS BROKERS 

Automobiles 
Furniture 
Stored 



Telephone 2-24-21 



Derham Bldg. 



Manila, P. I. 



518 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



December, 1939 



Chamberlain states in Commons that "if war to 
finish is indeed Germany's decision, there can be but 
one reply and we are prepared to give it. It isn't 
England that has challenged Germany in this war; 
it u German government which by its persistent 
acts of aggression pursued in face of our repeated 
warnings, that has forced us at last reluctantly to 
take up arms; it is German government which by 
reckless disregard of its pledged word and rights and 
liberties of other peoples that must bear responsi- 
bility for this war and all its consequences". British 
Air Ministry lists casualties in Royal Air Force since 
beginning of war at total of 32 men, including 11 
missing. 

Dutch ship owners express extreme dissatisfaction 
with way British contraband control has been oper- 
ating; ships are held up as long as 6 weeks and an 
average of 30 Dutch ships are always waiting investi- 
gation. 

Oct. 27. — Adm. K. Oikawa, Commander of Japa- 
nese navy in China, announces Japanese authorities 
in China are considering relaxation of trade restric- 
tions when these Would not interfere with military 
operations. 

Reported from Moscow that breaking up of landed 
estates in Poland has been completed and total of 
1,790,000 acres divided among 178,000 peasant 
families; much live-stock has also been distributed. 

Pope Pius XII in first encyclical pleads for return 
to God and points out error of considering state above 
everything else. Though letter is attack on totali- 
tarianism, he specifically mentions good relations 
between Italy and Vatican. He also refers to "resur- 
rection of Poland' . 

Oct. 28. — Hoc hi Shimbun states Japanese 
government is ready to enter negotiations with 
United States for revision and renewal of trade treaty. 

Stated in Berlin that embargo repeal by United 
States may cause Germany to hasten its warfare. 
Extensive aircraft movements are reported from 
behind German lines on Western Front and German 
big-gun batteries are used for first time against 
French positions. Berlin officials express optimism 
with respect to trade relations with Russia, stating 
exchange of goods will reach annual figure of 2,000,- 
000,000 marks and Russia will supply Germany with 
"thousands and even millions of tons of oil, cotton, 
ores, wood, and flax, and has also agreed to transport 
1,000,000 tons of soya beans from Machukuo in 
exchange for German machinery, chemicals, etc. 
Germans claim that between October 12 and 25 they 
sank 22 ships, totalling 121,976 tons, bringing total 
since war began to 115 ships or 475,321 tons; they 
admit loss of 3 submarines. 

After American Senate action on arms embargo 
repeal, French radiocast states this is "second great 
victory of war, first being conclusion of alliance with 
Turkey. British and French officials refrain from 
comment. 

Ocf. 29. — Russian troops establish garrison in 
Latvia, one of them at Libau, close to Memel which 
Germany acquired from Lithuania last March. 
Moscow officially announces that National Assembly 
of Beylorussia On former Poland) has unanimously 
resolved to request admittance into Soviet Union. 

Hundreds of persons arrested in Prague and else- 
where in Czechoslovakia during "Independence 
Day "celebration. First snow falls in Saar Valley, 
promising further delay in, military operations. 
Paris press states France will in few months posses 
three times number of planes Germany has; men 
employed in airplane factories will soon reach 300,- 
000. German Ambassador to Rome leaves for 
Berlin "for an extraordinary reason". 

Oct. 30. — Japanese Foreign Office spokesman 
states new "Central Government" will be established 
in China within a month; he claims Wang Ching- 
wei has been obtaining vigorous support from various 
Chinese quarters recently. 

Russian Ambas. I. Maisky at London in his capa- 
city as acting President of League of Nations Council, 
summons meeting of Council's 13 members in Geneva 
on December 3. Archbishop of Canterbury states 
"world is confronted with spirit of armed and ruth- 
less force which is truly satanic and that Christian 
citizens are fully justified in supporting allies in 
present conflict. In determining final settlement, 
victors must submit their case to conference in which 
neutral nations and German people, set free as we 
hope from the misrule of their present leaders, will 
have their place". 

Paris reports tell of grim purge of Nazi prisons 
and camps by H. Himmler to make room for new 
arrests. 

Ocf. 31. — Molotov, speaking before Supreme 
Soviet, attended by delegates from former Polish 
territories, asserts Soviet foreign policy calls for free 
hand in international affairs, continuation of neutra- 
lity, and determination not to help spread but to try 
halt war. He states "nothing is left of this ugly 
offspring of Versailles Treaty — Poland — which ex- 
isted by oppressing non-Polish nationalities and that 
continuation of war on ground that Poland must be 
restored is senseless. He states roles are changing 
and that Germany is now striving for peace while 
Britain and France, who yesterday disclaimed aggres- 
sion, are now seeking excuses to continue war. Mo- 
tives of Britain and France do not lie in any ideology 
but in their national interests as mighty colonial 
powers; "destruction of Hitlerism" and "fighting 
for democracy" are slogans that serve only as camou- 
flage. "Imperialist character of war is obvious to 
any one who wants to face realities. This was for 
world supremacy promises nothing for working 
class but hardship and bloody sacrifice. We have 
always held that a strong Germany is indispensable 
for durable peace in Europe. It is ridiculous to 
think Germany can simply be put out of commission; 
powers that cherish this foolish and dangerous dream 
have ignored deplorable experience of Versailles." 
Referring to recent armistice with Japan, he states 
this was result of Japanese initiative and adds that 
trade negotiations with Japan will be undertaken 
shortly. "It is not yet clear how soon and to what 
degree Japan is ready for vital improvement in our 



relations, but we are ready". He warns Turkey 
it has moved into orbit of war, but does not hint at 
any Russian aims in Balkans. With reference to 
negotiations with Finland, he states it is not true 
that Russia is demanding Aaland, but that it has 
merely asked Finland to move back some kilometers 
from the frontier in the Leningrad area and to lease 
some islands for creation of air bases in Gulf of Fin- 
land, taking part of Karelia in exchange. He states 
Finland was prepared to agree only in part and that 
if Fins continue to fail in meeting Russian require- 
ments it would be harmful to cause of peace. He 
accuses President Roosevelt of meddling contrary 
to United States policy, and states Philippines and 
Cuba which have long demanded freedom, have 
not yet obtained it, while Russia granted Finland's 
independence in 1917. He also asserts lifting of 
American embargo on arms may prolong and com- 
plicate the war. 

Reported from Paris that Gen. W. von Braus- 
chitsch has resigned and that Dr. Hjalmar Schacht 
has fled from Germany. 

Premier Benito Mussolini changes 8 ministers and 
4 Under-Secretaries, removing also Gen. A. Starace 
as Secretary of Fascist Party and making him Min- 
ister of Propaganda, a lesser job. Shift of these, all 
pro-German officials, is interpreted as indicating 
partial lessening of German influence in Rome. 

Government of Gen. Francisco Franco announces 
it will take over control of basic supplies in Spain to 
ensure even distribution; food shortage reported due 
to effects of civil war and restrictions in connection 
with European war. 

Nov. 1. — Japanese cut dykes in central and south 
Hopei, rendering 5,000,000 homeless, allegedly in 
effort to suppress guerillas hiding in kaoling fields. 

Soviet Parliament passes bill incorporating West- 
ern Ukraine into Soviet Union. Finnish Foreign 
Minister declares Finland has already declared its 
willingness to assist Russia in strengthening Lening- 
rad but will resist any territorial penetration; Finland 
would never allow a third power to use its territory 
for purposes inimical to Russia. 

Reported from London that Italy and Greece 
have concluded a non-aggression pact. Rumanian 
press urges formation of neutral Balkan bloc under 
leadership of Mussolini. 

Swiss government issues instructions informing 
population of its rights and obligations in case of 
foreign occupation of parts of Swiss territory. 



Nov. 2. — Japanese press comments sceptically on 
Molotov speech. Hochi Shimbun states he made 
gesture of shaking hands, but expresses doubt whe- 
ther he was extending his left or right hand. 

Berlin Nazis admit Molotov speech makes it clear 
Russia will not intervene in war militarily except in 
event of allied threat in Black Sea. Chamberlain 
states speech "occasioned some disappointment in 
Berlin" but that he refuses to disturb himself over 
"flights of fancy in which Molotov indulged himself 
when he describes aims of allies". British press 
stresses Molotov's emphasis on maintenance of 
Russian neutrality. 

Netherlands declares state of siege along parts of 
German frontier which may be flooded in case of 
invasion. 

Nov. 3. — Tokyo Institute of Pacific issues state- 
ment declaring United States wants kind of peace 
which is "not only undesirable but impossible to 
obtain". Grew "omits the word 'justice' from his 
plea for peace and ignores desire of all peoples to 
share fairly in fruits and opportunities offered by 
Mother Earth". Nine Japanese war planes dropped 
11 bombs over Put'en. Fukien, scoring 4 direct hits 
on American-operated hospital of British St. Luke's 
Mission; 2 patients were killed and others severely 
wounded. American Chamber of Commerce of 
Tientsin cables State Department urging it make 
new commercial pact with Japan until it "stops 
oppressing American business interests in North 
China". 

Pravda warns Finnish Foreign Minister against 
making provocative speeches. "We shall go direct 
to our aim, assuring our safety, crushing anything 
that stands in way. Look at map will convince any 
one of Soviet's right to take measures for protection 
of Leningrad whose population is half as large as all 
of Finland's. Finnish press is distorting Soviet 
aims. Finland has adopted measures only taken by 
a country preparing for war, evacuating cities, send- 
ing special troops, and so on. Finland is instigated 
by powers that urged Poland into war and are trying 
to involve us, too." 

British Air-Raid Precaution Commission warns 
that bombing of industrial areas may cost many 
lives and that whole official shelter scheme is "ter- 
ribly inadequate". 

Nov. 4. — Nomura and Grew hold 1-1 2 hour 
interview. Understood latter spoke with entire 
frankness, stating situation is serious and might 
lead to worse. 



Compliments of 



MANILA PRESS, INC. 



Tel. 4-90-05 

P. O. Box 41 438 Nueva, Manila 




ip «> < z k » « t: x u if a%v i:ir ss 

32 STA. POTENCIANA, MANILA 



December, 1939 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



Lord Linlithgow, Vice-roy and Governor-General 
of India, reported holding series of separate confer- 
ences with Mahatxna Gandhi and President Ma 
Jinnah of Muslim League. Five Indian National 
Congress ministries have resigned in protest against 
Britain's refusal to consider constitutional reforms 
until after war ends. 

Nov. 5. — Reuter's reports from London that 
according to information received, Hitler would 
accept every condition imposed by Stalin rather 
than yield to Western powers. 

With reference to United States action in lifting 
arms embargo, German press states "Money is still 
stronger than principles in America. As in last war, 
America buys profits with blood of other people". 

Nov. 6. — Japanese Foreign Office spokesman 
emphatically denies press reports that Grew threa- 
tened economic pressure and states talk was con- 
ducted in extremely friendly atmosphere. He states 
Japanese government is not desirous of having formal 
talk with United States at present as "we expect 
new central government of China will be organized 
before long and that will certainly clarify situation.* * 

Molotov states at Communist rally in Moscow 
that "no efforts to draw Russia into the war can 
succeed". Communist Internationale issues mani 
festo urging British and French workers to "go 
against those who favor continuation of this imperia- 
listic war" and attacking United States, Japan, and 
Italy as "bourgeois, socalled neutral countries which 
warm their hands near fire of war." Finn sources 
say Finland has shown willingness to meet Russian 
demands as to strengthening Leningrad, but that 
acceptance of demand for naval base on Hangeo 
peninsula would lead to creation of Russian Gibraltar 
there. 

International News Service reports Germany 
sent Belgium note Saturday asking for definite 



assurances regarding Belgium's neutrality. Paris 
L'Ordre reports grave dissatisfaction within upper 
Nasi circles where charge has been made Hitler is 
capitulating to Moscow. Also reports Himmler 
has created "Super-Gestapo" of 120 members charged 
with watching regular Gestapo and granted extraor- 
dinary powers, including right to assassinate. 

Gen. Quiepo de Liana, former Spanish commander, 
states in Rome that Germany's aviation is twice as 
good as combined aviation of Britain and France 
and that Germany will win war. 

Punjab Legislative Council adopts resolution, 
104 to 39, supporting Britain in war effort but urging 
re-examination of Constitution of India after con- 
clusion of war. Premier Sir S. Hyat Khan statea 
he felt Sir Samuel Hoare's speech in Commons last 
week was clear enough and meant India would re- 
ceive after the war same dominion status as that 
enjoyed by other dominions of Empire. 

Nov. 7. — Japanese release 7 Shanghai-owned ships 
of Portuguese registry after 5-months detention; 
believed to indicate relaxing of severe policy against 
third-power shipping. 

German Foreign Office spokesman states it is "up 
to smaller powers to do something more than paper 
protests against British blockade. They should 
have forced test case long ago, but they let 
Britain hold their ships for weeks without doing 
anything about it. In our view, such attitude is 
scarcely consistent with neutrality". German wor- 
kers reported laboring at top-speed at extending 
fortifications north of Luxembourg. Shock-troops 
and tanks reported massing on Dutch border. King 
Leopold of Belgium reported to have arrived unex- 
pectedly at the Hague last night, conferred with 
Queen Wilhelmiena until 1 :30 a. m., afterward return- 
ing to Brussels immediately. 



Nov. 8. — Japanese press opens apparently offi- 
cially inspired attack on United States, one paper 
stating it "conceitedly considers itself greatest power 
on earth, an arrogant nation that now proposes to 
deal with Japan through expanding naval power and 
economic pressure". Imperial Airways liner Dar- 
danusia fired on and struck by Japanese anti-aircraft 
guns and forced down at Weichow island near Hong- 
kong on flight to Bangkok allegedly for ignoring 
Japanese instructions to keep within certain lane 
during flight. 

Moscow Comintern appeals to world's communists 
to organize new front with left-wing elements to 
fight against war, manifesto stating old united front 
which tried to prevent capitalist offenses and fascist 
reaction is now obsolete; communists must adjust 
themselves to war conditions, purge doubtful ele- 
ments from their ranks, and establish discipline. 

Queen Wilhelmiena and King Leopold send joint 
telegrams to powers stating that "in this hour of 
anxious tension for entire world and before war in 
western Europe breaks out in full terror, we are 
convinced it is our duty to raise voice once again 
in warning. Warring nations already declared some 
time ago that they were not opposed entirely to an 
investigation to find reasonable and sound basis for 
honorable peace. As heads of state in two neutral 
nations, both having excellent relations with all their 
neighbors, we are ready to offer our good offices. If 
it should be agreeable to both parties concerned, we 
are ready to facilitate with all means at our disposal 
proposals they would suggest to us to do and with 
utmost spirit of friendly understanding to try to 
find basis for agreement. This appears to be task 
we have to fulfill for wellbeing of our nations and in 
interest of entire world, and we hope our offer will be 
accepted and thus first stride be made on road to 
foundation of lasting peace" Well-informed Lon- 




The Gift of Happiness And 
Home Brightness! Low Prices! 



Select your 
Christmas £ift 
from our ART 
Department — 
prices as low 



f 



265 



Complete 
with shade 

Floor and 
bridge lamps 
lor every 
home — dozens 
of beautiful 
models. Also 
gorgeous Table 
Lamps* 




PHILIPPINE EDUCATION CO. 



PICTURES 

Are the Best 




They add to the beauty of 
the entire home . . . and are 
a day-by-day reminder of 
your sentiment. 



If — 1 



Choose NOW! GIFT GROUP PI. 50 

Includes Pastoral... Water... 
and other interesting subjects. 
Choice of unusual plain and 
figured frames! A splendid 
Gift hint! 

NEW PRINTS — EACH P. 15 UP 

A wide range of scenes and 
subjects. Attractively de- 
signed. Ready for framing! 

Oils and Water Colors— Picture Framing 

PHILIPPINE EDUCATION Co. 



520 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



December, 1939 



don quarter* state appeal it assured of sympathetic 
reception but that it is not expected to provide basis 
for peace. French circles assume reserved attitude. 
German quarters describe offer at "nice gesture" 
but state they see scant possibility of success though 
Germany's "desire for peace remains unchanged". 
London Timea ttatet "proposals will be examined 
with respect due no less to the high-minded sincerity 
than to the exalted rank of the authors". Daily 
Telegraph state* "at present there it no sort of 
evidence that conditions to an honorable peace are 
obtainable". American press regards appeal with 
respectful and sympathetic interest but with scep- 
ticism regarding outcome. Belgium and Nether- 
lands issue new war-time regulations and Leopold 
calls up reserves and requisitions automobiles and 
taxies. 

C. R. Atlee in London speech defines Labor Party 
war aims, stating there must be a government in 
Germany that abandoned Hitlerism and "reinstate- 
ment of democratic governments of Czechoslovakia 
and Poland". Ideas of revenge and punishment 
must be excluded. All nations, great and small, 
must have right to- live and develop their own char- 
acteristics, and Germany must recognize that Pole, 
Czech, and Jew have same rights as German. War 
must be outlawed, disputes submitted to arbitrators, 
and international authority as superior to individual 
states must be recognized. Europe must federate 
or perish. Imperialism must be abandoned and in 
colonies where self-government can not yet be grant- 
ed, interests of natives must be paramount. Redis- 
tribution of colonies is not solution, but all nations 
must be given equal access to markets and raw ma- 
terials. National armed forces must be reduced 
to size necessary to preserve internal order, private 
manufacture of arms must be abolished, and there 
must be an international force strong enough to 
deter the aggressor. Small nations should take full 
share with large ones in international authority which 
will also deal with frontier problems and engage in 
economic planning on world scale to meet recurrent 
economic crises. 

Nov. 9. — Japanese tighten blockade around Tient- 
sin and again start interfering with movements of 
foreigners. Kokumin predicts "conflict to acquire 
territories and resources in South Seas will be fought 
in Pacific during or following European war which 
will probably result in expulsion of United States 
from East Asia". 

The 77th direct descendant of Confucius, great 
Chinese philosopher, is born in Shanghai, son of Duke 
Kung Teh-chen. 

Time-bomb, hidden in ceiling of Buergerbrau beer 
house in Munich kills 7 and wounds 60 Nazis, 27 
minutes after Hitler finished speech there and was 
on train for Berlin, program having been unexpect- • 
edly advanced. Meeting was in commemoration 
of putsch which started from there in 1923. Hitler 
speaking in fatigued and hesitating voice, declared 
Germany would never capitulate and that as for 
charge that allies could not trust word of present 
German government, he could say exactly same 
thing of those who make charge. "We have deve- 
loped all German resources to last detail and they 
shall never lay us low economically or militarily. 
There can be but one victor — we". He spoke deri- 
sively of British war aims ami asked whether their 
much-vaunted freedom exists in India and their high 
civilization in the mining districts of England. British 
failure to protest against Russian occupation of large 
part of Poland shows how little Britain is really 
interested in Poland's fate". He did not refer to 
Dutch and Belgian mediation offer and ended by 
saying Germany will reply to Britain in language it 
will understand. Propaganda Ministry issues state- 
ment declaring attempted assassination "seems 
traceable to foreign instigation and aroused fanatical 
indignation in Munich". Reward of 600,00 marks 
is offered for arrest of criminals", and several hun- 
dred suspects are said to have been arrested. Himm- 



ler states trail of perpetrators "leads to a foreign 
country" and offers 300,000 mark reward payable 
in foreign currency in addition to the 600,000. Ger- 
man press states Britain's declarations about elimi- 
nation of Hitler "prepared atmosphere" for plot. 

Simon, speaking for Chamberlain who is suffering 
of gout, states "stiff-necked men" who run Germany 
"do not speak any language but that of force" and 
that therefore he is "not very hopeful of satisfactory 
response from Hitler to Dutch and Belgian offer. 
We do not want continue war day longer than neces- 
sary if satisfactory settlement can be obtained in 
other way, but the war may at any moment turn 
into violent conflict". 

Dutch press reports German troops are massed 
on border not to invade Holland but to be used in 
case allies break through Siegfried line. Dutch 
arrest 4 Germans near Border following discovery 
of attempts to smuggle out Dutch uniforms; a Ger- 
man airplane was found in a garage. 

Gandhi rejects British contention that Indians 
should achieve unity before acquiring dominion 
status, stating that "only when it is free from bon- 
dage will India be able to solve its internal problems. 
If time has not yet come for acceptance of funda- 
mental truth, than I suggest that further efforts to 
reach solution be suspended". 

Nov. 10. — Ambassador Kerr returns from Chung- 
kingand states in Honkong that discussions with 
Chinese government at no time touched on peace 
terms with Japan. 

Foreign Minister of Finland states no common 
basis for agreement was found in latest conference 
with Russia and that present status of negotiations 
in worst since their inception. Rumania reported 
to have withdrawn almost all troops from Bessarabia 
which once belonged to Russia, to avoid appearance 
of challenge. 

Large plate-glass window in Berlin shop of Hitler's 
personal photographer is smashed by missile ap- 
parently aimed at large portrait of Fuehrer. Nether- 
lands cancells all soldiers' leave and begins flooding 
main water defense line of country, waters spreading 
through Utrecht province and also over area between 
Maas and Waal rivers, these sections protecting 
Amsterdam, Rotterdam, the Hague, and industrial 
areas from invasion. 

Nov. 11. — Hitler attends funeral of Nazis killed 
in bomb explosion. Rudolf Hess, Nazi leader, 
states "terrible crime has taught German people to 
hate". German Ambassador informs Dutch govern- 
ment Netherland and Belgian proposal will be "care- 
fully examined "by Hitler. Brussels correspondent 
of London Daily Mirror reports Germany has sent 
virtual ultimatum to Holland demanding free port 
in Amsterdam and airbases in Friesland and Gro- 
iningen for attack on England; demands said to have 
been revealed to Belgian parliament members Friday 
and King Leopold is said to have informed Queen 
Wilhelmiena that if Holland agreed he would be 
forced to occupy southern provinces of Holland. 
American, British, and French consuls reported to 
be quietly urging their nationals to leave Holland. 
General attitude of Hollanders reported to be calm. 

December meeting of League of Nations is can- 
celled. 

Nov. 12. — Moscow radiocast charges Finland 
with maintaing irreconcilable attitude and Trud 
denounces Finnish leaders and blames impasse on 
"machinations of British and French imperialists". 

Berlin spokesman states, "I can not go beyond 
what already has been said that German respect for 
neutrality is based on absolute reciprocity". Dutch 
government states talk of German ultimatum is 
"absolute nonsense". Dutch and Belgian Foreign 
Ministers confer at Brada, near Belgian frontier. 
British and French embasies have notified their 
nationals it is necessary to leave Belgium and Hol- 
land immediately. 



King George replies to Wilhelmiena and Leopold 
recalling Britain s earlier favorable replies to similar 
appeals on August 23 and 28. and stating that a few 
days later Germany launched its unprovoked attack 
on Poland. The King expresses appreciation of the 
offer and states further, * r lt is and always has been 
my desire that war should not last a day longer than 
necessary. The essential conditions on which we 
are determined that an honorable peace must be 
assured already have been plainly stated. We are 
fighting that Europe may be redeemed, in the words 
of my Prime Minister, from the perpetually recur- 
ring fear of German aggression, enabling people of 
Europe to preserve their independence and liberties*. 
Should Your Majesty be able to communicate any 
proposals from Germany of such a character my 
government would givs them most earnest considera- 
tion". Churchill bitterly attacks Hitler as a "cor- 
nered maniac" and expresses concern over Holland 
and Belgium stating "either all that Britain and 
France stand for in modern world will go down, or 
Hitler and Nazi regime and recurring Prussian 
menace in Europe will be broken and destroyed. . . 
If we are conquered, all will be enslaved, and united 
States will be left single-handed to guard rights of 
men". 

President Albert Lebrun, replying to Dutch and 
Belgian offer, reported to have said that permanent 
peace could only be established by repairing injus- 
tice to Austria, Czechoslovakia, and Poland, and 
that there must be effective guarantees of liberties 
of all nations. "It is up to Germany, no longer to 
France, today to pronounce for or against such 
peace". 

Nov. 13. — Britain and France notify Japan they 
intend to reduce their troops in China, leaving only 
sufficient number to "maintain peace and order" 
and "protect property". 

British steamer Sirdharxa sinks off Singapore 
water-front within 15 minutes as result of blast 
attributed to a mine. 

German planes raid British Shetland islands but 
are driven off. 

Nov. 14. — Reported from London and Paris that 
decision to withdraw troops from China does not 
imply any sacrifice of their rights. Japanese mili- 
tary refuse to pefmit coal supplies to enter Tientsin, 
leading to great hardship of population because of 
the cold. 

Said in Berlin that Anglo-French conditions for 
restoration of Austria, Czechoslovakia, and Poland, 
are "stupid". Spokesman states "Germany will 
respect Dutch and Belgian neutrality so long as 
Britain and France respect it and so long as Holland 
and Belgium show themselves capable of preserving 
strict neutrality". National Zeitung lists 26 
British ships "known to be armed", and states they 
will be treated as "pirate ships" and sunk without 
warning. British destroyer reported sunk by mine; 
11 ships sunk this week indicate renewed intensive 
warfare. 

Nov. 15. — Japanese take Pakhoi, last seaport 
connecting Chinese government with outside world, 
landing without resistance; Chinese claim they are 
putting up strong resistance behind city. Viscount 
Okabe, head of Philippine Society of Japan, states 
in radiocast from Tokyo to Philippines in connection 
with Commonwealth Day that "Japan has no designs 
against Philippines, now or after independence. . . 
Any sensible person would realize that talk of Ja- 
panese designs on Islands is pure poppycock and 
sheer nonsense". 

Stockholm dispatch states monarchist campaign 
for restoration of Hohenzollern family is growing in 
Germany; also that in Bavaria there is separatist 
movement in favor of Prince Rupprecht. Germany 
claims 2 British flying-boats were destroyed and a 
cruiser damaged in raid on Shetlands. 

Franco government restores state payments to 
clergy which Spanish Republic suspended in 1931. 




Delicious Fresh Orange Juice 
from Real Oranges!! 

That is what the delightful beverage 



ROYAL TSU FRANCE' 



gives you — 

It is lightly carbonated which makes it 
sparkling and more tempting — 

Taste it and you Will know at once it is 
the natural fruit and juice of sun-ripened 
California oranges — 

a product of the 

San Miguel Brewery 

famed for high quality products 



December, 1939 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



521 



Index to Volume XXXVI 

Philippine Magazine 

January to December, 1939 



ARTICLES 

Adoy Builds a House 

Agong Calls 

Alexander Lippay 

Amended Constitution, The 

America Views the Philippine 



Pavilion 



Appeal to My Comrades. 
Basi 



Battle of Bagsak, The 

Betting a la Philippines 

Bicolano Riddles 

Bohol's Fairy Hills 

Buri, for the Poor Man's Bread. 
Cabesang Andang and Pepay. . . 



"China Incident", The. 



Fascii and Nazi 

Fernando Maria Guerrero 

First Filipino Law School, The 

First Trip Abroad and First Book.. 

Gambling and Revenue 

Holy Wedlock in Lepanto 

"I Learned about Deer from Her". 

Igorot Riddles 

Ilocano Colloquialisms 



In Journalism 

Inside "Greater Germany". 
Juli 



AND ESSAYS 

Mariano D. Manawis 

P. D. Rogers 

A. V. H. Hartendorp. . 
Bernardo P. Garcia. . . 



January 
July 
May 



21 
291 
201 



September 368 



Major ie Burnett Cra- 
mer September 

W. S. Boston March 

Jose Resurreccion Ca- 
lip. 



372 
109 



December 498 



P. D. Rogers September 370 

M. E. Russell June 



April 



255 
173 
204 
332 



497 



Koronadal Valley, Cotabato, The . 

Land of Promise 

Lightning Literacy 

Lights and Shadows of Shanghai. . . 

Log of a Tropical Tramp 

Major Finley and the Sheik Ul Islam. 

Mandaya is Born, A 

Manila Ballet Moderne, The 

Manila Carnival, The 

Manila from the 16th to the 18th 
Century 

Maranao Bansulat, The 

Maranao Kutiapi, The 

Marooned in the Jungle 

Measures of Length in Aklan 

Minannamay 

More about Lafcadio Hearn's Letters 
Mount Pulog — Heaven of the Ibaloi . . 

Mountain Storm 

Mural Painting in the Philippines. . . . 

Narrow Escape, A 

Night with the Mansakas, A 



No Scuttling Away. . . Two Significant 
Resolutions on American Far 
Eastern Policy 

Paulita 

Pearling in Sulu — A Gamble on a 
Blister 

Philippine "Halloween" Customs.. . . 

Philippine Iron Mining Industry. . . . 

Philippine Middletown?, A 

Philippines Comes of Age Critically, 
The 

On the Road to Pagsanjan 

On Rafael Palma 

Our Changing Mountain-men 

Renacimiento Libel Suit, The 

Return of the Waltz 

Sinibaldo de Mas — Early Spanish 
Advocate of Philippine In- 
dependence 

Spanish Fortifications of Manila, 
The 



Paquito A. Serrano. 

Hugo Miller May 

Angel V. Campoy. . . . August 

Pura Santillan-Cas- 
trence December 

Lin Yu January p. 24 

February, 72, March, 121, April, 170 
May, 211, June, 254, July, 294, 
August, 333, September, 375, October, 
413, November, 455, December 502. 

Rudolf Schneider November 445 

Teodoro M. Kalaw . 

Teodoro M. Kalaw. 

Teodoro M. Kalaw. 

Anonymous September 374 

Dalmacio Maliaman December 499 

W. S. Boston April 

B. P. Sibayan March 

Jose Resurreccion Ca- 

Hp 

Teodoro M. Kalaw. . . 

Rudolf Schneider 

Pura Santillan-Cas- 

t re nee January 

Dominador Z. Rosell . 
A.V.H. Hartendorp. . 



March 

January 

April 



February 
February 
October 



119 
17 
164 



169 
123 

70 
64 
412 



December 
February 



Irene LaWall August 

Marc T. Greene July 

Marc T. Greene April 

P. D. Rogers January 

Jose Mangune December 

A. V. H. Hartendorp 
A.V.H. Hartendorp 



22 
493 
60 
330 
287 
160 
19 
494 

November 449 



M. Le Gentil. 



Maximo Ramos 

Maximo Ramos 

W. S. Boston 

Dominador I. Ilio. . . . 
Mariano D. Manawis . 

Marc T. Greene 

Cecile Carino 

W. S. Boston 

Galo B. Ocampo 

P. D. Rogers 

Honorato L. Buhay as 

told to Dominador I. 

Ilio 



American Legion 

Pura Santillan-Cas- 
trence 



February 66 

August and 328 
December 490 
April 
July 

February 



168 
296 
67 



November 456 



March 

February 

November 

July 

October 

April 



October 



122 
76 
456 
292 
408 
167 



414 



P. D. Rogers 

Angel V. Campoy. 
Rizal F. Gatica. . . . 
Anonymous 



July 285 

September 373 

August 327 

October 411 

November 451 

June 245 



Vicente Albano Pads. 

Anonymous 

Rafael Corpus 

Fred Passmore 

Teodoro M. Kalaw. . . 
Zoya N. Popova 



May 
July 
June 
April 
May 
June 



Emilia no L. La us October 



206 
290 
250 
158 
208 
247 



410 



Irma Thompson Ire- 
land January, p. 14, 

and March, p. 112. 



Strategic Importance of the Philip- 
pines — As Seen by a Dutch Ob- 
server in 1626 

Sunday in Tulinda 

Tagalog Proverbs 

Tagalog Proverbs 

Tagalog Riddles 

Urbana at Felisa 

Uses of Diplomacy — The Sanda 

Uprising, The 

Work of the Second Assembly, The 



Dr. Walter K. Frankel. November 447 

Luis B. Ladonga December 496 

Flavio Ma. Guerrero.... January 25 

Abraham R. Lay go... August, p. 334 

and November 457 

Fidela de Leyos February 74 

Encarnacion Alxona . . August 325 

P. D. Rogers March 117 

Bernardo P. Garcia. . . June 252 



SHORT STORIES 



"Heroes are Made" 

House that I Built, The 

Hunger in Bar ok 

Lizard and the Dream, The 

Mr. Pettigrew and his Alter Ego. . 

Patricia of the Green Hills 

"Political Conversation" 

Remembrance of Revolt. . 

Seven Hills Away 

They, the Living 

Three Wives, A Lanao Folk Tale.. 



Napoleon Garcia 

Bienvenido N. Santos. 
N. V. M. Gonxalex. . . 
Alfredo B. Belen . ■ 

Fred Passmore 

Maximo Ramos 

Jose Maria Bar redo. . 
Amador T. Daguio. . . 
N. V. M. Gonxalex. . . 
Lodivico D. Arciaga . . . 
Mangoda Magiringa . 



POEMS 

Alexander Lippay Aurelio Alvero 

Autumn Fancy Harriet Mills McKay. . 

Cotabato Bay Dominador I. Ilio. . . . 

Dawn Liborio G. Malapira . 

Days of Darkness Morris L. Appelman. . 

Desert Lover Harriet Mills McKay. . 

Exterior Decoration Harriet Mills McKay. . 

First Child Abelardo Subido 

Homes of Cavite Ina K. Dickey 

Lotus Desiderio F. Aquitania 

Memory Mosaic of Siquijor Harriet Mills McKay. 

Moon- Craft Harriet Mills McKay. . 

Motor Truck in the Jungle Maximo Ramos 

Nocturne Jose Velex Yasay 

Numquam Eum M oritur um Nobis 

Videbatur D. J. L. Bromfield . . . . 

O Land of Volcan Albert W. C. T. Harre. 

Ode to the Terrace-Builders R. Baguilat 

Prelude to Storm Martha Williams Kee~ 

van 

Rainy Evening Harriet Mills McKay. . 

Streets at Night, The Luis Dato 

Sunset on the Bay Martha Williams Kee- 

van 

Swain to his Love, A Trinidad A. Benito. . 

There is no Music Anonymous 

Transient Constancy Harriet Mills McKay.. 

Tropic Noon Harriet Mills McKay. . 

Visayan Serenade, A Joseph B. Man 

War Martha Williams Kee- 

van 

EDITORIALS 

America and the Philippines The Editor 

"Appeasement" of Japan The Editor 

C. I. C. and a New Caveat, The. . The Editor 

Character — and Where it will be 

Found The Editor 

Christ-mass The Editor 

Defensive Devices The Editor 

Development of Our Petroleum Re- 
sources 

Fascist International Breaking Up?, 
The 

Fortifying Guam Th> 

General Mac Arthur's Statement on 
the Defensibility of the Philip- 
pines 

High Commissioner Paul V. McNutt 

Hitler's Reichstag'sSpeech and Roose- 
velt's Conference with the Senators 

Isolationism The Editor 

Japan's Southward Drive The Editor 

Jews and Fascism, The 

"Justice and Friendship for AH".. . . 

Meaning of the "War" in Europe, 

The The Editor 

Nationalization of the Retail Trade . . The Editor. 

Neutrality Act of 1939, The The Editor, 



June 

April 

March 

February 

May 

April 

May 

October 



The Editor April 



The 



Editor . 
Editor . 



The Editor. 
The Editor. 



The Editor. 



The Editor. 
The Editor. 



April 
March 



July 
June 

February 

January 

April 

January 

April 



162 
62 
20 

205 
69 



April 
February 
January 
May 

February 
November 453 
September 360 
October 405 
March 115 
June 248 
December 495 



May 200 

November 448 

September 365 

August 327 

March 1 1 1 

September 367 



251 
163 
118 
68 
210 
17 
207 
413 



June 244 

December 499 

February 63 

September 367 

August 324 

July 292 

January 13 

June 249 

October 407 

June 244 

November 454 

August 326 

September 365 

September 363 

June 243 

March 108 

May 199 

December 490 

February 60 



156 



155 
107 



283 
243 

59 
13 
156 
1 

IS 



October 40' 
December 48 
November 44' 



522 



PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



December, 1939 



Philippines not to Remain a 8ubject 
State, The 

'Phoney"? 

Poland and Issues in Europe and 
Asia 

Pope verus "Man-God" 

President Gonzales of the University 
of the Philippines 

President Quezon's Wise Decision. . . 

Russia and Finland: Defense or 
1 Conquest? 



Trade, Foreign and Domestic 

Two Mouths, McNutt and Sayre. . 

War? 

What was Done at Lima? 



The Editor August 323 

The Editor September 36S 

The Editor July 284 

The Editor March 108 

The Editor May 199 

The Editor August 324 

The Editor December 488 

The Editor March 109 

The Editor October 403 

The Editor November 443 

The Editor September 364 

The Editor January 11 



COVERS 

The Musician Gavino R. Congaon... January 

The Peep-Show Gavino R. Congaon. . . February 



Dress Rehearsal Gavino R. Congaon... March 

"Sweepstake tickets, Strl" Gavino R. Congaon. . . April 

Vacation Cruise Gavino R. Congaon... May 

Rainy Days Gavino R. Congaon... June 

Cuya Goes Acourting Gavino R. Congaon. . . July 

Waiting for the Whistle Gavino R. Congaon... August 

His First Trophy Gavino R. Congaon. . . September 

My Turn Next! Gavino R. Congaon. . . October 

The Flag Goes By Gavino R. Congaon. . . November 

Guess What Ma Bought For Me. . . Gavino R. Congaon.. . December 

DEPARTMENTS 

Philippine Economic Conditions. . . . Paul P. Steintorf 4, 52, 100, 148, 

192, 236, 276, 316, 356, 396, 436, 480 
Four O'Clock in the Editor's Office 35,84,134,179, 

220, 261, 304, 341, 383, 422, 464, 510 
News Summary 5, 52, 101, 148, 

192, 237, 277, 316, 356, 397, 436, 480 
Astronomical Data Weather Bureau. .... . 46,94,142,186, 

230, 270, 310, 350, 390, 430, 474 



The "China Incident" 

{Continued from page 507) 
are in favor of Wang's proposal, and it is the Japanese 
army that is opposing it. Thereon hangs a tale. For it is 
an open secret that in the Chinese seaports and big cities 
every Japanese soldier, officer, or ronin is pretty much an 
"emperor" and a law unto himself, in so far as his dealing 
with the Chinese is concerned. Human nature being what 
it is, he would be a superman indeed, if he did not "squeeze" 
the Chinese and bleed them white in order to fatten him- 
self. Surely there is a "good" reason for him to oppose any 
proposal to send him back to Japan where no such op- 
portunity exists. At this rate of deterioration, it is 
doubtful that the Japanese fighting services in China could 
hold out for ten more years, the time now admitted by the 
Japanese Premier to be necessary for the solution of the 
"China Incident". This might be a mortal wound for the 
would-be conquerors of East Asia. 

Internationally, it' may be remarked that the Japanese 
invasion of Kwangsi has brought France into closer co- 
operation with China. For. with the Japanese fighting 
forces aiming at complete domination of the Far East, 



closer to the Indo-China territory, France has no choice 
but to^become more active in her cooperation with China, 
and this cooperation found expression in free passage 
of China's war supplies through Indo-China. 

With the expiration of the American- Japanese commercial 
treaty drawing near, the Japanese have been making 
frantic efforts to pacify American public opinion in order 
to prepare the way for negotiating a new trade treaty. 
However, of the over 600 cases of Japanese infringement 
upon the rights of the Americans in China, mentioned by 
Ambassador Grew, the Japanese admitted only Isome 300 
cases. True, some cash payments were speedily made in 
indemnification )for some damaged American properties, 
but only six or seven teases were thus settled. 

Meanwhile, experts at the Institute of Pacific Relations 
meeting at Virginia Beach concurred in the view Hihat an 
American embargo on her Japanese trade would force 
Japan to sue for peace. There seems, then, to be some hope 
for peace in China in the immediate future. America 
holds the key, but will she act? 



An Appropriate Gift 
For any of your friends 



Buy your friends a year's subscription to the PHILIPPINE 
MAGAZINE. 

One prominent local resident has for the past four years sent us 
subscriptions for twenty of his friends each year and says that this 
not only saves him the time-consuming task bf choosing and pur- 
chasing so many individual gifts, but gives him the satisfaction of 
seeing his gifts gratefully received and enjoyed by entire families. 

Why not do this yourself? It's a pleasant and always accept- 
able way of expressing your Good Wishes, renewed each month. 

A handsome gift card will be sent to each of your friends, in- 
dicating the source of the subscription. 

PHILIPPINE MAGAZINE 



P. O. Box 2466 — — Manila — — 



217 Dasmarinas 



"ALL 



in: 

by Eleven 
o'Clock! 



IF YOU'RE LIKE THAT YOU 
MAY NEED A "PROTECTING" 
FOOD TO STEP UP YOUR 
ENERGY AND GIVE YOU 

HEALTH-BUILDING ELEMENTS 




IF YOU GET TIRED EASILY, it may be because you need a "protect- 
ing" food in your diet to (1) give you quick energy, (2) build up your 
general health reserve. Ovaltine offers you both of these advantages! 



EVERYWHERE TODAY people 
are adopting a new "protecting 
food" idea to give them more energy 
during the day and help them build a 
more solid foundation of health. 

If you tend to get tired in mid- 
morning or afternoon— if you haven't 
your full measure of pep— why not 
adopt this new "protecting food" plan? 
Here's what you do: when you feel 




: i j. 

n — - — ; \%mm\mis*» 



tired, or at any other time of the day, 
take a cupful of delicious Ovaltine, the 
"protecting food-drink" so popular today. 

First, Ovaltine gives you food-energy 
in a form that gets into the blood stream 
in just a few minutes, making possible 
an increased feeling of pep and vitality 
in an amazingly short time. 

Second, Ovaltine contributes valuable 
proteins, minerals and vitamins (which 
are known as "protective" factors) nec- 
essary to health. These "protective" 
factors help build up your resistance. 

In addition to these advantages, 
Ovaltine is exceptionally easy to digest. 

OVALTINE 



HEAVY LINE ABOVE shows average in- 
crease in "energy reserve" of a group of 20 
normal people when given Ovaltine be- 
tween-meals. Note 20% increase in 15 min- 
utes. (Test based on blood-sugar analysis.) 




TO INCREASE YOUR CA- 
PACITY for work and enjoy- 
ment, why not try a cupful or 
two of Ovaltine every day? 

To get a trial tin of Ovaltine 
make use of the coupon at 
right. Or— better still — ask 
your dealer for a full-size tin 
TODAY. You'll find it's easy 
to prepare. 



And it helps digest starchy foods like 
rice and bread and potatoes. 

Ovaltine may be the protecting food 
regime you need to have the extra en- 
ergy to "put things over." It may hold 
the secret of better health and more 
abundant living— for you. 

Drink two cupfuls daily— between or 
at meals. (You can make it with either 
plain or evaporated milk.) 

Doctors approve Ovaltine. It is served 
in hospitals all over the world, including 
1,700 in America alone. 

To have the energy necessary to en- 
joy life, why not try Ovaltine? 



C0UP0N_for a Sample Tin 



! id. A. Keller, ltd., Dept. 19-1 

I 171 Juan Una, Manila 

J Please mail me a trial tin of Ovaltine. I enclose 

I P.10 to cover your cost of handling and mailing. 

I 

| Name 

I 

I Addr.n 

I 

| Town 

J 




McCullou-ih Priniin,; Co, - )/ 



