
BLUE BOOK 

INAUGURATION 

and 

INDUCTION INTO OFFICE 

of 

His Excellency 

MANUEL A. ROXAS 

as President of the Philippines 
and 

The Honorable ELPIDIO QUIRINO 

as Vice President of the Philippines 
Manila, Tuesday. May 28, 1946 



THE PRESIDENT 



"Our appointment with destiny is upon us. . . 
I ask from the nation the full and undivided sup- 
port of heart, mind and energy for the necessary 
tasks which await us/* 

— From His Inaugural Address 



Manuel Ac an a Roxas 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

PAGE 



Official Program VII 

Foreword -Paul V. McNutt 1 

Inaugural Address— Manuel Roxas 3 

Manuel Roxas - Biography 1 3 

Elpidio Quirino — Biographical 17 

Jose A velino— Inaugural 21 

Eugenio Perez —Inaugural 25 

Pictorial Section 29 

The Cabinet 52 

The Congress 54 

Inaugural Committee 58 

The Constitution 66 



IV 



OFFICIAL PROGRAM 

Inaugural Day, May 28 



7:00 o^clock a. m. 

The main doors of the City Hall will be opened to those entitled to sit 
at the center of the ceremonial platform. The right and left wings of the 
ceremonial platform will be opened to the ladies and other guests with 
admission cards. 

Participating groups and other delegations representing the various 
departments, bureaus, offices and agencies of the national government, 
the provincial and municipal governments, civic, commercial and industrial 
organizations, foreign communities, educational institutions, and civic 
organizations will occupy the sections respectively assigned to them. 

The general public will assemble at the places designated for them. 

7/30 o'clock a. ffi. 

The main doors of the City Hall will be opened to the following 
officials and distinguished guests who, upon arrival, will be escorted to 
their respective assembly places as follows: 

The Members of the Consular Corps 

The Chief of Staff, Philippine Army and Staff 

The Members of the House of Representatives 

The Members of the Senate 

The Associate Justices of the Supreme Court 

The Members of the new Cabinet 

The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court 

The Speaker of the House of Representatives 

The President of the Senate 

The Commander, Philippine Sea Frontier, United States Navy and 
Staff 

The Commanding General, Army Forces Western Pacific, United 
States Army and Staff 

vii 



Assemblage 



8:15 o'clock a. ffi. 

The officials and guests assembled at the City Hall will proceed to the 
ceremonial platform in the following order: 

The Commanding General, Army Forces Western Pacific, United 

States Army and Staff 
The Commander, Philippine Sea Frontier, United States Navy and 

Staff 

The President of the Senate 

The Speaker of the House of Representatives 

The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court 

The Members of the new Cabinet 

The Associate Justices of the Supreme Court 

The Members of the Senate 

The Members of the House of Representatives 

The Chief of Staff, Philippine Army and Staff 

The Members of the Consular Corps 

8:40 o'clock a* m. 

The United States High Commissioner to the Philippines and Staff 
will leave his residence preceded by a Cavalry Escort of the United States 
Arm v . 

8:45 o'clock a. m* 

The President, the President-elect, and the Vice President-elect will 
leave Malacanan preceded by a Cavalry Escort of chc Philippine Army. 

8:50 o'clock a. m. 

The arrival at the ceremonial platform of the following officials will 
be announced by a bugle call which will be the signal for the public to 
rise; 

The United States High Commissioner to the Philippines. 
Upon the appearance of the United States High Commissioner at the 
ceremonial stand, four ruffles and four flourishes will be sounded. 

The President, the President-elect, and the Vice President-elect. 

viii 



Ceremonies 



9:00 o'clock a. m. 

Presentation of the National Colors. 

The American Flag will he borne by members of the United States 
Army* 

"United States National Anthem/' by the Philippine Army Band. 

The Philippine Flag will be borne by members of the Philippine Army. 
"Philippine National Anthem, 1 ' by the Philippine Army Band. 

Invocation by His Grace, the Most Reverend Gabriel M. Reyes, 
D.D., Archbishop of Cebu. 

Reading by the President of the Senate of the Proclamation by the 
Congress of the Philippines announcing the results of the elections in 
the Philippines. 

Administration of the Oath of Office to President-elect MANUEL 
ROXAS by the Hon, Manuel V. Moran, Chief justice of the Supreme 
Court of the Philippines. 

As the President rises to take the oath the public will also rise and will 
remain standing until the gun salute and the ruffles and flourishes, and 
the playing of the Philippine National Anthem, in the order indicated, 
arc completed. 

Administration of the Oath of Office to Vice President-elect EL- 
PIDIO QUIRING, by the Hon. Manuel V. Mokan, Chief Justice o£ 
the Supreme Court of the Philippines. 

Inaugural Address by the President of the Philippines. 

" Pangulong Roxas," March by the Philippine Army Band. 

ix 



Parade 

10:00 o'clock 0. m, 

A bugle call will be sounded to indicate the start of the parade to be 
reviewed by the President. 

ORDER OF UNITS 
grand marshal 

Maj, Gen. Rafael Jalandoni 
Chief of Staff, Philippine Army 

MILITARY PARTICIPATION 
Military Police Command' 
Philippine Army 
Guerrilla Organizations 

CIVIC PARTICIPATION 

Departments, Bureaus, Offices and Agencies of the National Govern- 
ment, 
City of Manila. 
Women's Organizations- 
Educational Institutions and Youth Organizations. 
Provincial and City Participations. 
Civic Organizations and Chambers of Commerce. 
Labor Participation. 
Miscellaneous Units. 

Upon the completion of the Parade the President will proceed to 
Malacanan Palace preceded by a cavalry escort. Outside the gates of 
Malacanan, the cavalry escort will be relieved by the Presidential Guards. 

x 



Recession 

72:00 o'clock noon 

Upon the conclusion of the Inaugural Ceremonies, the following 
officials will retire in the order given: 

The President of the Philippines 

The United States High Commissioner 

Official Calls 

12:10 o'clock p. m. 

The President will receive the following officials at Malacanan Palace: 
The Vice President of the Philippines 

The Chief Justice and Associate Justices of the Supreme Courr 

The Members of the Cabinet 

The Members of the Senate 

The Members of the House of Representatives 




J 



Xlll 




Paul Varies McNffit 



FOREWORD 



It happens not infrequently in history that the times call for a man and 
that man appears. The future of the Philippines as a nation is the re- 
sponsibility of the people, but without energetic leadership, the very 
magnitude of the task ahead might well breed despair. It is fortunate that 
these critical times produced in the person of the freely chosen leader of the 
Philippine people a man of such strength and inspiration as Manuel Roxas, In 
a larger sense, the assumption by Manuel Roxas of the leadership of his people 
is a reflection of the basic health and strength of the Philippine nation. 

When President Roxas took his oath of office, he assumed the task of lead- 
ing a people from destruction to recovery and from prostration to reconstruction 
in a world shaken to its foundations by the grinding impact of war. In this 
shell-shocked world, the Philippine Republic is soon to emerge as an indepen- 
dent entity j one of the many small nations of the earth . 

Courage and leadership are required. Those qualities are precisely those 
which appear in President Roxas. A democratic dynamism is needed to meet 
the problems that will crowd in upon the Philippine people from every side. 
The institutions of democracy established here under the protection of American 
sovereignty will be called upon to meet their great test. They will be required 
to adapt themselves to emergencies and to initiate and test untried solutions 
of monumental problems. The great advantages of the democratic system lie 
in the fact that experimental solutions will be tested not only by experience but 
also by the impact of these solutions on the touchstone of public opinion and 
by exposure to the health-giving atmosphere of free public discussion. 

In such a process, the training and background of President Roxas, and his 
avowed dedication to democratic principles, will stand the Philippine people 
in good stead. His dynamic leadership, in a framework of devotion to liberal 
ideals, is exactly the ingredient to bring order out of what otherwise might be 
chaos. 

Sound judgment is essential in such a leader, but equally essential is the 
boldness to try and to fail, and a willingness to acknowledge error and to start 
over again with undiminished resolution and energy. 

I believe that the people of the Philippines have produced in Manuel Roxas 
such a statesman. I have confidence that he will give to his responsibilities 
the undivided devotion of his mind and energies. His success will be the suc- 
cess of the people. 

Faujl V. McNutt 
United States High Commissioner to Phe Philippines 

1 



ROXAS, THE PRESIDENT 

Inaugural Address 



~j^^~Y Countrymen: 

I have taken my oath as President of the Philippines to defend and 
support the Constitution and to enforce the laws of our country. I assume 
in all humbleness the complex responsibilities which you have chosen to 
give me, I pledge my efforts and my life to discharge them with whatever 
talent, strength and energy I can muster. But those responsibilities must 
be shared by the Congress, by the other branches of government, and, in 
the last analysis, by all the people of the Philippines who face together the 
great test of the future, I would not be content to assume this office, I 
would not have the hope to discharge the duties assigned me if I were not 
confident that my countrymen are ready and capable of sharing in full 
measure the work and sacrifices which lie ahead. Certainly no people in 
recent history have been called upon to surmount the obstacles which con- 
front us today. But I have supreme faith in the ability of our people 
to reach the goals we seek. I ask from the nation the full and undi- 
vided support of heart, mind and energy for the necessary tasks which 
await us. 

In our traditions there are ample sources of inspiration. From the 
recent past we have the standard of dynamic leadership erected by Manuel 
Quezon, that mighty champion of independence and great friend and bene- 
factor of the masses of the people. We have the spotless integrity and 
noble patriotism of Sergio Osmcna who grasped the banner of leadership 
when the incomparable Quezon was taken from us. 

Our appointment with destiny is upon us. In five weeks we will be a 
free Republic. Our noble aspirations for nationhood, long cherished and 
arduously contended for by our people, will be realized. We w r ill enter 
upon a new existence in which our individual lives will form together a 
single current, recognized and identified in the ebb and flow of world events 
as distinctly Filipino. 

Yet look about you, my fellow-citizens. The tragic evidence of recent 
history stares at us from the broken ruins of our cities and the wasting 
acres of our soil. Beneath the surface of our daily strivings lie deep the 
wounds of war and economic prostration. The toppled columns of the 
Legislative Building before which we stand are mute and weeping symbols 
of the land we have inherited from war. 



3 



Unemployment is increasing, as the United States armed forces de- 
crease the tempo of activities here. Our soldiers are being discharged in 
growing numbers to swell the ranks of those who must find work and live- 
lihood. Many of those who have work are employed in trades dependent 
on the rapidly shrinking expenditures of the Army and Navy. 

There is hunger among us. In the mountain provinces and in other 
far-flung areas of our land children starve. Prices race with wages in the 
destructive elevators of inflation. The black market with all its attendant 
evils of disrespect for law and public morality thrives in the channels of 
commerce. 

Plagues of rats and locusts gnaw at our food supplies. Public health 
and sanitation have been set back a quarter of a century. 

Housing for most of our urban citizens is shocking in its inadequacy 
and squalor. Disease and epidemic threaten, and we have to thank the 
Divine Providence that the toil of death is still relatively smalL 

Our communications are destroyed, stolen or disrupted, and many 
of our countrymen are still today cut off from the main currents of national 
life. Schools have been burned and teachers have been killed; our educa- 
tional system is in large measure a shambles. 

I have sketched a dark landscape, a bleak prospect for our future. 
I have not meant unduly to dramatize our ills. I do not wish to parade the 
sackcloth and ashes of our people. Nevertheless it is necessary to know 
the truth. Many of us live today in the chambered Nautilus of our own 
mental construction. There arc those who close their eyes to the problems 
that confront us, and prefer to direct the national attention and the na- 
tional energy at objects outside of ourselves, at fancied enemies, at fancied 
fears of imperialistic aggression. The coincidence of easy money and high 
prices gives to some of our people the false illusion of national prosperity 
and the mad notion that wx have time to dally and debate. The pros- 
perity of money and prices is a hallucination, a nightmarish dream re- 
sulting from the scarcity of commodities and the influx of a half billion 
dollars of troop money. Soon, very soon, we must awake from that 
dream, We will find that mere money, bloated by inflation and circulating 
in narrow channels, does not bring about prosperity and national well- 
being. Every day, that money is being siphoned from our land by more 
and more imports — not productive imports, but imports of consumption. 
The well-being of the tradesman alone is not the well-being of our people. 
Disaster awaits us tomorrow if we do not rouse ourselves and get back to 
work, to productive work. 

I recall our national temper and our national condition five years ago,, 
the last year of the generation of peace. 

We had then a land of comparative plenty. The products of our fields 
and farms were flowing in a never-ending stream across the oceans to the 
United States, to Europe, to China — even to japan and Russia. The 



4 



Government was rich in revenue from taxes, from customs, and from the 
refunded collections on Philippine products processed and taxed in the 
United States. Wc were in the midst of a program aimed at the eventual 
achievement of social justice for the underprivileged elements of our popu- 
lation. Yes, we had those elements then, as we have them now. We 
must not imagine that economic maladjustments, land hunger and farm 
tenancy are problems born of recent years. They are as old as our present 
civilization in the Philippines. 

The brutal hand of war spread its breath across our land and blotted 
out not only our progress toward a fuller life for all, but our entire economy, 
all the economic goods and tools we had amassed by a century of labor. 
We had not expected to be a battleground. We had not expected war. 
Nor were we alone among the peoples of the earth in our lack of under- 
standing of the military aims of our enemies. 

We were treacherously attacked; soon, despite the unmeasured heroism 
of our men at arms and of their gallant American comrades on Bataan and 
Corregidor, despite the magnificent courage and leadership of General 
Douglas Mac Arthur, our land was conquered. A new sovereignty, by 
dint of force, was imposed upon us. From the beginning the Filipinos 
had indicated by word and deed that the fate of the United States in this 
global conflict was the fate of the Philippines. President Quezon offered 
the United States the blood and treasure of the Filipino people until victory 
came. We did not then realize how complete that offer was! 

For three and a half years we were an unwilling part of the Japanese 
sphere of conquest. But though the land was possessed, there was never 
a moment in which our hearts or convictions faltered. The Filipinos dis- 
charged their debt of allegiance to the United States with a payment of 
loyalty which has never been surpassed. 

I need not refer further in phrase or word to the gallantry of our coun- 
trymen in their resistance to the Japanese, The deeds of the Filipino 
people have been celebrated wherever men have gathered to pay tribute to 
heroism, courage and fidelity. Their gallantry has become an epic, a by- 
word, a standard by which all heroism may be measured. Many have 
tried to explain that heroism and that loyalty. But like all heroism it 
rises above the logic of mere reason. I judge it a proof and product of the 
passion for democracy and freedom which America has taught us during 
48 years. That teaching took deep root in a soil made fertile by our great 
heroes of pre- American days — RizaJ, Mabini and Bonifacio, Our hearts 
were ready when the Americans came in 1898. By the manner in which 
America discharged her trust, we developed a devotion to that great nation 
which I know will exist for all time. 

A nation is something more than the people who inhabit a geographic 
area. It is a spirit, a tradition and a way of life. There have been Amer- 
icans whom wc have disliked. There have been American administra- 
tions from which we have received scant comfort. There have been Amer- 
ican Governors General with whom we have quarreled. But we. have 



never had cause to waver in our confidence or faith in America, We have 
clasped to our bosom her system of government, her language, her institu- 
tions, her historical traditions. We have made them ours. We cannot 
forget this fact and this great truth. We are to be a free nation largely 
because we were aided in that direction by the love of liberty and the good- 
will of the American people. If we succeed as a nation, if we are able to 
survive as a nation — and of course we will— we will have America to than k . 
I bear witness to the fact that America stands ready to help, without selfish- 
ness, without motive except to reward us for our loyalty and to advance 
in our land the great cause of democracy and freedom for which Americans 
and Filipinos died together, in many corners of the earth in the past four 
years. 

I find no dream of empire in America. While cognizant of power, 
America, as a nation, is troubled in the use of that power by an earnest and 
heartfelt desire to advance not the cause of greed but the cause of freedom. 
We arc and shall be a living monument to this fact. 

Yet we have today in our own land a few among us who would have 
us believe that we are in danger of an imperialistic invasion from the very 
nation which is granting us our sovereignty. They would have us believe 
that the American Republic, resplendent in her power and prestige as the 
leader of democracy and as the spokesman for freedom, would lend herself 
to a theft of our national heritage for the sake of a thimblefull of profits. 
No, my mind will not stoop to as low a conceit as that. The nation 
which spent three hundred billion dollars to arm the hosts of freedom, the 
nation which has spent and is spending so much of its substance not only 
to free but also to feed the hungry peoples of the earth will not do that, 
Small minds see small deeds. I will not place my Government in the 
position of accusing the United States Congress of willingly conspiring to 
cheat us of our birthright. I admit the possibility of error in the United 
States Congress as in any other constitutional body. But I have faith that 
justice will be done us by a country which has been our mother, our pro- 
tector, our liberator and now our benefactor. In this world, the balances 
of justice move only on great moment urns. I am firmly convinced that 
when the scales point unmistakably to injustice being rendered us, the 
United States Congress will grant us redress in full and generous measure. 

I have no fears from a nation which idolizes humanity and crowns 
with laurels those who fight for freedom and brotherhood. There is no 
greater regard in America today than the national regard for our people. 
Shall we sacrifice that rich regard on the altar of petty pride and foolish 
fears? Shall we' hold up to world obloquy the country whose legions 
liberated us for freedom? Shall we give comfort to the enemies of liberty 
in the crisis which now grips the earth? The forces of evil may be defeat- 
ed, but they are not dead. And there are new forces of evil growing even 
in nations which were our allies, I see no such forces reflected in the 
policies of the United States. 

Let us strengthen as much as we can the hand of the nation which 



6 



stands clearly in the world's confusion today for democracy and for justice 
under law. Let us bide our time for the rectification of alleged impositions. 
When the time comes, let us present facts rather than fears. 

The gratitude of the Filipino people to America is great and enduring. 
Our feeling toward America is not represented by the loud complaints of 
an articulate few in our midst. I say in the presence of our great American 
High Commissioner— one of the ablest and most unselfish of our advocates 
and friends — that the America of Franklin D. Roosevelt and of President 
Truman is a land we love and respect. The mighty concern that these 
men have felt for our welfare dwarfs the magnitude of our fancied ills 
against the United States today. 

Meanwhile, with the tools which have been provided us, we must 
move forward without pause to bind up this nation's wounds, to toil, to 
make, and to build. We have, and will have, a market for our produce. 
We must concentrate on production, on ever-increasing production. This 
nation must produce to live. We must have income from abroad — income 
from exports. We must have that income so that we may buy the mach- 
ines, hire the technical skills, and, for a time, buy the food which we need 
to sustain our strength and impart vigor and health to our young. That 
task must be begun now, today. The time for action has come. The 
national energy, in all its parts, must be focussed on a single purpose, on 
the rehabilitation of our destroyed and ravaged economic enterprises— on 
rice, on sugar, on coconuts, on abaca, on coconut oil, on cigars and to- 
bacco — on gold and chrome, and manganese and lumber. We must foster 
the enterprises which will raise the national income and bring in financial 
returns from abroad. 

But our aim is not alone to rebuild the economy that was broken 
and destroyed by war. That is only the beginning of our task, stupendous 
as it is. We must rebuild, repair, and replace. Wc must feed the hungry 
and heal the sick and disabled. We must care for the widows and orphans 
of our soldier dead. We must wage war against inflation and unemploy- 
ment. That is the obvious foundation stone of national rehabilitation. 
But we know, we have long known, that the narrow economy of the past 
must be broadened. The national structure must be sufficient to house the 
energies of the whole people. For the Philippines to fit into the pattern 
of the 20th century, to take its place as an equal among the nations of the 
earth, we must industrialize; we must make as well as grow. Only in this 
way can we raise to substantial and permanently high levels the living 
standards of our people. To support this kind of economy, the producers 
must become consumers and purchasers. They must have the income with 
which to buy the products of their toil. Higher wages accompanied by 
efficient and increased production are the true road to full employment. 
Increased wages and income in pesos must represent increased purchasing 
power. Prices must be kept under control until production and importa- 
tion reach saturation levels. We must avoid a price structure based on 
scarcity. We must avoid a wage structure based on inflated prices. Mean- 



7 



while we must encourage the production of more and more of our primary 
requirements, production of things we ourselves will consume. The en- 
couragement of production for consumption and the increase in the pur- 
chasing power of the masses are parallel paths which we must travel. 

Our people are well-known for their handicraft and for their ingenuity. 
There are available in the world today tools and machines of which w T e 
must become the masters. There are many natural resources in our land 
which can be processed by the methods of modern technology into finished 
items for our consumption and for sale abroad. There are many small in- 
dustrial and business enterprises which must attract the skills and talents 
of our citizens. Every encouragement must be given the Filipino to parti- 
cipate in all the operations of our new economy at all its levels. But this 
participation cannot be a grant of government. Participation in busi- 
ness and industry cannot be magically induced. Opportunity can be af- 
forded but it is the responsibility of the individual and groups of indivi- 
duals to strive for and capture that opportunity and, by so doing, become 
integral parts of the expanded economy of the nation. 

Tools and implements will be needed to make this dream an actual- 
ity. Capital will be required. The savings of our own people will be called 
for, but they are inadequate. We must invite foreign capital, American 
capital, investment capital. 

We may well wisely look to the great international organs, the Inter- 
national Monetary and Rehabilitation Bank and others, for financial aid. 
We may look to the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administra- 
tion. But for some of our needs we can only obtain assistance from the 
United States. In addition, we must remember that the United States is 
the source of most of the finances ot all these organizations. What we 
can secure directly from the United States is far better and more expedi- 
tiously obtained than through the devious channels of international action. 
We must bear in mind in this and other connections that the great inter- 
national organization of the United Nations, lofty in concept, is yet only 
an infant in the arena of world affairs. Recent events have demonstrated 
to us, as to the rest of the world, that the skeleton of the United Nations 
Organization must grow flesh and develop muscles of its own before it 
can be depended upon as a repository of our immediate hopes. 

We will be as wholehearted as any nation in our devotion to the ideals 
of an indivisible peace and an indivisible world. We will maintain with 
all our strength and all our power our obligations to the United Nations, 
and to the causes set forth in the United Nations charter to which we are 
a signatory. In the same way we will maintain friendly and honorable 
relations with all our neighbors and look forward to the day when peace 
and security will be maintained by mutual consent and by the collective 
conscience of mankind. 

But until that happy day dawns upon us, we can much more securely 
repose our fate in the understanding and comradeship which exist between 
the Philippines and the United States than in the hope of an international 



8 



morality which, however desirable, is still today in the process of deve- 
lopment. We are fortunate to have as the guarantor of our security the 
United States of America, which is today the bulwark and support of small 
nations everywhere in the world. 

I have spoken of the past; I have spoken of the future- I have not 
spoken much of the present. I have suggested some of the problems we 
face. I have not referred to one of our most urgent ones. 

In some few provinces of our land the rule of law and order has yielded 
to the rule of force and terror. Using economic injustice as a rallying 
cry, demagogues have destroyed the precious fabric of public faith in de- 
mocratic procedure, The faith of the people in government and in law 
must be restored. I pledge myself to rectify injustice, but I likewise 
pledge myself to restore the role of law and government as the arbiter of 
right among the people. 

A great American who loved mankind and died in its name, Abraham 
Lincoln, once said, "Among free men there can be no successful appeal 
from the ballot to the bullet. . . they who take such appeal are sure to 
lose their case and pay the cost". 

This great humanitarian could not be accused of placing the values 
of law above human values. He recognized as do all right-minded men 
that if government has one function, it is to insure the reign of law for the 
protection of the weak in their inalienable rights — the right to life, liberty 
and the pursuit of happiness. This Government is pledged to maintain 
the rights of the underprivileged with all its strength and all its power. 
It will see justice done to the poor, the lowly and the disinherited. But 
it will not sanction, it will not permit, it will oppose with every force at 
its command if necessary the imposition of extra -legal rule over any section 
of this country by any group of self-anointed leaders or individuals, The 
show of arms and terror will not daunt us. Defiance will not obtain from 
us a single additional iota of justice. Justice is absolute and is not to be 
measured by strength of contention. 

We will move with maximum speed to cure the ills which beset the 
landless and the tenants, the hungry and the unemployed. Only un- 
avoidable lack of means can delay the full execution of this policy. A new 
tenancy law, granting a greater share of the produce of the land to those 
who till the soil will , be recommended; usury will be stamped out; lands 
will be purchased by Government and re-sold to tenants; new agricultural 
areas will be opened to settlement; modern methods of agriculture will be 
taught, and farm machinery will be made available for purchase. It is 
my aim to raise the status of the farm worker, to increase his earnings, to 
spread wide the benefits of modern technology. 

Labor must be given the full fruits of its toil. Its right of organiza- 
tion must be protected. The dignity of work, and the worker's equity 
in the product of his labor must be assured by Government. We will en- 
deavor to assure economic security for all our people. But meanwhile 
terror must be abandoned as an instrument of justice. Lawlessness must 



9 



stop without a moment's delay. Our people, starting out on a career of 
nationhood, cannot permit our national efforts to be influenced by fear. 
This proud nation will not grant economic concessions at gun-point. Arms 
must be surrendered, except by those licensed to bear arms. The Govern- 
ment will undertake to protect each man, woman, and child in the security 
of his person, of his liberty, and of his property. That protection is an 
absolute requisite of progress. 

We understand the habit of violence which developed in time of war 
when violence was the creed of freedom, Many of those who now hold 
arms illegally served well our common cause. We will not forget their 
services. We are not without sympathy for the centuries-old burdens of 
injustice visited upon some of our people. We must understand that anger 
will lurk in the hearts of men when the gains won by violence in war seem 
about to be taken away. But the rough gains achieved in the absence of 
law are transitory and insecure. Be assured that the welfare of those who 
suffered injustice in past years will be heeded. Their war-won gains will 
be replaced by the more substantial benefits of justice, of peace and tran- 
quility within a framework of national prosperity and economic well- 
being. But first, arms must be surrendered and the leaders of violence must 
recognize the leaders duly chosen by the free vote of the people. 

I recognize that government, in order to maintain respect for law, must 
in itself bear the unassailable stamp of integrity. Honesty in government 
is the first essential for the maintenance by the people of faith in its actions. 
It is a corollary of this that government must be efficient and must watch 
with vigilant eye the expenditures of public funds. Public officials must 
render public service. That is their duty. That is their responsibility. 
Every centavo of the people's money must be spent for the people's benefit. 
I intend to maintain these standards during my administration. 

We have great tasks before us, tasks which challenge the very best and 
the most that is within us. There is no seed of effort which can be spared 
from the national planting. Charity and understanding must replace 
bitterness and anger. We cannot afford to cherish old feuds or old divi- 
sions. For the many tasks of national reconstruction, we need the thou- 
sand talents of all our people — men and women alike. The recent elections 
are past. Likewise the strife of war is over. Bitterness engendered by 
these events must be forgotten and healed. Violations of basic law will be 
tested and punished by law. Traitors will not escape their just desserts. 
But among the people, there must be no recriminations or malignancies. 
Errors of mind rather than of heart must be forgiven. The great test of 
war and sacrifice through which we have passed with such hardship will 
have failed in one of its few benefits if it has not taught us that only in 
unity can there be power, that only in singleness of national purpose can 
there be achieved national salvation. I do not mean to suggest that there 
is no room in this democracy for division of views or of parties. Vigilant, 
free and constructive minority organization is a spur to majority leader- 
ship and responsibility. 



10 



But as we go forward in our full faith to work out the destiny of our 
land and of our people, we must cling fast to one another, and to our friends 
across the seas; we must maintain in both our hearts and minds a gentleness 
of understanding as well as firmness of purpose. Sweat and sacrifice will 
be needed, but they will fall on barren ground, unless we move in the path 
of God, 'with malice toward none, with charity for all, with firmness in 
the right as God gives us to see the right". 

I have faith in the wisdom of our people, I have trust in the good- 
ness of God. Let us together maintain our faith in each other, in liberty 
and in the ways of democracy, and give strength to one another as we ad- 
vance in our search for the evergreen pastures of peace and well-being 
for all. With the help of God, let us build in this our land a monument 
to freedom and to justice, a beacon to all mankind. 




^Palace of the People" Legislative Building 

Sketch by F, Ammi&U 



11 



At the Presidential Desk, Malacanan Palace 
{with Secretary to the President Emilia Abe 11 o) 



12 



ROXAS, THE MAN 



A Brief Biography 



MANUEL ROXAS who by the grace of God and the will of the people 
has been chosen to launch the young Philippine Republic, is a 
lawyer, parliamentarian, orator, economist, soldier and patriot. 
He was born in Capiz, Capiz, on January 1, 1892, the youngest son of 
Gerardo Roxas and Rosario Acuna, in a trouble-laden decade. From 
early youth he knew tragedy. 

His father was killed by the Spanish Guard ia Civil who in those days 
were the Gestapo or Kempcitai in the Philippines. Four years after 
young Manuel was born, the Spaniards executed the Filipino hero, Jose 
Rizal, on December 30, 1896 before a firing squad. In 1898 the revolution 
came to a head and the Americans took possession of Manila. 

Emerging from a troublesome period, young Manuel chummed with 
the blue-shirted American soldiers, sat on their laps and learned English, 
His generation is the first product of the American public schools in the 
Philippines, He delivered his first school declamations in English, pick- 
ing mostly stirring addresses of the fiery and eloquent Patrick Henry and 
the ringing and humanizing address of the immortal Lincoln at Gettys- 
burg. This influence is keenly marked in the life of Manuel Roxas. He 
can be revolutionary and aggressive like Henry, and as human as Lincoln. 
That he intends to pattern his administration after the Rail -Splitter, is 
apparent from his inaugural address where he quoted Lincoln liberally. 

Unlike Abe Lincoln or Patrick Henry, Roxas was given the best educa- 
tion the family could afford in his early youth. He learned to read his 
primer in the public schools taught by Americans. As it was the fashion 
of the day to educate well-to-do children in a foreign land, young Manuel 
was sent to Hongkong where he studied at St. Joseph's College under 
British tutelage. He spent one year there and then returned to Manila to 
finish his elementary education. He entered Manila High School graduat- 
ing in 1910. 

He chose law as a profession and entered the Law School opened by 
the Y.M.CA. After six months he transferred to the University of the 
Philippines where he finished his law with high honors in 1913. His pro- 
fessors said that he could have easily been the valedictorian if he cared to, 
but he did not work for it, He prepared to top the bar examination that 
same year, however, and he passed it with the highest rating. 



13 



Speaking both Spanish and English fluently, his first position while a 
student was that of interpreter in the Court of First Instance in the Fifteenth 
Judicial district. After topping the bar examination, he attracted 
the attention of the famous Chief Justice Arellano of the Philippine Su- 
preme Court and he was employed as law clerk of that great jurist. He 
resigned in 1917 to enter politics. 

The first call to public office came with an appointment to the Munic- 
ipal Council of Capiz. Winning the governorship of the province in his 
next move gave him his first major victory at the polls. This position, 
moreover, brought him permanently to the national political scene. At- 
tending the Governors 1 Convention in 1920, he impressed every one with 
his magnetic personality and fluent speech, and was made the presiding 
officer. He had become a national figure. His gubernatorial achievement 
was also outstanding. He linked the far ends of his province by roads and 
stepped up public improvements. 

His legislative career dates from his election as Representative from 
the First District of Capiz and was immediately elected Speaker of the 
House of Representatives, a position which he held for eleven years. In 
1934, as a member of the Constitutional Convention, he became one of the 
outstanding leaders of that body and probably more than any other indi- 
vidual member influenced the drafting of that instrument. The last reward 
of his legislative service was the presidency of the Philippine Senate in 
1945. With his elevation this year to the presidency of the Philippines, 
he has set a record in Philippine elective office. 

His work for Philippine independence in Washington is as distin- 
guished as that of any other national leader. He has been a member of most 
of the independence missions sent to the United States to win the country's 
freedom. He was on his first mission in 1923 and has since become well 
known as a pleader of the cause in Washington. Jointly with Quezon, 
he headed the Third Mission. In 1929, he was Chairman of the Special 
Mission sent by the Eighth Philippine Legislature. Again he headed the 
House delegation which formed part of the Independence Mission of 1931. 
The year 1933 marked the climax of the long struggle in Washington. 
Roxas, Osmena, and others secured the passage of the Hare-Hawes-Cutting 
Law. Though Quezon had this law replaced by theTydings-McDuffie Act, 
he commended Roxas for his brilliant work. "If any member of the mis- 
sion/" he said * 1 was most useful in the campaign in America, that member 
was Speaker Roxas." The resulting Pro and Anti struggle is still vivid in 
the political memory of the nation. True, Roxas lost the Speakership, 
but "he fell into the arms of the people." lie had qualified as a na- 
tional leader to be reckoned with in every affair of state. 

In the Commonwealth era he was in every national planning enter- 
prise. He served in most of the agencies created to study different aspects 
of national life. He was a member of the Joint Preparatory Committtee 
on Philippine Affairs, and be was chairman of the following bodies: The 
National Economic Council, the Tax Commission, the Rural Progress Ad- 



14 



ministration, the Board of Directors of the National Development Com- 
pany, and the Committee on Educational Policy to reorganize the Uni- 
versity of the Philippines. He was a member of other government boards 
such as the National Rice and Corn Corporation, the Mindanao Land 
Settlement Project, the National Relief Board and the Board of Regents of 
the University of the Philippines. In 1938 he was made Secretary of 
Finance, a position which he held until 1941 when he resigned to run for 
the Senate. 

The war in the Pacific revealed fully the soldier and patriot in Manuel 
Roxas. In the Philippine Army, he rose to the rank of Brigadier General. 
As soon as Pearl Harbor was bombed he volunteered his services to the 
Army and was immediately appointed one of the Aides of General Mac- 
Arthur. He saw action on Bataan and Corregidor and Mindanao. His 
record during the three years of enemy occupation including his under- 
ground work, after he had refused to leave the country for a haven of safety, 
are now well known. His recent election to the Presidencv makes him 
the leader of the Filipino people during these crucial times 'and the first 
President of the Philippine Republic. 

Mrs. Roxas, the first Lady of the Land, is the former Miss Trinidad 
de Leon of Bulacan. They have two children, Ruby who is finishing her 
course at Vassar in the United States and Gerardito who is studying law 
in the University of the Philippines. 



15 




Elpidio Qjurtno 



THE VICE PRESIDENT 



A Biographical Sketch 



ELPIDIO QUIRINO, lawyer, orator, legislator, economist, was born 
on November 16, 1890 in Vigan, Ilocos Sur T being the third among 
the nine children of Mariano Quirino and Gregoria Rivera. 

Elpidio received the rudiments from his parents; later he was sent to 
the private school of Maestro Anastacio Aquino. Then he entered the 
Aringay public school, the San Fernando provincial school, and the Vigan 
High School where he completed his first year. He also enrolled in paint- 
ing and drawing in the Univcrsidad Ilocana, In April, 1908, he escaped 
to Manila, where he enrolled in the Manila High School, supporting him- 
self by sketching and illustrating for a couple of publications! It was here 
that he learned his rules of discussion and debate, heading the Cryptia 
Debating Club which was the opposing group of the Rizal Debating Club 
led by Manuel Roxas. Graduating in April, 1911, he enrolled in the Col- 
lege of Law, University of the Philippines, where he obtained his Bachelor 
of Laws in March, 1915. He passed the bar examination in the same year; 
was admitted to practice in the United States District Court of China in 
1921, and to the Federal Supreme Court in 1934. 

While a student in Vigan he accepted a teaching position in one of the 
barrio schools, Capariaan, Caoayan, 1906-1907- In Manila he became 
junior computer in the Bureau of Lands, 1909-1910; clerk in the principal's 
office of the Manila High School, 1911; clerk in the Department of Police, 
Manila, 1912-1915; clerk, Philippine Commission, 1915-1916; assistant 
law clerk and later special clerk, Philippine Senate, 1916-1917; and then 
Secretary to the President of the Senate, 1917-1919, when he resigned to 
launch his candidacy for membership in the lower house. He won and 
served as Representative from the First District of Ilocos Sur, 1919-1922; 
became a delegate of the House of Representatives to the International Bar 
Conference in Peking, China, 1921; Senator from the First Senatorial Dis- 
trict, 1925 1931; re-elected to the Senate from the same district, 1931-1935. 
Then he became delegate to the Constitutional Convention, 1934-1935; 
Secretary of Finance under Governor-General Frank Murphy, 1934^1935; 
first Secretary of Finance under the Commonwealth Government, 1935- 
1936; Secretary of the Interior, 1936-1938; and elected Senator-at-Large in 
1941. Upon the liberation of the Philippines, he was elected President 



17 



pro tempore of the Philippine Senate in 1945* 

As a member of the Senate before the establishment of the Common- 
wealth Government, he was Chairman of the Joint Legislative Committee 
on Taxation; Senate Majority floor leader and Chairman of the Committees 
on Rules, Accounts, Elections and Privileges, and Public Instruction. He 
was a ranking member of the last Independence Mission to the United 
States headed by Manuel Quezon which secured the passage of theTydings- 
McDuffic Independence Law in 1934. As member of the Constitutional 
Convention, Elpidio Quirino was responsible for breaking the long dead- 
lock on the question of whether or not the constitution being drafted was 
also going to become the constitution of the future republic. He advo- 
cated that the matter be left to the people and the leaders of the republic. 
He also was instrumental in defeating the Singson Encarnacion proposal 
that the constitution adopt the freehold system in regard to mine lands. 
As a legislator he sponsored the revision and codification of the scattered 
laws on elections, and of the motor vehicle laws; initiated a major revision 
of the laws on tariff and taxation; fathered the law creating the Junior 
College in Vigan, Ilocos Sur; conceived the first Land Colonization Act 
which became^he pattern of the Commonwealth Land Settlement Act; and 
drafted the law on national defense with the assistance of Colonels Ord 
and Eisenhower. 

While in the Cabinet, he was Chairman of the National Information 
Board, the National Relief Board, the National Radio Board, the Board 
.of Trustees of the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes, and the Special Inter- 
department Trade Committee. As Secretary of Finance, he advocated the 
creation of the National Loan and Investment Board and the National 
Economic Council. As Secretary of the Interior, he advocated the con- 
version of thickly populated and progressive barrios into municipalities, 
and of municipalities into cities. The new cities organized during his in- 
cumbency were Cebu, Hollo, Zamboanga, Davao, and Bacolod, He spon- 
sored the organization of the State Police, the organization of the Office of 
the Commissioner for Mindanao and Sulu, so as to bring the National Gov- 
ernment closer to the Mohammedan Filipinos. He was" responsible for the 
creation of the National Information Board for the purpose of informing the 
masses of the people what the Government is doing for them and to know 
the problems of the people. As Secretary of the Interior he adopted the po- 
licy of visiting the provinces and the rural communities pursuant to a 
policy of bringing the Government closer to the people, and the people 
closer to the Government. 

Before his return to the Senate in 1941, he was Vice Chairman of the 
Board of Directors of the Agricultural and Industrial Bank and member of 
the Board of Directors of the National Development Company and several 
of its subsidiaries. At intervals while not serving the Government in any 
official capacity he practiced law and taught in various colleges and uni- 



18 



versitics in Manila . He was dean of the Adamson College of Law before 
his election to the Senate in 1941. 

Elpidio Quirino married Alicia Syquia, daughter of Tomas Syquia and 
Conccpcion Jimenez on January 16, 1921, by whom five children were born : 
Tomas, Armando, Norma, Victoria, and Fe 5 the second, third and fifth 
children having been massacred together with their mother and other rela- 
tions in the slaughter of South Manila in February, 1945. 




m 




Wmm 



-.1. 



University of the Philippines 
Alma Mater of the President 

Sketch by D. Castancda 



19 




Jose Avelino 



INAUGURAL ADDRESS 



Jose Avelino, Senate President 



C£ T am deeply moved by your expression of confidence, I am ata loss, in- 
deed, to find adequate words with which to convey to you my profound 
gratitude. Mere words no matter how eloquent, can never convey 

the full measure of my appreciation, and so I shall simply beg you to allow 

me to express it in action in the course of our association official and 

persona L 

"It is for me a happy omen that most of the present members of the 
Senate have known one another for many years. Nearly all the members 
of this august body have sprung from a common political party that 
divided only recently because of honest difference of opinion over principles 
of public service. Future events will show whether the Party's disruption 
was an error or whether it has been beneficial to the nation and conducive 
to the strengthening of democracy in this country. But whatever may 
be the verdict of history, I daresay that nobody in the future will ever 
question the patriotism of those men who placed the interests of the nation 
above the interests of their Party. 

"We have just gone through one of the most exciting phases of our 
political history. The political contest that this country has recently 
witnessed has been perhaps the most bitterly fought in the record of our 
country. I do not recall the last electoral campaign in order to deepen any 
cleavage or to reopen wounds but merely to make it of record that, in 
spite of the bitterness of the contest, victors and vanquished alike maintain- 
ed at ail moments their traditional chivalry. I have every reason to believe 
that the same gallant spirit will guide us throughout the course of our 
deliberations in this chamber. 

"The fight is over, and now we find ourselves faced by arduous and 
multifarious tasks. I believe that I express your true feelings when I say 
that we are now ready to begin our work firmly determined to serve the 
best interests of the people, ready to do our part of the great collective 
task, and ready to offer the full measure of our support and cooperation 
to the new and legitimate national leader, the leader chosen by the people 
of the Philippines for his extraordinary virtues as statesman and patriot, 
for his long record of public service, for his brilliant career as an officer of 
our glorious Army and leader of the resistance movement. 

"I do not have to stress the seriousness of the problems that we face 
as a nation, You all have a pretty definite idea of the existing conditions. 



21 



What I wish to remind you is that the future task and the responsibility 
for its accomplishment are collective in character, and that consequently 
the success of our common venture shall require united effort, the highest 
degree of patriotism and the severest kind of national discipline. 

I4 I think I can speak for the majority and declare that we are ready 
to give the people the kind of public service that they expect and deserve. 
I believe, moreover, that the minority, without relinquishing its position 
as fiscal izer, will place above petty party considerations the higher interests 
of the nation, and I expect that it will act in accordance with accepted 
principles of democratic procedure and will give its support to the new ad- 
ministration which is of the people, by people and for the people, 

"Gentlemen of the Senate: I repeat that I am deeply touched by 
your generosity. I know my limitations and I realize that it is only your 
generosity which has placed me in the Presidency of the Senate. I am 
confident, however, that with God's help and your valuable cooperation 
I shall be able to carry out your mandate, 

I am now ready to take my oath of office/* 



22 



The President Before Congress 



23 




Eugenia Pere\ 



^^^^ Timrf 



INAUGURAL ADDRESS 

Eugenio Perez, Speaker, 
House of Representatives 

His speech follows in full: 

By your generous action mine is the signal honor and distinct privilege 
of presiding over the deliberations of ■ this august chamber. I cannot 
adequately express to you my profound gratitude for electing me Speaker 
of the House of Representatives. Conscious of my own limitations, f 
must confess that only the hope of your abiding support and cooperation 
has nerved me to accept this great responsibility. 

Never before has any legislature in the history of our country been 
convoked upon a more fateful hour than the Second Congress of the Phil- 
ippines. Problems of transcendental importance confront us today, Li- 
berated only recently from domination by a cruel enemy, the Philippines 
still lies post rate as a consequence of the terrible global war just ended. 
The tremendous problems which beset the nation stand as a challenge to 
the patriotism, the courage, the wisdom and statesmanship of the leaders 
of our people. In the great and difficult tasks before us, we must realize 
the imperative necessity for joint action. Wc must work, work hard, and 
work together. Let that be the keynote of our common undertaking. 

But if the times are extremely critical and of the need for action is ex- 
ceedingly urgent, no legislative body has ever had its tasks more clearly 
indicated than ours. We need no one to tell us that we are here to help 
bind the wounds of a grievously suffering people, in a woefully devastated 
country, said a world in ruins. The magnitude of our people's need is the 
measure of the service that will be required of us. 

The barest enumeration of the grave problems that confront our nation 
is all that is necessary to mark out the tasks that await us. There is, first 
and foremost, the problem of restoring peace and tranquility everywhere 
throughout the country, as a condition precedent to the accomplishment 
of all other tasks essential to the national welfare. The vast majority 
of our people are weary unto death of crime and violence. They passion- 
ately desire to live once more under a regime of law and order, which is 
their natural Inclination and ro which they have long been accustomed, 
Yet, however strong this desire may be, we must realize that there is no 
shortcut solution to the problem of peace and order. For it is one thing 
to suppress sporadic outbreaks of violence, which we can easily do through 



25 



the use of a well-trained and well-armed police organization and another 
thing to eliminate the deep-lying causes out of which such violent out- 
breaks are born. The duty of maintaining peace and order at any given 
time and place shall devolve primarily upon the Executive Department. 
But it shall be the duty of this Congress to consider and devise long-term 
legislation to remedy the root-causes of social antagonism and disorder 
among our people. Reforms in our agrarian economy and on the industrial 
front are imperative, and their formulation shall require of this Congress 
the highest possible sense of rcsponsiblity, justice, and statesmanship. 

Our next important problem is the rehabilitation of our national eco- 
nomy and the stabilization of our public finances. Our coffers are virtually 
empty, and the wheels of our commerce and industry have scarcely begun 
to run. It is essential that we speedily secure the means w T hereby we may 
inject new life and energy into the veins of our moribund and oiling indus- 
tries, most especially those that are devoted to the production of basic 
consumer goods and of commodities for the export trade. It is axiomatic 
that we cannot indefinitely keep importing goods and fail to export others 
in return without courting economic disaster. It is equally axiomatic 
that our public finances, despite the most generous transfusion of loans and 
war damage payments, shall undergo no permanent improvement until the 
income- producing occupations, trades and industries have been restored in 
full operation. It shall be the concern of this Congress to devise ways 
and means of encouraging productive activities in every field, on the per- 
fectly sound principle that our economic salvation, like charity, begins 
at home and will prosper only if we ourselves resolutely put our shoulders 
to the wheel. 

All the other major problems that confront us will depend for their 
solution upon the success of our efforts at economic reconstruction. The 
most ambitious projects of health and public works, social and educational 
reform, cultural improvement and moral rehabilitation shall be in vain 
unless and until we have the means to finance them steadily, from year to 
year, with earned income and not w r ith begged or borrowed funds. It shall 
be the duty of this Congress to create the condition necessary for the earning 
of that income. 

In the meantime, it is obvious that we must secure all the economic 
and financial assistance we can get from without. Almost, we might say, 
we are starting today from scratch. It should not hurt our national pride 
to have to admit that we need help, and that we are eager to accept it under 
the most favorable conditions possible at the present time. It is a false 
and dangerous pride which would reject preferred assistance from an exag- 
gerated sense of self-sufficiency. It is quite easy for an individual to act 
solely upon a narrow interpretation of dignity and honor; it is not so easy 
to gamble with the lives and fortunes of eighteen million people upon a 
similar basis of stern and unrelenting principle. 

In the Philippine Trade and Rehabilitation Acts recently passed by 
the U.S. Congress and approved by President Truman, we have the means 

26 



of securing the economic and financial assistance that we need right away 
and during the first years of the Republic. No one claims that these laws 
are perfect in every way, or that the Philippine Trade Act, in particular, is 
the best and fairest that could have been devised for the regulation of the 
commercial relations between the Philippines and the United States. Yet, 
it is noteworthy that the people who are in the best position to know — 
High Commissioner McNutt, President Osmcfia, President-elect Roxas, 
and Resident Commissioner Romulo — have endorsed the measure as the 
best that can be secured from the U. S. Congress at the present time. Their 
endorsement of the law is based on a practical and first-hand knowledge 
of the facts, whereas the opposition to it seems mainly to be based on mere 
theory and cold, academic analysis. 

Because we cannot afford to delay our economic rehabilitation much 
longer, I must ask you, Gentlemen of the House, to endorse these twin 
measures on Philippine economic and financial rehabilitation. Let us 
accept them, if we must, with reservations clearly indicated in the act of 
our acceptance. In this manner, we shall let it be known to the people 
and government of the United States that we arc not unaware of the de- 
fective and inequitable provisions of these enactments, that from sheer 
necessity alone are we being compelled to accept them in their present 
form, and that it is our frank intention to seek their modification on the 
first opportunity that presents itself. 

This will be the first major test of our cooperation with the Chief 
Executive. I have no fear that this cooperation shall be extended in full. 
In two more days we shall have as Chief Magistrate of the nation a man 
who was long ago marked as the chosen and legitimate heir to the twin 
sceptre of political power that for so long has been held alternately by 
Manuel Quezon and Sergio Osmena — a man of great vision and energy, of 
surpassing moral courage and intellectual sagacity, whom Divine Pro- 
vidence has guided and protected against the perils of our bitter yesterday 
in order that he may help usher in a brighter and happier tomorrow for all 
our people. 

For General Manuel Roxas, who is soon to be our President and our 
Leader, permit me, gentlemen, to invoke the fullest cooperation of which 
you are capable, I ask this, not in the spirit of party but in the spirit of 
the whole nation which he, no less than each of us, shall be bound by the 
most solemn of oaths to serve with utmost loyalty and devotion. In all 
matters of vital necessity that may require action by this Congress, promp- 
titude shall be of the essence. I trust that the spirit of patriotism which 
overlaps the barriers of party, and our common adherence to the principles 
of the general welfare, shall permit this Congress to act quickly and wisely 
in order that our people may obtain the relief and succor which they so 
urgently require. 

Gentlemen : I accept, in all humility, the Chair of the Speaker of 
the House. I would not be human not to feel gratified by this special 
mark of your confidence and esteem. But the burden of responsibility 

27 



that goes with the honor you have just conferred upon me must not weigh 
heavily on the shoulders of any man. It reassures me to feel that the 
burden shall weigh less heavily on mine, knowing that it too must rest 
upon your capable shoulders, in the spirit of the common faith and hope 
that shall hold us here together till our work is over and done. 

I thank you, 




Remains of the 
Manila Cathedral 

Sketch hy F . Amorsdo 



28 



PICTORIAL 
SECTION 

Scenes From The Inau- 
gural Day Ceremonies 



29 




The President's Day 
May 28, 1946 



30 




31 



While the Crowd 
Waits on P> Burgos 



Seated on the 
Inaugural Platform 




35 



His Mother 
At His Side 



36 



Signing the 
Oath of Office 



38 



4f My Felloiv 
Counhymen— 



39 




ff I Have Faith 
In the Wisdom 
of Our People' 



Convrattdati oris! 



The Parade 
Is Starting 



The Colors 
Are Passing By 



Salute to 
the Colors 



The Philippine 
Army 




47 



Legislative Building 
In The Background 



Honor Guests 

{Ex-Governor Harrison, left) 



Back To 
The Palace 




i-Nn of 

PICTORIAL 
SECTION 



51 



THE CABINET 



MEMBERS 

Vice President Elpidio Q^irinc --Secretary of Finance. 
Jose Zulueta— Secretary of the Interior. 
Justice Roman Qzaeta — Secretary of justice. 
Mariano Garchicorena — Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce. 
Judge Ricardo Nepomuceno — Secretary of Public Works and Com 
munications. 

Dr. Manuel Gal lego- — Secretary of Public Instruction. 

Dr, Antonio VI llara ma— iV^tary of Health and Welfare. 

judge Pedro Magsalitv — Secretary of Labor. 

R u pert o Kangleon — Secretary of National Defense. 

Emilio Abello — Chief of the Executive Office. 




53 




CONGRESS OF 
THE PHILIPPINES 



54 




Gathered In Joint 
Session To Hear 
The President's Mes~ 



55 



CONGRESS OF THE PHILIPPINES 



THE SENATE 



Hon. Jose Avelino 
President 

Mr. Felix L, Lazo Mr, Manuel Eloriaga 
Secretary S p. -at- Amu 

Alonto, ALauya.. Dansalan, Lanao 

Arranz, Melecio Aleak, Cagayan 

Buendia, Nicolas Malolos, Bulacan 

Cahili, Tomas, , Dansalan, Lanao 

Clarin, Olcgario B Tagbilaran, Bohol 

Confesor, Tomas Cabatuan, Iloiio 

Cuenco, Mariano J Cebu City 

Diokno, Ramon Lemery, Bmngas 



Francisco, Vicente J.. Cavke City 

Garcia, Carlos P Taliban, Bohol 

Hcmaez, Pedro C . Bacolod, N. Occ 

Imperial, Domingo Daraga, Albay 

Mabanag, Aiejo. . . S. Fernando, La Union 

Magalona, Enrique.. . . . Negros Occ, 

Pendaciin, Salipada., . . Xotabato, Cotabato 
Rama, Vicente. ......... Cebu City 

Rodriguez, Eu logic Sr.. Montalban, Rizal 

Romero, Jose E. , . . Negros Or, 

Sebastian, Proeeso E. . -Tuguegarao, Cagayan 

Sotto, Vicente ■ .Cebu, Cebu 

Tirana, Emiliano Tria. . Xawit, Cavite 

Torres, Ramon Bacolod, N. Occ. 

Vera, Jose O Albay 



THE HOUSE OF 
REPRESENTATIVES 

Speaker 
Eljoenjo Perez 

Secretary 
Narciso Pimentel 

St r^tan t-at-A rm s 
Narciso Diokno 



Agan, Anastaciu Batanes 

Alano, Juan S, Zamboanga 

Albano,' Pedro G Hocos Norte 

Almendras, Jovenal . . Cebu 

Alonzo, Paulino Cagayan 

Amilbangsa, Ombra Sulu 

Arnaldo, Ramon A. .... Capiz 
Atienza, Hermenegildo B. Manila 

Baculio, Pedro Sa - Or, Misamis 

Barretto, Eduardo A. . . . Laguna 
Bdcran, PascuaJ Pangasinan 



Borra, Juan V. , . Iloiio 

Cabarroguis, Leon , Nueva Vizcaya 

Cabigon, Apolinario .... Davao 

Calo, Marcos M. . , , Agusan 

Camacho, Bonifacio B,., Baca an 

Cauda, Jose. * ♦ N. Ecija 

Cases, Manuel T . La Union 

Cinco, Atilano R Leyte 

< l.tnn, Luis T Bohol 

Clemente, Tomas S Sorsogon 

Cr iso logo, Flora. . . I locos Sur 

Dun nan, Gabriel Mt. Province 

Eco, Esmeraldo . Camarines Norce 

Escareal, Agripino P< Samar 

Espaiiola, Sofronio Palawan 

Espinosa, Emilio B... . . . Masbate 

Fernandez, Estanislao A. Laguna 
Formilleza, Modesto . , . Romblon 

Fortich, Carlos A. H Bukidnon 

Garcia, Cosme P Bohol 

Gustilo, Vicente F Occ. Negros 



Hilado, Carlos.. Occ. Negros 

Kintanar, Agustin Y. . Cebu 

Laurel, Jr. Jose B . Batangas 

Lava, Jesus B., Bulacan 

Lawenko, Eulogio V.. . . Albay 
Ledesma, Oscar. ........ Iloilo 

Leuterio, Raul T.. Mind or a 

Lim, Pacifico F Sorsogon 

Limsiaco, Elisco P. . ... Occ. Negros 

Logarta, Vicente Cebu 

Lonmntad, Adriano D... Samar 

Latere, Tiburcio . . . Iloilo 

Magsaysay, Ramon Zambales 

Medina, Enrique. ....... Or. Negros 

Mencio, Jose . , . . . Mt. Province 

Mindelano, Manaiao... Lanao 

Miranda, Juan Q. Ca marines Sur. 

Moll Jr. , Celestino C, . . Ca marines Sur 
Montano, Justmiano S, ,., Cavite 

Mora to, Tomas B Tayabas 

iVtufioz, Pedro P. . . . .... Batangas 

Navarro t Ricardo. Surigao 

Nietes, Emigdio, Antique 

Noel, Maximino Cebu 

Ortega j Francisco La Union 

Pad ilia, Constancio N. Erija 

Paguirtgan, Domingo Isabela 

Pajao, Francisco M Ley re 

Pared es, Quintin. Abra 

Penaflorida, Mariano. . . . Iloilo 

Perez, Juan R*. . . . Leyte 

Perez, Toribio P Albay 



Perfecto, Francisco A Catanduanes 

Piang, Gumbay, Cotabato 

Primicias, Cipriano P. . . . Pangasinan 

Rafols, Nicolas Cebu 

Ramos, Narciso. . , Pangasinan 

R a fio 1 a , Mar cial Albay 

Reyes, Jose M, , * Ca pi z 

Ricohermoso, Timoteo. . . Marinduque 

Rodriguez, Jose V . Cebu 

Rodriguez, Juan de G. , . Pangasinan 

Roy, Jose J . Tarlac 

Samonte, Da ma so T Ilocos Norte 

Santos, Ale jo S Bulacan 

Santos Diaz, Ignacio. . . . Rizal 
Serrano, Felixberto M, . . Batangas 
Simpaoco, Alejandro. . . . Tarlac 

Singson, Conrado Cagayan 

Suarez, For tun a to N Tayabas 

Sumulong, Lorenzo Rizal 

Tait, George K , , , , Mt. Province 

Tan, Carlos S — Leyte 

Taruc, Luis. Fampanga 

Teves, Lorenzo Or; Negros 

Tizon, Tito V . . Samar 

Tojong, Leandro A Cebu 

Topacio Nueno, Jose. . Manila 

Toribio, Simeon G Bohol 

Veloso, Domingo Leyte 

Villanueva, Fidel Ilocos Sur 

Viliareal, Corneiio T.. . . Capiz 

Villarin, Porfirio G, Occ. Misamis 

Yuzon, Amado M, Pampanga 



57 



THE INAUGURAL COMMITTEE 



Hon. Jose Avelino, Chairman 



MEMBERS 



Hon. Jose C. Zulueta 

Dr. Jose S, Reyes 

Hon, Roman Ozaeta 

Hon, Eugenio Perez 

Mrs. Narciso Ramos 

Dr. Bienvenido Gonzalez 

Maj, Gen. Rafael Jalandoni 

Hon. Tom as Morato 

Mr. Jose Hontiveros 

Mr, Jesus Bautista 

Mr. Pedro Magsalin 

Or, Sixto Antonio 

Mr. Filadelfo Rojas 

Mr. Perfecto Faypon 

Hon. Juan S. Alano 

Mr. Urbano J, 



Mr. Manuel S. Rojas 
Mi\ Modesto Castillo 
Mr. J, Amado Araneta 
Mr, Toribio Teodoro 
Mr, Valeriano Fugoso 
Mr. Manuel de la Fuente 
Mr. Vicente Albo 
Mr. Fortunato Haliu 
Mr, Canuto Martin 
Mr, Faustino Aguilar 
Mr. Felipe E. Jose 
Mr. John Canson 
Mr. Isaias Fernando 
Mr. Alfredo V. Jacinto 
Mrs. Felicidad S. Manuel 
Velasco, Secretary 



SUBCOMMITTEES 

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE CITY OF MANILA 
Hon. Segundo Agustin, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Hon. Juan Nolasco Mr, Venancio Trinidad 

Mrs. Felicidad Manuel Dr. Mariano Icasiano 

Mr. "Alejo Aquino - Mr. Felipe Jimenez 

Lt. CoL Angel M, Tuason Mr, Fidel Reyes 
Mr. Victor Alfonso Mr. Sabino de Leon 

Judge Felipe Natividad 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CITY AND PROVINCIAL PARTICIPATION 

Hon. Tomas Morato, Chairman 
Hon. Juan Nolasco, Vice Chairman 

members 

Mr. Dominaoor Camerino Mr. Perfecto Faypon 

Hon. Lorenzo Sumulong Dr. Pedro J. Velasco 

Hon, L Santos Diaz Dr. Fernando Bautista 

Mr. Honorio Lopez Gov, Arturo Samaniego 

Mr. Felix A. Sapalicio, Secretary 



58 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON BAND CONCERTS 

Mr. Manuel S. Rojas, Chairman. 

Mr. Bartolome San Diego, Vice Chairman 



MEMBERS 



Mr, Domingo Bascara 
Mr. Gabriel Leynes 
Mr. Damian L. Jimenez 
Mr, Mamerto Ramos 
Mr. Am ado Gonzales 
Mr. Francisco Rodrigo 
Mr. Agustin Pineda 
Mr. Pablo Manahan 
Mr. Epitacio Cruz 

Mr. Marcelo A. 



Mr. Felipe Ortega 
Mr. Francisco Ner 
Mr. Flaviano Geronimo 

Mr. DoMINADOR BUHAIN 

Mr. Luis Ablaza 
Mr, Pedro Poblete 
Mr. Felipe de Leon 
Mayor Sabino de Leon 
Col. Alejandro Santos 
Garcia, Secretary 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON CIVIC ORGANIZATIONS 
AND CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE 
Mr. Tor i bio Teodoro, Chairman 



MEMBERS 



Mr. W. H. Rennolds 



Col 
Mr. 
Mr. 
Mr. 



Frank Hodsoll 
Ricardo Descals 
Alfonso SyCip 
Gil J. Puyat 



Mr. Domingo Bascara 
Mr. Glenn A. Whisler 
Mr. Lorenzo Bautista 
Miss Elvira Llanes 
Mr. Ex e qui el Villacorta 



Mrs. Jose fa J. Martinez 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CIVIC PARADE 

chairmen 
Mr. Valeriano E. Fugoso 
Mr. Manuel de la Fuente 



MEMBERS 



Pascual Santos 
Gaudencio Garcia 
Agapito Lopez 
Vicente Cruz 
Canuto Martin 
Pedro Arenas 
Bibiano Meer 
Gregorio Bautista 
Prof. Felipe Roman 
Mr. Venancio Trinidad 
. Urbano Crespo 
. Isauro Santiago 
. Andres Sta. Maria 
Felix Basilio 

Mr. Silvestre 



Mr 
Dr. 
Mr 
Mr 
Mr 
Dr. 
Mr 
Dr. 



Mr 
Mr 
Mr 
Dr. 



Mr. Guillermo Ronquillo 
Mr. Am ado Hernandez 
Mr, Pablo Manlapit 
Mr. Aurelio Intertas 
Mr, Pedro Hernandez 
Mr. Leonardo Manas 
Mr. Gregorio Lugtu 
Mr. A qui lino Reyes 
Mr. Vicente Albo 
Maj. Jose Magsino 
Capt. Domtnador Santos 
Mr. Pedro Magsalin 
Lr. Frank C. Young 

Torres, Secretary 



59 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON DECORATION, ILLUMINATION 

AND FIREWORKS 



Mr. Felipe E. Jose, Chairman 

Mr. Gregorto Santayana, Vice Chairman and Secretary 
Mr, Domingo Ponce, Chairman y Subcommittee on Illumination 



Mr. Santiago Penano 
Mr, Fi lemon Almazan 
Mr. Pekfecto Atas 
Mr. M. Morales 
Maj. Jose P. Aquino 



MEMBERS 

Mr. 
Mr. 
Mr. 
Mr. 
Mr. 



Pedro Ardena 
Conrado Solloranq 
Simeon Silverio 
Rafael Toledo 
Antonio K, Abad 



Mr. Eliseo M. Tenza 
Mr. Celestino Sagalongos, Chairman^ Subcommittee an Fireworks 

MEMBERS 



Mr. 
Mr. 
Mr. 
Mr. 
Mr. 



Mariano Santos Mr. 

Rosendo Miranda Mr. 
Eulogio Nicolas 

Remigio Clemente Mr. 

Aurelio Reyes Mr. 



Benito Frias 
Antonio Silverio 
Mr, Salvador Marino 
avelino vlllacorta 
Telesporo Not a rio 



Mr. Evaristo Salon ga 



Mr. Bunyi Dimaculangan, Chairman, Subcommittee on Decoration 



MEMBERS 



Mr. Ignacio Tolentino 
Mr. Saturnino de la Cruz 
Mr; Gregorio Bautista 
Mr, Mateo Herrera 



Mr. Marcelino Trinidad 
Mr. Jacinto Salazar 
Mr, Amando Jose 
Mr. Juan M, Arreglado 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS 
AND YOUTH PARTICIPATION 

Dr. B. M. Gonzalez, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Hon. Lorenzo Sumulong Mr, Filiberto Castillo 
Dir. Manuel L> Carreon Mr. Ernesto Rodriguez, Jr. 
Mr, Venancio Trinidad 

Dr. Pater no Santos, Member and Secretary 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT 
PARTICIPATION 



Dr. Jose S. Reyes, Chairman 

Hon. Marciano Roque, Vice Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Hon, Flo renti no Cayco Hon- Jose S. Camus 

Hon. Roberto Concepcion Hon. Teodosio R. Dino 
Hon. Jose M. Hilario Hon. Jose Guidote 

Hon. Joaquin Panis 

Dr. Jacinto C. Borja, Secretary 

Mr. Fi lemon Fob labor, Assistant Secretary 

Mr. Apolonio Navata, Assistant Secretary 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCE 
Mr. J. Amado Araneta, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Mr. Bibiano L. Meer Mr. Jose McMicking 

Mr. Simpltcio Liz ares Mr. Vicente Villanueva 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON GUERRILLA UNITS 

Col. Manuel T. Dikit, Chairman 
Col. Marcos Agustin, Vice Chairman 
Col. Terry Magtangol, Inspector General 
Lt. CoL Severino Bernardo, Liaison Officer 
Major Ramon Ramos, Liaison Officer 

MEMBERS 

Col. Jose T, Nueno Lt. Col. Ildefonso Barzaga 

CoL Silvino Gallardo Lt, Col. Jesus Perocho 

Lt, CoL Felipe Laguatan Lr. Col. Leon Cabalin 

Col. David Estrella Lt. Col. Valentin Villa vicencio 



61 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY PARTICIPATION 



Hon. Roman Ozaeta, Chairfnan 
lion, Rjcardo Paras, Vice Chairman 



MEMBERS 



Hon. Roberto Concepcion Hon. Fernando Jugo 
Hon. Rjcardo Nepomuceno Hon- Lorenzo Tanada 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON LABOR PARTICIPATION 

Mr. Faustxno Aguilak, Chairman 
Mr. Artemio Nabor, Vice Chairman 



MEMBERS 



Mr. Guillermo E. Espino 
Mr. Marcelo A, Garcia 
Mr. Bartolome San Diego 
Mr. Felicisimo Lauson 
Mr. Jose L Baluyot 
Dr. Pedro J. Velasco 
Mr. Salvador Marino 
Mr. Pablo Manlafit 
Mr. Juan M. Lanting 
Mr, Mariano Ubaldo 
Mr. Eulogio Lerum 
Mr. Antonio Fuentes 
Mr. Pedro Fernandez 



Mr. Jacinto L. Salazae 

Mr. Leon C. Pichay 

Mr. Aorelio S. Intertas 

Mr. Jose Robles, Jr. 

Mr. Felix A, Sapalicio 

Mr, Catalino Caminong 

Mr. Jose Castro 

Mr, Domingo Ponce 

Mr. David C. Tins ay 

Mr. Hermenegildo Gonzaga 

Mr. Eladio Enriquez 

Mr. Perfecto T, At as 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS 
Mr, Urbano J. VelascOj Chairman 
members 

Mr. Leonardo Manas Mr, Eduardo Cardenas 

Mr, Gregorio Lugtu Mr. Aquiljno Reyes 

Mr. Jose Lauchengco 



02 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PARADE 



Maj. C Z. Barbero, FA, Chairman 
Capt. G. Ortega, CE, Member 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON PLATFORM 
Dir. Isaias Fernando, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Mr. Antonio Toledo Mr. Herman Franco 

Mr. Severino Fernandez Mr. Jose Gonzalez-Salvador 

Mr. Cirjaco Coronel Mr t Eustaquio Balagtas 

* * * 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON PROGRAM AND INVITATION 
Dr. B. M. Gonzalez, Chairman 
members 

Dir. Amado Jacinto Mr, Felino Neri 

Mr. Teodoro Evangelist a Mr. Urbano Velasco 
Mr. Manuel G. Zamora Mr, Fernando Amorsolo 
Dr. Patrocinio Valenzuela, Member and Secretary 

* * * 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ORDER AND SAFETY 

Brigadier General F. G. Oboza, PA, Chairman 
Lt. CoL Angel M. Tuason, Member, and such other 
Officers and units as the chairman will designate. 



63 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON PUBLICITY 



Mr. Juan C. Orendain, Chairman 



Mr. Howard Kramer 
Mr. Pablo Katigbak 
Mr. Abelardo Valencia 
Mr. Rodolpo Nazareno 
Mr. H. Ford Wilkin s 
Mr. Jose P. Bautista 
Mr. Abelardo Subido 



MEMBERS 

Mr. Ernesto del Rosario 

Mr. Pedro Pa dill a 

Mr. Aproniano C. Borres 

Mr. Inigo Ed. Regalado 

Mr. Cirilo Bognot 

Mr. Bienvenido de la Paz 

Mr. Onofre Guevara 



Mr. Moises Guerrero, Secretary 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON RECEPTION 



Lt. Col. Jacobo Zobel, IGS, Chairman 



members 



Mr. Felix Lazo 

Mr. Narciso Pimentel 

Mr. Manuel Eloriaga 

Lt Col. M. G, Soliman, GSC 

Lt, Col. M. Montemayor, JAGS 

Lt. Col. A. O. Cruz, AC 

Lt. Coi. M, C. Reyes, AC 

Lt. Col. A.W. de los Reyes, IGS 



Ma). 


j- 


B. Hidalgo, IGS 


Maj. 


j- 


Celis Jr., IGS 


Maj. 


A. 


S. Salcedo, JAGS 


Maj. 


T. 


B. Bernardo, AC 


Maj. 


J- 


Francisco, AC 


Capt 


C J. Herrera, IGS 


Capt 


P 


. L. Felix, IGS 



Mr. Narciso Diokno 
Mr. Julian La O 
Capt. V. Yngente, IGS 
Capt. J. Pagkalinawan, IGS 
Capt. F. Lardizabal, IGS 
Capt. C. F. Tanseco, FS 
Capt. I. M. Sison, FA 
Capt. C. R. Ibanez, CE 
Capt. A, F. Ferraren, CE 
Capt. V. Luna, INF 
Capt. J. Barrenengoa, INF 
1st Lieut. A. R. Sievert, IGS 
1st Lieut. F. Llamas, CAC 
2d Lieut. V. Manzo, IGS 
2d Lieut. F. Vileegas, IGS 



64 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION 



Mr. Filadelfo S. Rojas, Chairman 
Mr. Alejo Aquino, Vice Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Mr. A. J. Thomas Mr. Fortunato Halili 

Mr. Hermektegildo R. Reyes Mr. Enrique Monserrat 

Mr. Mateo Herrera 



SUBCOMMITTEE ON WOMEN'S PARTICIPATION 
Mrs. Felicidab Manuel, Chairman 

MEMBERS 

Mrs. Narciso Ramos Mrs. Belen Ortega 

Mrs. Consuelo Garcia Mrs. Aurea Castro 



65 



CONSTITUTION OF 
THE PHILIPPINES 



(As amended by He solution Numbered Thirty-nine adopted by the 
Second National Assembly on the fifteenth day of September, 
nineteen hundred and thirty-nine , and approved by the Pres- 
ident of the United States on the tenth day of November* nine- 
teen hundred and thirty-nine y and by Resolution Numbered 
Seventy- three adapted by the Second National Assembly on the 
eleventh day of April y nineteen hundred and forty, and ap- 
proved by the President of the United States on the second day 
of December, nineteen hundred and forty. ^ 

The Filipino people, imploring the 
aid of Divine Providence, in order to 
establish a government that shall em- 
body their ideals, conserve and develop 
the patrimony of the nation, promote 
the general welfare, and secure to them- 
selves and their posterity the blessings 
of independence under a regime of jus- 
tice, liberty, and democracy, do ordain 
and promulgate this Constitution. 

Article I. — The National Territory 

Section 1. The Philippines com- 
prises all the territory ceded to the 
United States by the Treaty of Paris 
concluded between the United States 
and Spain on the tenth day of December, 
eighteen hundred and ninety-eight, the 
limits of which are set forth in Article 
III of said treaty, together with all the 
islands embraced in the treaty con- 
cluded at Washington, between the 
United States and Spain on the seventh 
day of November, nineteen hundred, 
and in the treaty concluded between 
the United States and Great Britain 
on the second day of January, nineteen 
hundred and .thirty, and all territory 
over which the present Government 
of the Philippine Islands exercises juris- 
diction. 



Article II. — Declaration of Principles 

Section 1. The Philippines is a 
republican state. Sovereignty resides 
in the people and all government au- 
thority emanates from them. 

Sec. 2. The defense of the State is 
a prime duty of government, and in the 
fulfillment of this duty all citizens may 
be required by law to render personal 
military or civil service. 

Sec. 3. The Philippines renounces 
war as an instrument of national policy, 
and adopts the generally accepted prin- 
ciples of international law as part of 
the law of the Nation. 

Sec. 4. The natural right and duty 
of parents in the rearing of the youth 
for civic efficiency should receive the 
aid and support of the Government. 

Sec. 5, The promotion of social 
justice to insure the well-being and 
economic security of all the people 
should be the concern of the State. 

Article III. — Bill of Rights 

Section 1. (1) No person shall be 
deprived of life, liberty, or property 
without due process of law, nor shall 
any person be denied the equal protec- 
tion of the laws. 

(2) Private property shall not be 
taken for public use without just 
compensation. 

(3) The right of the people to be 
secure in their persons, houses, papers, 
and effects against unreasonable sear- 
ches and seizures shall not be violated, 
and no warrants shall issue but upon 



66 



probable cause, to be determined by the 
, judge after examination under oath 
or affirmation of the complainant and 
the witnesses he may produce, and 
particularly describing the place to be 
searched, and the persons or things to 
be seized, 

(4) The liberty of abode and of 
changing the same within the limits 
prescribed by law shall not be impaired. 

(5) The privacy of communication 
and correspondence shall be inviolable 
except upon lawful order of the court 
or when public safety and order re- 
quire otherwise. 

(6) The right to form associations 
or societies for purposes not contrary 
to law shall not be abridged. 

(7) No law shall be made respect- 
ing an establishment of religion, or 
prohibiting the free exercise thereof, 
and the free exercise and enjoyment of 
religious profession and worship, 
without discrimination or preference, 
shall forever be allowed. No religious 
test shall be required for the exercise 
of civil or political rights. 

(8) No law shall be passed abridg- 
ing the freedom of speech, or of the 
press, or the right of the people peace- 
ably to assemble and petition the Gov- 
ernment for redress of grievances. 

(9) No law granting a title of 
nobility shall be enacted, and no person 
holding any office of profit or trust 
shall, without the consent of the Con- 
gress of the Philippines, accept any 
present, emolument, office, or title of 
any kind whatever from any foreign 
state. 

(10) No law impairing the obliga- 
tion of contracts shall be passed. 

(11) No ex post facto law or bill of 
attainder shall be enacted, 

(12) No person shall be imprison- 
ed for debt or nonpayment of a poll tax. 

(13) No involuntary servitude in 
any form shall exist except as a punish- 



ment for crime whereof the party shall 
have been duly convicted. 

(14) The privilege of the writ of 
habeas corpus shall not be suspended 
except in cases of invasion, insurrec- 
tion, or rebellion, when the public 
safety requires it, in any of which 
events the same may be suspended 
wherever during such period the neces- 
sity for such suspension shall exist. 

(15) No person shall be held to 
answer for a criminal offense without 
due process of law. 

(16) All persons shall before con- 
viction be bailable by sufficient sureties, 
except those charged with capital of- 
fenses when evidence of guilt is strong. 
Excessive bail shall not be required. 

(17) In all criminal prosecutions 
the accused shall be presumed to be 
innocent until the contrary is proved, 
and shall enjoy the right to be heard 
by himself and counsel, to be informed 
of the nature and cause of the accusa- 
tion against him, to have a speedy and 
public trial, to meet the witnesses face 
to face, and to have compulsory process 
to secure the attendance of witnesses 
in his behalf. 

(18) No person shall be compelled 
to be a witness against himself. 

(19) Excessive fines shall not be 
imposed, nor cruel and unusual punish- 
ment inflicted. 

(20) No person shall be twice put 
in jeopardy of punishment for the same 
offense. If an act is punished by a law 
and an ordinance, conviction or acquit- 
tal under either shall constitute a bar 
to another prosecution for the same act. 

(21) Free access to the courts shall 
not be denied to any person by reason 
of poverty. 

Article IV .—Citizenship 

Section 1. The following are citi- 
zens of the Philippines: 



67 



(1) Those who arc citizens of the 
Philippine Islands at the time of the 
adoption o£ this Constitution, 

(2) Those born in the Philippine 
Islands of foreign parents who, before 
the adoption of this Constitution, had 
been elected to public office in the 
Philippine Islands. 

(3) Those whose fathers are citi- 
zens of the Philippines. 

(4) Those whose mothers are citi- 
zens of the Philippines and, upon reach- 
ing the age of majority, elect Philip- 
pine citizenship. 

(5) Those who are naturalized in 
accordance with law. 

Sec, 2. Philippine citizenship may 
be lost or reacquired in the manner 
provided by law. 

Article W .Suffrage 

Section L Suffrage may be exer- 
cised by male citizens of the Philippines 
not otherwise disqualified by law, who 
are twenty-one years of age or over and 
are able to read and write, and who 
shall have resided in the Philippines 
for one year and in the municipality 
wherein they propose to vote for at 
least six months preceding the election. 
The National Assembly shall extend 
the right of suffrage to women, if in a 
plebiscite which shall be held for that 
purpose within two years after the 
adoption of this Constitution, not less 
than three hundred thousand women 
possessing the necessary qualifications 
shall vote affirmatively on the question, 

Article VI.— Legislative Department 

Section 1. The Legislative power 
shall be vested in a Congress of the 
Philippines, which shall consist of a 
Senate and a House of Representatives. 

Sec. 2. The Senate shall be com- 
posed of twenty-four Senators who 
shall be chosen at large by the qualified 



electors of the Philippines, as may be 
provided by law. 

Sec. 3. The term of office of Sen- 
ators shall be six years and shall begin 
on the thirtieth day of December next 
following their election. The first Sen- 
ators elected under this Constitution 
shall, in the manner provided by law, 
be divided equally into three groups, 
the Senators of the first group to serve 
for a term of six years- those of the 
second group, for four years; and those 
of the third group, for two years. 

Sec. 4. No person shall be a Senator 
unless he be a natural-born citizen of 
the Philippines and, at the time of his 
election, is at least thirty-five years of 
age, a qualified elector, and a resident 
of the Philippines for not less than two 
years immediately prior to his election. 

Sec. 5. The House of Representa- 
tives shall be composed of not more 
than one hundred and twenty Members 
who shall be apportioned among the 
several provinces as nearly as may be 
according to the number of their re- 
spective inhabitants, but each province 
shall have at least one Member. The 
Congress shall by law make an appor- 
tionment within three years after the 
return of every enumeration, and not 
otherwise. Until such apportionment 
shall have been made, the House of 
Representatives shall have the same 
number of Members as that fixed by 
law for the National Assembly, who 
shall be elected by the qualified electors 
from the present Assembly districts, 
Each representative district shall com- 
prise, as far as practicable, contiguous 
and compact territory. 

Sec. 6. The term of office of the 
Members of the House of Representa- 
tives shall be four years and shall 
begin on the thirtieth day of December 
next following their election. 

Sec. 7. No person shall be a Mem- 
ber of the House of Representatives un- 



68 



less he be a natural-born citizen of the 
Philippines and, at the time of his 
election, is at least twenty-five years 
of age, a qualified elector, and a resident 
of the province in which he is chosen 
for not less than one year immediately 
prior to his election* 

Sec. 8, (1) Elections for Senators 
and Members of the House of Repre- 
sentatives shall be held in the manner 
and on the dates fixed by law. 

(2) In case of vacancy in the Senate 
or in the House of Representatives, a 
special election may be called to fill such 
vacancy in the manner prescribed by 
law, but the Senator or Member of the 
House of Representatives thus elected 
shall serve only for the unexpired 
term. 

Sec. 9- The Congress shall convene 
in regular session once every year on 
the fourth Monday of January, unless a 
different date is fixed by law. It may 
be called in special session at any time 
by the President to consider general 
legislation or only such subjects as he 
may designate. No special session shall 
continue longer than thirty days and 
no regular session longer than one 
hundred days, exclusive of Sundays. 

Sec. 10. (1) The Senate shall elect 
its President and the House of Repre- 
sentatives its Speaker. 

Each House shall choose such other 
officers as may be required. 

(2) A majority of each House shall 
constitute a quorum to do business., but 
a smaller number may adjourn from 
day to day and may compel the attend- 
ance of absent Members in such manner 
and under such penalties as such House 
may provide. 

(3) Each House may determine the 
rules of its proceedings, punish its 
Members for disorderly behavior, and, 
with the concurrence of two-thirds of 
all its Members, expel a Member. 



(4) Each House shall keep a Journal 
of its proceedings, and from time to 
time publish the same, excepting such 
parts as may in its judgment require 
secrecy; and the yeas and nays on any 
question shall, at the request of one- 
fifth of the Members present, be entered 
in the Journal 

(5) Neither House during the ses- 
sions of the Congress shall, without 
the consent of the other s adjourn for 
more than three days, nor to any other 
place than that in which the two Houses 
shall be sitting. 

Sec Hi The Senate and the House 
of Representatives shall each have an 
Electoral Tribunal which shall be the 
sole judge of all contests relating to the 
election, returns, and qualifications of 
their respective Members. Each Elec- 
toral Tribunal shall be composed of 
nine Members, three of whom shall be 
Justices of the Supreme Court to be 
designated by the Chief Justice, and the 
remaining six shall be Members of the 
Senate or of the House of Representa- 
tives, as the case may be, who shall 
be chosen by each House, three upon 
nomination of the party having the 
largest number of votes and three of 
the party having the second largest 
number of votes therein. The senior 
Justice in each Electoral Tribunal shall 
be its Chairman. 

Sec. 12. There shall be a Commis- 
sion on Appointments consisting of 
twelve Senators and twelve Members 
of the House of Representatives, elected 
by each House, respectively, on the 
basis of proportional representation 
of the political parties therein. The 
President of the Senate shall be the 
Chairman ex-officio of the Commission, 
but shall not vote, except in case of tie. 

Sec. 13- The EJectoral Tribunals 
and the Commission on Appointments 
shall be constituted within thirty 
days after the Senate and the House of 



69 



Representatives shall have been or- 
ganized with the election of their 
President and Speaker, respectively. 
The Commission on Appointments 
shall meet only while the Congress is 
in session, at the call of its Chairman 
or a majority of its Members, to dis- 
charge such powers and functions as 
are herein conferred upon it. 

Sec. 14* The Senators and the Mem- 
bers of the House of Representatives 
shall, unless otherwise provided by 
law, receive an annual compensation 
of seven thousand two hundred pesos 
each, including per dicms and other 
emoluments or allowances, and exclu- 
sive only of traveling expenses to and 
from their respective districts in the 
case of Members of the House of Rep- 
resentatives, and to and from their 
places of residence in the case of Sen- 
ators, when attending sessions of the 
Congress. No increase in said com- 
pensation shall take effect until after 
the expiration of the full term of all 
the Members of the Senate and of the 
House of Representatives approving 
such increase. Until otherwise pro- 
vided by law, the President of the Senate 
and the Speaker of the House of Rep- 
resentatives shall each receive an annual 
compensation of sixteen thousand pesos. 

Sec, 15, The Senators and Members 
of the House of Representatives shall 
in all cases except treason, felony, and 
breach of the peace, be privileged from 
arrest during their attendance at the 
sessions of the Congress, and in going 
to and returning from the same, and 
for any speech or debate therein, they 
shall not be questioned in any other 
place. 

Sec. 16, No Senator or Member of 
the House of Representatives may hold 
any other office or employment in the 
Government without forfeiting his seat, 
nor shall any Senator or Member of the 
House of Representatives, during the 



time for which he was elected, be ap- 
pointed to any civil office which may 
have been created or the emoluments 
whereof shall have been increased while 
he was a Member of the Congress. 

Sec. 17. No Senator or Member of 
the House of Representatives shall di- 
rectly or indirectly be financially inter- 
ested in any contract with the Govern- 
ment or any subdivision or instrument- 
ality thereof, or in any franchise or 
special privilege granted by the Con- 
gress during his term of office. He 
shall not appear as counsel before the 
Electoral Tribunals or before any court 
in any civil case wherein the Govern- 
ment or any subdivision or instrument- 
ality thereof is the adverse party, or in 
any criminal case wherein an officer or 
employee of the Government is accused 
of an offense committed in relation to 
his office, or collect any fee for his ap- 
pearance in any administrative pro- 
ceedings, or accept employment to in- 
tervene in any cause or matter where he 
may be called upon to act on account 
of his office. No Member of the Com- 
mission on Appointments shall appear 
as counsel before any court inferior to a 
collegiate court of appellate jurisdic- 
tion. 

Sec. 18. All appropriation, revenue 
or tariff bills, bills authorizing increase 
of the public debt, bills of local applica- 
tion, and private bills, shall originate 
exclusively in the House of Repre- 
sentatives, but the Senate may propose 
or concur with amendments. 

Sec. 19- (1) The President shall 
submit within fifteen days of the open- 
ing of each regular session of the Con- 
gress a budget of receipts and expen- 
ditures, which shall be the basis of the 
general appropriation bill. The Con- 
gress may not increase the appropria- 
tions recommended by the President 
for the operation of the Government 
as specified in the Budget, except the 



70 



appropriations for the Congress and 
the Judicial Department. The form of 
the Budget and the information that it 
should contain shall be prescribed by 
law. 

(2) No provision or enactment shall 
be embraced in the general appropria- 
tion bill unless it relates specifically 
to some particular appropriation there- 
in; and any such provision or enactment 
shall be limited in its operation to such 
appropriation, 

Sec. 20. (1) Every bill passed by 
the Congress shall, before it becomes a 
law, be presented to the President. If 
he approves the same, he shall sign it; 
but if not, he shall return it with his 
objections to the House where it ori- 
ginated, which shall enter the objections 
at large on its Journal and proceed to 
reconsider it. If, after such reconsidera- 
tion, two-thirds of all the Members of 
such House shall agree to pass the bill, 
it shall be sent, together with the ob- 
jections, to the other House by which 
it shall likewise be reconsidered, and 
if approved by two- thirds of all the 
Members of that House, it shall become 
a law. In all such cases, the votes of 
each House shall be determined by yeas 
and nays, and the names of the Members 
voting for and against shall be entered 
on its Journal, If any bill shall not 
be returned by the President as herein 
provided within twenty days (Sundays 
excepted) after it shall have been pre- 
sen ted to him, the same shall become a 
law in like manner as if he had signed 
it, unless the Congress by adjournment 
prevent its return, in which case it shall 
become a law unless vetoed by the Pres- 
ident within thirty days after adjourn- 
ment. 

(2) The President shall have the 
power to veto any particular item or 
items of an appropriation bill, but the 
veto shall not affect the item or items 
to which he does not object. When a 



provision of an appropriation bill af- 
fects one or more items of the same, the 
President cannot veto the provision 
without at the same time vetoing the 
particular item or items to which it 
relates. The item or items objected 
to shall not take effect except in the 
manner heretofore provided as to bills 
returned to the Congress without the 
approval of the President. If the veto 
refers to a bill or any item of an appro- 
priation bill which appropriates a sum 
in excess of ten per centum of the total 
amount voted in the appropriation bill 
for the general expenses of the Govern- 
ment for the preceding year, or if it 
should refer to a bill authorizing an 
increase of the public debt, the same 
shall not become a law unless approved 
by three-fourths of all the Members of 
each House. 

(3) The President shall have the 
power to veto any separate item or 
items in a revenue or tariff bill, and the 
item or items vetoed shall not take 
effect except in the manner provided as 
to bills vetoed by the President. 

Sec. 21. (!) No bill which may 
be enacted into law shall embrace more 
than one subject which shall be expres- 
sed in the title of the bill. ! 

(2) No bill shall be passed by either 
House unless it shall have been printed 
and copies thereof in its final form 
furnished its Members at least three cal- 
endar days prior to its passage, except 
when the President shall have certified 
to the necessity of its immediate enact- 
ment. Upon the last reading of a bill 
no amendment thereof shall be allowed, 
and the question upon its passage shall 
be taken immediately thereafter, and 
the yeas and nays entered on the Journal, 

Sec. 22. (1) The rule of taxation 
shall be uniform. 

(2) The Congress may by law au- 
thorize the President, subject to such 



71 



limitations and restrictions as it may 
impose, to fix, within specified limits, 
tariff rates, import or export quotas, 
and tonnage and wharfage dues. 

(3) Cemeteries, churches, and par- 
sonages or convents appurtenant there- 
to, and all lands, buildings, and im- 
provements used exclusively for reli- 
gious, charitable, or educational pur- 
poses shall be exempt from taxation. 

Sec 23* (1) All money collected 
on any tax levied for a special purpose 
shall be treated as a special fund and 
paid out for such purpose only. If 
the purpose for which a special fund 
was created has been fulfilled or aban- 
doned, the balance, if any, shall be 
transferred to the general funds of the 
Government. 

(2) No money shall be paid out of 
the Treasury except in pursuance of an 
appropriation made by law. 

(3) No public money or property 
shall ever be appropriated, applied, or 
used, directly or indirectly, for the use, 
benefit, or support of any sect, church, 
denomination, sectarian institution, or 
system of religion, or for the use, 
benefit, or support of any priest, prea- 
cher, minister, or other religious tea- 
cher or dignitary as such, except when 
such priest, preacher, minister, or dig- 
nitary is assigned to the armed forces 
or to any penal institution, orphanage, 
or leprosarium. 

Sec. 24. The heads of departments 
upon their own initiative or upon the 
request of either House may appear be- 
fore and be heard by such House on any 
matter pertaining to their departments, 
unless the public interest shall require 
otherwise and the President shall so 
state in writing. 

Sec. 25- The Congress shall, with 
the concurrence of two-thirds of all the 
Members of each House, have the sole 
power to declare war. 



Sec. 26. In times of war or other 
national emergency, the Congress may 
by law authorize the President, for a 
limited period and subject to such re- 
strictions as it may prescribe, to pro- 
mulgate rules and regulations to carry 
out a declared national policy. 

Article VII.— Executive Department 

Section 1. The Executive power 
shall be vested in a President of the 
Philippines. 

Sec. 2. The President shall hold his 
office during a term of four years and, 
together with the Vice-President cho- 
sen for the same term, shall be elected 
by direct vote of the people. The re- 
turns of every election for President 
and Vice-President, duly certified by 
the board of canvassers of each province 
or city, shall be transmitted to the seat 
of the National Government, directed 
to the President of the Senate, who 
shall, in the presence of the Senate and 
the House of Representatives, open all 
the certificates, and the votes shall then 
be counted. The persons respectively 
having the highest number of votes for 
President and Vice-President shall be 
declared elected; but in case two or 
more shall have an equal and the high- 
est number of votes for either office, 
one of them shall be chosen President 
or Vice-President, as the case may be, 
by a majority vote of the Members of 
the Congress in joint session assembled. 

Sec. 3. No person may be elected 
to the office of President or Vice-Pres- 
ident unless he be a natural-born citizen 
of the Philippines, a qualified voter, 
forty years of age or over, and has been 
a resident of the Philippines for at least 
ten years immediately preceding the 
election. 

Sec 4. Elections for President and 
Vice-President shall be held once every 
four years on a date to be fixed by law. 



72 



The terms of the President and Vice- 
President shall end at noon on the 
thirtieth day of December following 
the expiration of four years after their 
election, and the terms of their suc- 
cessors shall begin from such time. 

Sec. 5- No person shall serve as 
President for more than eight consecu- 
tive years. The period of such service 
shall be counted from the date he shall 
have commenced to act as President. 
Voluntary renunciation of the office for 
any length of time shall not be con- 
sidered as an interruption in the con- 
tinuity of the service of the incumbent 
for the full term for which he was 
elected. 

Sec 6. If, at the time fixed for the 
beginning of the term of the President, 
the President-elect shall have died, the 
Vice-President-elect shall become Pres- 
ident. If a President shall not have 
been chosen before the time fixed for 
the beginning of his term, or if the 
President-elect shall have failed to 
qualify, then the Vice-President shall 
act as President until a President shall 
have qualified, and the Congress may 
by law provide for the case wherein 
neither a President-elect nor a Vice- 
President-elect shall have qualified, 
declaring who shall then act as Pres- 
ident, or the manner in which one who 
is to act shall be selected, and such 
person shall act accordingly until a 
President or Vice-President shall have 
qualified. 

Sec, 7. Before he enter on the ex- 
ecution of his office, the President shall 
take the following oath or affirmation: 

"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully 
and conscientiously fulfill my duties as President of the 
Philippines, preserve and defend its Constitution, execute 
its laws, do justice to every man, and consecrate myself 
to the service of the Nation, So help me God/' (In 
case of affirmation, last sentence will be omitted). 

Sec. 8. In the event of the removal 
of the President from office, or of his 
death, resignation, or inability to dis- 



charge the powers and duties of the 
said office, the same shall devolve on the 
Vice-President, and the Congress shall 
by law provide for the case of removal, 
death, resignation, or inability, both 
of the President and Vice-President, 
declaring what officer shall then act as 
President, and such officer shall act 
accordingly, until the disability be 
removed, or a President shall be elected. 

Sec. 9- The President shall have an 
official residence and receive a compen- 
sation to be ascertained by law which 
shall be neither increased nor dimin- 
ished during the period for which he 
shall have been elected, and he shall 
not receive within that period any 
other emolument from the Govern- 
ment or any of its subdivisions or in- 
strumentalities. Until the Congress 
shall provide otherwise, the President 
shall receive an annual salary of thirty 
thousand pesos. The Vice-President, 
when not acting as President, shall 
receive an annual compensation of fif- 
teen thousand pesos until otherwise 
provided by law. 

Sec. 10. (X) The President shall 
have control of all the executive de- 
partments, bureaus, or offices, exercise 
general supervision over all local 
governments as may be provided by 
law, and take care that the laws be 
faithfully executed. 

(2) The President shall be com- 
mander-in-chief of all armed forces of 
the Philippines and, whenever it be- 
comes necessary, he may call out such 
armed forces to prevent or suppress law- 
less violence, invasion, insurrection, or 
rebellion. In case of invasion, insur- 
rection, or rebellion, or imminent dan- 
ger thereof, when the public safety 
requires it, he may suspend the pri- 
vileges of the writ of habeas corpus, or 
place the Philippines or any part there- 
of under martial law. 

(3) The President shall nominate 



73 



and with the consent of the Commis- 
sion on Appointments, shall appoint 
the heads of the executive departments 
and bureaus, officers of the Army from 
the rank of colonel, of the Navy and 
air forces from the rank of captain or 
commander, and all other officers of 
the Government whose appointments 
are not herein otherwise provided for, 
and those whom he may be authorized 
by law to appoint; but the Congress 
may by law vest the appointment of 
inferior officers, in the President alone, 
in the courts, or in the heads of depart- 
ments. 

(4) The President shall have the 
power to make appointments during 
the recess of the Congress, but such 
appointments shall be effective only 
until disapproval by the Commission 
on Appointments or until the next ad- 
journment of the Congress. 

(5) The President shall from time to 
time give to the Congress information 
of the state of the Nation and recom- 
mend to its consideration such meas- 
ures as he shall judge necessary and 
expedient, 

(6) The President shall have the 
power to grant reprieves, commuta- 
tions, and pardons, and remit fines 
and forfeitures, after conviction, for all 
offenses, except in cases of impeach- 
ment, upon such conditions and with 
such restrictions and limitations as he 
may deem proper to impose. He shall 
have the power to grant amnesty with 
the concurrence of the Congress, 

(7) The President shall have the 
power, with the concurrence of two- 
thirds of all the Members of the Senate, 
to make treaties, and with the consent 
of the Commission on Appointments, 
he shall appoint ambassadors, other 
public ministers, and consuls. He shall 
receive ambassadors and other public 
ministers duly accredited to the Gov- 
ernment of the Philippines. 



Sec. 11. (1) The executive depart- 
ments of the present Government of 
the Philippine Islands shall continue 
as now authorized by law until the 
Congress shall provide otherwise. 

(2) The heads of departments and 
chiefs of bureaus or offices and their as- 
sistants shall not, during their con- 
tinuance in office, engage in the practice 
of any profession, or intervene, directly 
or indirectly, in the management or 
control of any private enterprise which 
in any way may be affected by the func- 
tions of their office; nor shall they, 
directly or indirectly, be financially 
interested in any contract with the 
Government, or any subdivision or 
instrumentality thereof. 

(3) The President may appoint the 
Vice-President as a member of his ca- 
binet and also as head of an executive 
department. 

Article VHL — Judicial Department 

Section 1. The Judicial power shall 
be vested in one Supreme Court and in 
such inferior courts as may be estab- 
lished by law. 

Sec, 2. The Congress shall have the 
power to define, prescribe, and appor- 
tion the jurisdiction of the various 
courts, but may not deprive the Su- 
preme Court of its original jurisdiction 
over cases affecting ambassadors, other 
public ministers, and consuls, nor of its 
jurisdiction to review, revise, reverse, 
modify, or affirm on appeal, certiorari, 
or writ of error, as the law or the rules 
of court may provide, final judgments 
and decrees of inferior courts in — 

(1) All cases in which the constitu- 
tionality or validity of any treaty, law, 
ordinance, or executive order or regu- 
lations is in question. 

(2) All cases involving the legality 
of any tax, impost, assessment, or toll, 



74 



or any penalty imposed in relation 
thereto. 

(3) All cases in which the jurisdic- 
tion of any trial court is in issue- 

(4) All criminal cases in which the 
penalty imposed is death or life im- 
prisonment. 

(5) All cases in which an error or 
question of law is involved. 

Sec. 3. Until the Congress shall pro- 
vide otherwise, the Supreme Court 
shall have such original and appellate 
jurisdiction as may be possessed and 
exercised by the Supreme Court of the 
Philippine Islands at the time of the 
adoption of this Constitution. The 
original jurisdiction of the Supreme 
Court shall include all cases affecting 
ambassadors, other public ministers, 
and consuls. 

Sec, 4. The Supreme Court shall be 
composed of a Chief Justice and ten 
Associate justices and may sit either 
in banc or in two divisions unless other- 
wise provided by law. 

Sec. 5. The members of the Su- 
preme Court and all judges of inferior 
courts shall be appointed by the Pres- 
ident with the consent of the Commis- 
sion on Appointments. 

Sec. 6. No person may be appointed 
member of the Supreme Court unless he 
has been five years a citizen of the 
Philippines, is at least forty years of 
age, and has for ten years or more been 
a judge of a court of record or engaged 
in the practice of law in the Philip- 
pines. 

Sec, 7. No judge appointed for a 
particular district shall be designated 
or transferred to another district with- 
out the approval of the Supreme Court, 
The Congress shall by law determine 
the residence of judges of inferior 
courts. 

Sec. 8- The Congress shall prescribe 
the qualifications of judges of inferior 



courts, but no person may be appointed 
judge of any such courts unless he is a 
citizen of the Philippines and has been 
admitted to the practice of law in the 
Philippines, 

Sec. 9. The members of the Su- 
preme Court and all judges of inferior 
courts shall hold office during good 
behavior, until they reach the 
age of seventy years, or become inca- 
pacitated to discharge the duties of 
their office. They shall receive such 
compensation as may be fixed by law, 
which shall not be diminished during 
their continuance in office. Until the 
Congress shall provide otherwise, the 
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court 
shall receive an annual compensation 
of sixteen thousand pesos, and each As- 
sociate Justice, fifteen thousand pesos. 
Sec. 10. AH cases involving the 
constitutionality of a treaty or law 
shall be heard and decided by the Su- 
preme Court in banc, and no treaty or 
law may be declared unconstitutional 
without the concurrence of two-thirds 
of ail the members of the Court. 

Sec. 11. The conclusions of the Su- 
preme Court in any case submitted to 
it for decision shall be reached in con- 
sultation before the case is assigned to 
a Justice for the writing of the opinion 
of the Court. Any Justice dissenting 
from a decision shall state the reasons 
for his dissent. 

Sec. 12. No decision shall be ren- 
dered by any court of record without 
expressing therein clearly and distinctly 
the facts and the law on which it is 
based. 

Sec. 13. The Supreme Court shall 
have the power to promulgate rules 
concerning pleading, practice, and pro- 
cedure in all courts, and the admission 
to the practice of law. Said rules shall 
be uniform for all courts of the same 
grade and shall not diminish, increase, 
or modify substantive rights. Theexist- 



75 



log laws on pleading, practice, and 
procedure are hereby repealed as statu- 
tes, and are declared Rules of Courts, 
subject to the power of the Supreme 
Court to alter and modify the same. The 
Congress shall have the power to re- 
pea^ alter, or supplement the rules con- 
cerning pleading, practice, and proce- 
cedure, and the ""admission to the prac- 
tice of law in the Philippines. 

Article IX. — Impeachment 

Section 1. The President, the Vice- 
President, the Justices of the Supreme 
Court, and the Auditor General, shall 
be removed from office on impeach- 
ment for, and conviction of, culpable 
violation of the Constitution, treason, 
bribery, or other high crimes. 

Sec. 2. The House of Representa- 
tives, by a vote of two-thirds of all its 
members, shall have the sole power of 
impeachment. 

Sec, 3- The Senate shall have the 
sole power to try all impeachments. 
When sitting for that purpose, the 
Senators shall be on oath or affirma- 
tion. When the President of the Phil- 
ippines is on trial, the Chief Justice 
of the Supreme Court shall preside. 
No person shall be convicted without 
the concurrence of three-fourths of all 
the Members of the Senate. 

Sec. 4. Judgment in cases of im- 
peachment shall not extend further 
than to removal from office and dis- 
qualification to hold and enjoy any 
office of honor, trust, or profit under 
the Government of the Philippines, but 
the party convicted shall nevertheless 
be liable and subject to prosecution, 
trial, and punishment, according to 
law. 

Article X, — Commission on Elections 

Section 1. There shall be an in- 
dependent Commission on Elections 



composed of a Chairman and two other 
Members to be appointed by the Pres- 
ident with the consent of the Commis- 
sion on Appointments, who shall hold 
office for a term of nine years and may 
not be reappointed. Of the Members 
of the Commission first appointed, one 
shall hold office for nine years, another 
for six years, and the third for three 
years- The Chairman and the other 
Members of the Commission on Elec- 
tions may be removed from office only 
by impeachment in the manner pro- 
vided in this Constitution. 

Until the Congress shall provide 
otherwise, the Chairman of the Com- 
mission shall receive an annual salary 
of twelve thousand pesos, and the other 
Members, ten thousand pesos each, 
Their salaries shall be neither increased 
nor diminished during their term of 
office. 

Sec + 2. The Commission on Elec- 
tions shall have exclusive charge of 
the enforcement and administration of 
all laws relative to the conduct of 
elections and shall exercise all other 
functions which may be conferred upon 
it by law. It shall decide, save those 
involving the right to vote, all ad- 
ministrative questions, affecting elec- 
tions, including the determination of 
the number and location of polling 
places, and the appointment of election 
inspectors and of other election officials. 
All law enforcement agencies and 
instrumentalities of the Government, 
when so required by the Commission, 
shall act as its deputies for the purpose 
of insuring free, orderly, and honest 
elections. The decisions, orders, and 
rulings of the Commission shall be 
subject to review by the Supreme Court. 

No pardon, parole, or suspension of 
sentence for the violation of any elec- 
tion law may be granted without the 
favorable recommendation of the Com- 
mission, 



76 



Sec. 3- The Chairman and Members 
of the Commission on Elections shall 
not, during their continuance in office, 
engage in the practice of any profession, 
or intervene, directly or indirectly, in 
the management or control of any pri- 
vate enterprise which in any way may 
be affected by the functions of their 
office; nor shall they, directly or in- 
directly, be financially interested in 
any contract with the Government or 
any subdivision or instrumentality 
thereof. 

Sec, 4. The Commission on Elec- 
tions shall submit to the President and 
the Congress, following each election, 
a report on the manner in which such 
election was conducted. 

Article XI. — General Auditing Office 

Section 1. There shall be a General 
Auditing Office under the direction and 
control of an Auditor General, who 
shall hold office for a term of ten years 
and may not be reappointed. The 
Auditor General shall be appointed by 
the President with the consent of the 
Commission on Appointments, and shall 
receive an annual compensation to be 
fixed by law which shall not be dimin- 
ished during his continuance in office. 
Until the Congress shall provide other- 
wise, the Auditor General shall receive 
an annual compensation of twelve thou- 
sand pesos. 

Sec. 2. The Auditor General shall 
examine, audit, and settle all accounts 
pertaining to the revenues and receipts 
from whatever source, including trust 
funds derived from bond issues; and 
audit, in accordance with law and ad- 
ministrative regulations, all expendi- 
tures of funds or property pertaining 
to or held in trust by the Government 
or the provinces or municipalities there- 
of. He shall keep the general accounts 
of the Government and preserve the 
vouchers pertaining thereto. It shall 



be the duty of the Auditor General to 
bring to the attention of the proper 
administrative officer expenditures of 
funds or property which, in his opinion, 
are irregular, unnecessary, excessive, 
or extravagant. He shall also per- 
form such other functions as may be 
prescribed by law. 

Sec. 3. The decisions of the Auditor 
General shall be rendered within the 
time fixed by law, and the same may 
be appealed to the President whose 
action shall be final. When the ag- 
grieved party is a private person or 
entity, an appeal from the decision of 
the Auditor General may be taken di- 
rectly to a court of record in the man- 
ner provided by law. 

Sec. 4. The Auditor General shall 
submit to the President and the Con- 
gress an annual report covering the fi- 
nancial condition and operations of 
the Government, and such other 
reports as may be required. 

Article XII. — Civil Service 

Section 1. A Civil Service embrac- 
ing all branches and subdivisions of the 
Government shall be provided by law. 
Appointments in the Civil Service, ex- 
cept as to those which are policy- 
determining, primarily confidential or 
highly technical in nature, shall be 
made only according to merit and 
fitness, to be determined as far as prac- 
ticable by competitive examination. 

Sec. 2. Officers and employees in 
the Civil Service, including members 
of the armed forces, shall not engage 
directly or indirectly in partisan po- 
litical activities or take part in any 
election except to vote. 

Sec. 3- No officer or employee of 
the Government shall receive additional 
or double compensation unless specifi- 
cally authorized by Jaw. 

Sec. 4. No officer or employee in 



77 



the Civil Service shall be removed or 
suspended except for cause as provided 
by law. 

Article XIIL — Conservation and Util- 
isation of Natural Resources 

Section 1. All agricultural, timber, 
and mineral lands of the public do- 
main, waters, minerals, coal, petroleum, 
and other mineral oils, all forces of 
potential energy, and other natural 
resources of the Philippines belong to 
the State, and their disposition, ex- 
ploitation, development, or utilization 
shall be limited to citi?xns of the Phil- 
ippines, or to corporations or associa- 
tions at least sixty per centum of the 
capital of which is owned by such 
citizens, subject to any existing right, 
grant, lease, or concession at the time 
of the inauguration of the Government 
established under this Constitution. 
Natural resources, with the exception 
of public agricultural land, shall not 
be alienated, and no license, conces- 
sion, or lease for the exploitation, devel- 
opment, or utilization of any of the 
natural resources shall be granted for a 
period exceeding twenty-five years, re- 
newable for another twenty-five years, 
except as to water rights for irrigation, 
water supply, fisheries, or industrial 
uses other than the development of 
water power, in which cases beneficial 
use may be the measure and the limit of 
the grant. 

Sec. 2. No private corporation or 
association may acquire, lease, or hold 
public agricultural lands in excess of 
one thousand and twenty-four hectares, 
nor may any individual acquire such 
lands by purchase in excess of one hun- 
dred and forty-four hectares, or by 
lease in excess of one thousand and 
twenty-four hectares, or by homestead 
in excess of twenty-four hectares. Lands 
adapted to grazing, not exceeding two 
thousand hectares, may be leased to an 



individual, private corporation, or as- 
sociation. 

Sec. 3* The Congress may determine 
by law the sifce of private agricultural 
land which individuals, corporations, 
or associations may acquire and hold, 
subject to rights existing prior to the 
enactment of such law. 

Sec. 4- The Congress may author- 
ize, upon payment of just compensa- 
tion, the expropriation of lands to be 
subdivided into small lots and con- 
veyed at cost to individuals. 

Sec 5- Save in cases of hereditary 
succession, no private agricultural land 
shall be transferred or assigned except 
to individuals, corporations, or associa- 
tions qualified to acquire or hold lands 
of the public domain in the Philip- 
pines. 

Sec 6. The State may, in the inter- 
est of national welfare and defense, 
establish and operate industries and 
means of transportation and commu- 
nication, and, upon payment of just 
compensation, transfer to public owner- 
ship utilities and other private enter- 
prises to be operated by the Govern- 
ment. 

Article XIV. — General Provisions 

Section 1, The flag of the Philip- 
pines shall be red, white, and blue, 
with a sun and three stars, as conse- 
crated and honored by the people and 
recognized by law. 

Sec. 2. All public officers and mem- 
bers of the armed forces shall take an 
oath to support and defend the Consti- 
tution. 

Sec 3- The Congress shall take 
steps toward the development and adop- 
tion of a common national language 
based on one of the existing native 
languages. Until otherwise provided 
by law, English and Spanish shall 
continue as official languages. 



78 



Sec. 4. The State shall promote 
scientific research and invention. Arts 
and letters shall be under its patronage. 
The exclusive right to writings and 
inventions shall be secured to authors 
and inventors for a limited period. 

Sec. 5. All educational institutions 
shall be under the supervision of and 
subject to regulation by the State. 
The Government shall establish and 
maintain a complete and adequate sys- 
tem of public education, and shall pro- 
vide at least free public primary in- 
struction, and citizenship training to 
adult citizens. All schools shall aim 
to develop moral character, personal 
discipline, civic conscience, and voca- 
tional efficiency, and to teach the du- 
ties of citizenship. Optional religious 
instruction shall be maintained in the 
public schools as now authorized by 
law. Universities established by the 
State shall enjoy academic freedom. 
The State shall create scholarships in 
arts, science, and letters for specially 
gifted citizens. 

Sec. 6. The State shall afford pro- 
tection to labor, especially to w 7 orking 
women and minors, and shall regulate 
the relations between landowner and 
tenant, and between labor and capital 
in industry and in agriculture. The 
State may provide for compulsory ar- 
bitration. 

Sec. 7. The Congress shall not, ex- 
cept by general law, provide for the 
formation, organization, or regulation 
of private corporations, unless such 
corporations are owned or controlled 
by the Government or any subdivision 
or instrumentality thereof. 

Sec. 8. No franchise, certificate, or 
any other form of authorization for the 
operation of a public utility shall be 
granted except to citizens of the Phil- 
ippines or to corporations or other 
entities organized under the laws of the 
Philippines, sixty per centum of the 



capital of which is owned by citizens 
of the Philippines, nor shall such fran- 
chise, certificate, or authorization be 
exclusive in character or for a longer 
period than fifty years. No franchise 
or right shall be granted to any indi- 
vidual, firm, or corporation, except 
under the condition that it shall be 
subject to amendment, alteration, or 
repeal by the Congress when the public 
interest so requires. 

Sec, 9. The Government shall or- 
ganize and maintain a national police 
force to preserve public order and en- 
force the law. 

Sec. 10. This Constitution shall be 
officially promulgated in English and 
Spanish, but in case of conflict the 
English text shall prevail. 

Article XV.- — Amendments 

Section 1. The Congress in joint 
session assembled, by a vote of three 
fourths of all the Members of the Senate 
and of the House of Representatives 
voting separately, may propose amend- 
ments to this Constitution or call a con- 
vention for that purpose. Such amend- 
ments shall be valid as part of this 
Constitution when approved by a ma- 
jority of the votes cast at an election 
at which the amendments are submit- 
ted to the people for their ratification. 

Article XVI. — Transitory Provisions 

Section 1. The first election of the 
officers provided in this Constitution 
and the inauguration of the Govern- 
ment of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines shall take place as pro- 
vided in Public Act Numbered One 
hundred and twenty-seven of the Con- 
gress of the United States, approved 
March twenty-four, nineteen hundred 
and thirty-four. 

Sec 2. All laws of the Philippine 
Islands shall continue in force until 



79 



the inauguration of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines; thereafter, such 
laws shall remain operative, unless in- 
consistent with this Constitution, until 
amended, altered, modified, or repealed 
by the Congress of the Philippines, and 
all references in such laws to the Gov- 
ernment or officials of the Philippine 
Islands shall be construed, in so far as 
applicable, to refer to the Government 
and corresponding officials under this 
Constitution, 

Sec. 3- All courts existing at the 
time of the adoption of this Constitu- 
tion shall continue and exercise their 
jurisdiction, until otherwise provided 
by law in accordance with this Consti- 
tution, and all cases, civil and criminal, 
pending in said courts, shall be heard, 
tried, and determined under the laws 
then in force. 

Sec, 4- All officers and employees in 
the existing Government of the Phil- 
ippine Islands shall continue in office 
until the Congress shall provide other- 
wise, but all officers whose appoint- 
ments are by this Constitution vested 
in the President shall vacate their re- 
spective offices upon the appointment 
and qualification of their successors, 
if such appointment is made within 
a period of one year from the date of the 
inauguration of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines. 

Sec 5- The members of the House 
of Representatives for the Mountain 
Province shall be elected as may be 
provided by law. The voters of muni- 
cipalities and municipal districts for- 
merly belonging to a special province 
and now forming part of regular prov- 
inces shall vote in the election for 
Members of the House of Representa- 
tives in such districts as may be pro- 
vided by law. 

Sec. 6. The provisions of this Con- 
stitution, except those contained in this 
article and in Article V, and those 



which refer to the election and qualifi- 
cations of officers to be elected under 
this Constitution, shall not take effect 
until the inauguration of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines. 

Article XVII. — Special Provisions Ef- 
fective upon the Proclamation of the In- 
dependence of the Philippines. 

Section 1. Upon the proclamation 
of the President of the United States 
recognizing the independence of the 
Philippines — 

(1) The property rights of the United 
States and the Philippines shall be 
promptly adjusted and settled, and all 
existing property rights of citizens or 
corporations of the United States shall 
be acknowledged, respected, and safe- 
guarded to the same extent as property 
rights of citizens of the Philippines- 

(2) The officials elected and serving 
under this Constitution shall be consti- 
tutional officers of the free and inde- 
pendent Government of the Philip- 
pines and qualified to function in all 
respects as if elected directly under 
such Government, and shall serve their 
full terms of office as prescribed in this 
Constitution. 

(3) The debts and liabilities of the 
Philippines, its provinces, cities, muni- 
cipalities, and instrumentalities, which 
shall be valid and subsisting at the 
time of the final and complete with- 
drawal of the sovereignty of the United 
States, shall be assumed by the free and 
independent Government of the Phil- 
ippines; and where bonds have been 
issued under authority of an Act of 
Congress of the United States by the 
Philippine Islands, or any province, 
city, or municipality therein, the Gov- 
ernment of the Philippines will make 
adequate provision for the necessary 
funds for the payment of interest and 
principal, and such obligations shall be 
a first lien on all taxes collected. 



80 



(4) The Government of the Phil- 
ippines will assume all continuing 
obligations of the United States under 
the Treaty of Peace with Spain ceding 
the Philippine Islands to the United 
States. 

(5) The Government of the Phil- 
ippines will embody the foregoing pro- 
visions of this article [except subsection 
(2) ] in a treaty with the United States. 

Article XVIIL — The Commonwealth and 
the Republic 

Section 1. The government estab- 
lished by this Constitution shall be 
known as the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, Upon the final and com- 
plete withdrawal of the sovereignty 
of the United States and the proclama- 
tion of Philippine independence, the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines shall 
thenceforth be known as the Republic 
of the Philippines. 

ORDINANCE APPENDED TO THE 
CONSTITUTION 

Section 1. Notwithstanding the 
provisions of the foregoing Constitu- 
tion, pending the final and complete 
withdrawal of the sovereignty of the 
United States over the Philippines — 

(1) All citizens of the Philippines 
shall owe allegiance to the United 
States. 

(2) Every officer of the Government 
of the Commonwealth of the Philip- 
pines shall, before entering upon the 
discharge of his duties, take and sub- 
scribe an oath of office, declaring, among 
other things, that he recognizes and 
accepts the supreme authority of and 
will maintain true faith and allegiance 
to the United States, 

(3) Absolute toleration of religious 
sentiment shall be secured and no inha- 
bitant or religious organization shall 



be molested in person or property on 
account of religious belief or mode of 
worship. 

(4) Property owned by the United 
States, cemeteries , churches, and par- 
sonages or convents appurtenant there- 
to, and all lands, buildings, and im- 
provements used exclusively for 
religious, charitable, or educational 
purposes shall be exempt from taxation. 

(5) Trade relations between the 
Philippines and the United States shaJ] 
be upon the basis prescribed in section 
six of Public Act Numbered One hun- 
dred and twenty-seven of the Congress 
of the United States approved March 
twenty-four, nineteen hundred and 
thirty-four, as amended by the Act of 
Congress of the United States, approv- 
ed August seven, nineteen hundred 
and thirty-nine. 

(6) The public debt of the Phil- 
ippines and its subordinate branches 
shall not exceed limits now or hereafter 
fixed by the Congress of the United 
States, and no loans shall be contracted 
in foreign countries without the ap- 
proval of the President of the United 
States. 

(7) The debts, liabilities, and obli- 
gations of the present Government of 
the Philippine Islands, its provinces, 
municipalities, and instrumentalities, 
valid and subsisting at the time of the 
adoption of the Constitution, shall be 
assumed and paid by the Government 
of the Commonwealth of the Philip- 
pines. 

(8) The Government of the Com- 
monwealth of the Philippines shall 
establish and maintain an adequate 
system of public schools, primarily 
conducted in the English language. 

(9) Acts affecting currency, coinage, 
imports, exports, and immigration shall 
not become law until approved by the 
President of the United States. 



81 



(10) Foreign affairs shall be under 
the direct supervision and control of 
the United States. 

(11) All acts passed by the Congress 
of the Philippines shall be reported to 
the Congress of the United States. 

(12) The Philippines recognizes the 
right of the United States to expro- 
priate property for public uses, to main- 
tain military and other reservations and 
armed forces in the Philippines, and, 
upon order of the President of the 
United States, to call into the service 
of such armed forces all military forces 
organized by the Government of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines. 

(13) The decisions of the courts of 
the Philippines shall be subject to 
review by the Supreme Court of the 
United States as now provided by law, 
and such review shall also extend to 
all cases involving the Constitution 
of the Philippines. 

(14) Appeals from decisions of the 
Auditor General may be taken to the 
President of the United States. 

(15) The United States may, by 
Presidential proclamation, exercise the 
right to intervene for the preservation 
of the Government of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines and for the 
maintenance of the Government as 
provided in the Constitution thereof, 
and for the protection of life, property, 
and individual liberty and for the dis- 
charge of Government obligations 
under and in accordance with the pro- 
visions of the Constitution. 

(16) The authority of the United 
States High Commissioner to the Gov- 
ernment of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines as provided in Public Act 
Numbered One hundred and twenty- 
seven of the Congress of the United 
States approved March twenty-four, 
nineteen hundred and thirty-four, is 
hereby recognized. 



(17) Citizens and corporations of 
the United States shall enjoy in the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines all 
the civil rights of the citizens and cor- 
porations, respectively, thereof. 

(18) Every duly adopted amend- 
ment to the Constitution of the Phil- 
ippines shall be submitted to the Pres- 
ident of the United States for approval. 
If the Prcsidenr approve the amendment 
or if the President fail to disapprove 
such amendment within six months 
from the time of its submission, the 
amendment shall take effect as a part 
of such Constitution, 

(19) The President of the United 
States shall have authority to suspend 
the taking effect of or the operation of 
any law, contract, or executive order 
of the Government of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines, which in his 
judgment will result in a failure of the 
Government of the Commonwealth of 
the Philippines to fulfill its contracts, 
or to meet its bonded indebtedness and 
interest thereon or to provide for its 
sinking funds, or which seems likely to 
impair the reserves for the protection of 
the currency of the Philippines, or which 
in his judgment will violate interna- 
tional obligations of the United States, 

(20) The President of the Com- 
monwealth of the Philippines shall 
make an annual report to the Pres- 
ident and Congress of the United States 
of the proceedings and operations of 
the Government of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines and shall make such 
other reports as the President or Con- 
gress may request. 

Sec. 2. Pending the final and com- 
plete withdrawal of the sovereignty of 
the United States over the Philippines, 
there shall be a Resident Commissioner 
of the Philippines to the United States 
who shall be appointed by the President 
of the Commonwealth of the Phil- 
ippines with the consent of the Com- 



82 



mission on Appointments. The powers 
and duties of the Resident Commis- 
sioner shall be as provided in section 
seven, paragraph five of Public Act 
Numbered One hundred and twenty- 
seven of the Congress of the United 
States, approved March twenty- four, 
nineteen hundred and thirty-four, to- 
gether with such other duties as the 
Congress of the Philippines may de- 
termine. The qualifications, compen- 
sation, and expenses of the Resident 
Commissioner shall be fixed by law. 



Sec. 3. All other provisions of Public 
Act Numbered One hundred and twenty- 
seven of the Congress of the United 
States, approved March twenty-four, 
nineteen hundred and thirty-four, as 
amended by the Act of Congress of the 
United States, approved August seven, 
nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, ap- 
plicable to the Government of the Com- 
monwealth of the Philippines are here* 
by made a part of this Ordinance as if 
such provisions were expressly inserted 
therein. 



83 



