Aq uino 

MANAGEMENT 



Of The 



PRESIDENCY 




Power To The Regions 



The 




UINO 



MANAGEMENT 

Of The 



PRESIDENCY 




Power To The Regions 



Published by the 
Presidential Management Staff 
Office of the President 
Manila, Philippines 
June 1992 



Project Director 

Executive Secretary Franklin Drilon 



EDITORIAL ADVISORY BOARD 
Chairman 

Secretary Aniceto Sobrepena 
Members 

Asst. Secretary Mary Ann Fernandez 
Asst. Secretary Demetrio Ignacio 
Asst. Secretary Narciso Inlong 

Production Manager 

Director Nicanor Torres 

Production Support 

Felicitas Estrella 

Office of Special Concerns - PMS 
Writers/Researchers 

Asst. Director Bernard Sychangco {lead writer) 

Gloria Georgina Jota 

Minerva Generalao 

Merci Biluan-Tabafunda 

ChelleCruz 

Asst. Secretary Manuel Gaite 
Claron Alcantara 
Floribelle Aduna 
Vic Rodriguez 
Alex Yambao 

Editorial Consultants 

Hugo Yonzonlll 
Guia Tecson Prado 
Minerva Quemuel 

Book Design 

Fusion Media 

Special Thanks 

Resource Persons/Institutions 

Executive Director Maria Montelibano - RTVM 
Photos 

Photo Lab - Office of the Press Secretary 
Undersecretary Lourdes Siytangco 

Logo 

Philippine Information Agency 
Editorial and Visual Office - PMS 

Printing 

Neda Secretariat - APO 



Foreword 



"OURS TS A government that came to power borne on the shoulders of our 
people; we must, therefore, govern on the basis of that same people power". 

These were the very words of President Corazon C. Aquino - words that 
laid the foundation of the highest office of the land. For six years and four months, 
her people-powered presidency reflected itself in the very nature of the executive 
branch and on the implementation of several projects closest to the President's 
heart; closest, because they touched the warp and woof of our people's aspira- 
tions. 

To document in part her people-powered presidency, we have compiled this 
series of volumes titled The Aquino Management of the Presidency. The flrst 
part of the series attempts to outline the evolution of the support offices and the 
various management tools and technology employed in the decision-making and 
decision dissemination processes in the Office of the President. The second part 
of the series, to which this volume belongs, provides a chronicle of some specific 
undertakings initiated by the Office of the President which, now, constitute part 
of the legacies of the Aquino government. The third part of the series is a summa- 
tion of the Aquino government's performance during its six years in office. 

This volume, "Power To The Regions", details the ways by which the 
President ensured the institution of the people's hard-won democracy. Through 



various obstacles posed by political factions, self-interests, ideological and even 
cultural differences, she had remained steadfast in her desire to bring down to 
the people the instruments of power. Such that genuine freedom shall be in the 
hands of all Filipinos; not only during her time, but for generations to come. 

This series of volumes. The Aquino Management of the Presidency, is by 
no means a complete coverage of the legacies of the Aquino presidency. Some of 
those not documented here are contained in materials better covered by other 
line agencies or academic groups. 

Some of President Aquino's legacies, however, will find no archive to pre- 
serve them for posterity. One would have to look at the faces and listen to the 
hearts of the people she touched in order to find them. 



Aniceto M. Sobrepeiia 

Cabmet Secrelary 
and 

Head, Presidentinl Management Staff 



"I am convinced that if this country is to move 
forward, to grow at a rate and pace consistent 
with the aspirations of our people, we have to de- 
centralize much of that authority wielded by the 
national government, and your national govern- 
ment is taking steps to remedy the overly - 
centralized system we inherited from the 
past regime. . . 

We must continuously move together towards 
making every municipality a self-reliant 
community with the local chief executive 
empowered and provided with enough resources 
to truly manage on his own". 

President Corazon C. Aquino 

1989 National Mayor's League 
of the Philippines 
Folk Arts Theater 
June 10, 1989 



Introduction 



CORAZON C. AQUINO was swept into power because the people had de- 
cided that the previous ruler had overreached his powers and had overextended his 
stay. Although it was true that there was a constitution in place, Marcos operated 
above it and practically outside of it. His prerogatives were such that he could 
supercede legislation at a stroke of a pen. 

To the dictator and his wife, Malacanang was the center of things. From it 
emanated the true, the good, and the only vision and direction that would set the 
Filipinos free from their centuries of indolence. There was that deliberate effort to 
manipulate the minds of the people - for them to believe that they would be helpless 
without the imperial presidency continuing, forever. 

But the Filipinos knew better. They spoke at EDSA and decreed that primacy 
of the people must prevail. And what were the Filipino people but a rich tapestry of 
cultures, dialects, traditions and regions? In modern development paradigms, these 
differences must be considered and respected to achieve unity and progress. 

Owing to the revolutionary fervor in the aftermath of EDSA, the new President 
had the mandate of her people to bestow upon herself authoritarian powers if she so 
wished. But instead, she ordered the creation of a constitutional commission to write 



4 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



a new democratic framework, to rebuild a nation with its people participating in 
governance. 

In his 20 years as Philippine president, Marcos methodically centralized power. 
The delineation between the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of the pre- 
vious government seemed indistinguishable. President Aquino had to turn the sys- 
tem inside out, bottom to top. She meant to shed central power and distribute it 
among her people. She never wavered on this overwhelming drive. 

The President consistently pursued the devolution of the traditional seat of 
power, and all throughout her reign, decentralization was systematically imple- 
mented. The Constitution of 1987, ratified overwhelmingly by the people, was very 
definite about conferring more authority to local governments and autonomy to 
regions which, due to historical, cultural, and political imperatives, wished to pace 
their own development tighter. 

The Constitutional Commission which drafted the 1987 Constitution included 
three prominent Muslims and other representatives from cultural communities. The 
composition was such that it represented a wide range of sectors. To a man, the 
commissioners aimed to empower the local governments. 

The new Constitution says: "The state shall ensure the autonomy of local gov- 
ernments" and that, 'The Congress shall enact a local government code which shall 
provide for a more responsive and accountable local government structure insti- 
tuted through a system of decentralization". 

Following these provisions, the Aquino government (1 ) established the Autono- 
mous Region for Muslim Mindanao and the Cordillera Administrative Region, (2) 
strengthened the Regional Development Councils, and (3) effected the Congress- 
enacted Local Government Code. 

Thus, the era of grassroots planning and responsibility began. 



Autonomous 




THE AIR WAS thick with tension. Maimbung, Sulu was full of fierce-looking 
men armed to the teeth. Government soldiers filled one half of the town, while Mus- 
lim secessionists controlled the other. It was September 1986, and the battle-weary 
town was expecting an unusual guest. For the first time in the history of the nation, 
its President was about to land in the heart of conflict. She was either insane or very 
fearless, indeed. 

President Aquino broke protocol and personally met Nur Misuari, Chairman 
of the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) on that day. The unprecedented 
move manifested the President's resolve to exhaust all peaceful means to achieve 
the peace which eluded Mindanao for so many years. It was a significant break- 
through, marking the first step in the peace process. 

In his eyeball-to-eyeball meeting with the President, Misuari agreed to cease 
hostilities and sit down with the government on how to arrive at a political solution. 
And as a further proof of government's sincerity, Misuari was allowed to hold 
consultations in Mindanao. 

The Muslim's dream of establishing their own Bangsa is deeply rooted in his- 
tory, dating back to the Spanish and American periods. The Muslims, as a people, 
have fought against the superior forces of foreign colonizers. 



6 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The Americans particularly found the Muslims very tough. It is legend that the 
would-be colonizers invented the powerful .45 caliber pistol to subdue the warriors, 
but failed. Instead, they opted for a stalemate. 

More specifically, the Tausogs of Sulu have the distinct honor to be the only 
tribe which had entered into a treaty with the government of the United States of 
America. The Bates Treaty recognized the religious rights of the Muslims and 
respected their culture and tradition in exchange for the Muslim recognition of 
American authority. 

In the 1950s, President Ramon Magsaysay opened the frontiers of Mindanao 
to other Filipino migrants. Cebuanos, Ilongos, Ilocanos, and even the Ivatans from 
Batanes found the land very rich. As the farms and the residential communities 
spread, the Muslims found themselves marginalized. 

To compound the situation, the long neglect by government of the welfare of 
Filipino Muslims in Mindanao had resulted in bitterness and resentment from these 
people, eventually leading to the formation of the Muslim Secessionist Movement. 

President Marcos also tried the armed response. In bitter, bloody wars of broth- 
ers that became full blown upon the declaration of Martial Law in September 1972, 
thousands of lives and properties had been lost. Yet there was no solution in sight. 

President's Conunitment: Muslim Mindanao 

Soon after assuming office, President Aquino immediately directed the resump- 
tion of talks with the leaders of the MNLF. The President considered the resolution 
of the Muslim secessionist problem as one of her priorities. 

But while the Aquino administration committed itself to accommodate the just 
aspirations of the Filipino Muslims for real and meaningful autonomy, it stood firm 
on a policy which dictated that this must be done within the framework of democ- 
racy and national sovereignty and must not, in any way, prejudice the territorial 
integrity of the Republic. 



Power to the Regions 



7 



The meeting with the President and Misuari led to what is known as the Jeddah 
Accord. Three months after the pivotal meeting in Sulu, the President sent then 
Minister of Local Governments Aquilino Pimentel to Jeddah, Saudi Arabia to ex- 
pand the groundworks for Muslim autonomy with Misuari. The Jeddah Accord 
called for the continuance of "discussion of the proposal for the grant of full au- 
tonomy to Mindanao, Basilan, Sulu, Tawi-Tawi, and Palawan subject to demo- 
cratic process". 

The Accord showed the Filipino Muslims and the Islamic world that the new 
government was sincere in its intent to grant its people maximum participation in 
the so-called democratic space. 

A Government With The Pulse Of The People 

From April 1986 to May 1987, the government and the MNLF Panel held a 
series of dialogues for mutually acceptable proposals. Ambassador Emmanuel N, 
Pelaez headed the Mindanao Peace and Development Panel. 

While this was happening, the Constitutional Commission was making its own 
grassroots consultation. It also used the Tripoli Agreement, a document drafted in 
the previous administration, as primary reference in drafting the provision for the 
creation of an autonomous region in Mindanao. 

On February 1987, the new Philippine Constitution enshrined the aspirations 
of the Filipino Muslims to manage their own affairs according to their customs, 
beliefs, and traditions. 

As a clincher, the Constitution called on Congress to pass, within 18 months of 
its organization, an Organic Act creating the autonomous region and defining its 
basic structure of government, with the assistance of a special, multisectoral body 
called the Regional Consultative Commission. 

Even while Congress was still deliberating on the bill for the creation of the 
Mindanao Regional Consultative Commission (MRCC), the people in the concerned 



8 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



areas were already busy looking for the right representatives to constitute the spe- 
cial body. 

There was happy anticipation among the Muslims as they braced themselves 
for this fresh turn of history. 

Consulting The People 

Multisectoral meetings were conducted from October 1987 to February 1988 
in the 27 districts of the 12 provinces proposed to be incorporated in the autono- 
mous region. Nominees from each district were screened and interviewed. By the 
time Congress passed the MRCC Bill on March 11, 1988, there was already a care- 
fully prepared roster of nominees. By June, the Commission on Appointments had 
confirmed the appointment of 51 members to the MRCC. 

The cross-section of Mindanao society was aptly reflected in the MRCC, half of 
whom were Muslims. Among these Muslim commissioners were former secession- 
ist commanders. The MNLF commanders were Nasrodin Tan Dacula from 
Maguindanao and Amilpasa Bandaying and Dambong Sali who were both Tausugs 
and Mama S. Lalanto who was a Maranao commander from the MILF. 

The task of putting into concrete and precise terms the aspirations of Filipino 
Muslims in Mindanao officially began when the MRCC convened on March 26, 
1988 in Cotabato City where the President swore in the commissioners. The first 
Plenary Session was held with Peace Commissioner Alfredo R.A. Bengzon as the 
interim presiding officer. 

Zamboanga City became the venue for the second and third plenary sessions 
where, on April 11-19, 1988, caucuses were held to elect the officers and draw up 
the house rules. Commissioner Tocod Macaraya became chairman of the officers 
which had the right mix of Muslims, Christians, and highlanders. 

From April 20 to July 1988, public consultations became very extensive. Local 
government officials and nongovernment organizations actively participated in these 



Power to the Regions 



9 



fora. The MRCC committees deliberated on the issues such as the definition of the 
term "Muslim Mindanao", the issues on ancestral domain, land reform, the regional 
security force, the benefits to be gained from autonomy, and the matter of revenue- 
sharing. 

Aside from the local consultations, regional consultations were also conducted 
within the year in strategic urban centers like Puerto Princesa City (July 9), 
Zamboanga City (July 22), Marawi City (July 31 -August 1), Cotabato City (August 
2-3), and General Santos City (August 4-5). 

The issues generated the interest of the majority of the Mindanao populace. 
There was a strong clamor for the draft organic act to be presented to the people 
first before the MRCC submits it to Congress. 

Congress also created the joint House and Senate Ad Hoc Committee and met 
with the MRCC in Zamboanga City on September 3- 4, 1988 to look into the progress 
of the Commission's work. 

The Commission members realized their duty not only to search for options to 
assist in the shaping of the future of Mindanao but also to preserve and maintain the 
unity and integrity of the Filipino nation. Not that it was easy. Serious disagree- 
ments among the commissioners over controversial issues prevented them to com- 
plete the draft of the organic act. 

However, the final report, containing 18 committee reports and two with proper 
notations, submitted to the House and the Senate passed the second reading. From 
this point, the task of coming up with an organic act was in the hands of Congress. 

Congress also demonstrated the democratic processes in the formulation of the 
act by conducting consultations not only between the two chambers, but also be- 
tween the legislative and the executive branches of the government. 

The proposed law generated much public interest which led to the filing of a 
case before the Supreme Court raising the issue as to whether its ratification will 
depend on double or single majority. 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



In the case of Abbas et al vs. COMELEC et al, the Supreme Court in an en banc 
resolution dated November 10, 1989 unanimously ruled that: "If the framers of the 
Constitution intended to require approval by a majority of all votes cast in the plebi- 
scite, they would have so indicated . . . The creation of the autonomous region is 
made to depend, not on the total majority vote in the plebiscite, but on the will of the 
majority in each of the constituent units". 

Finally, after nine months of work, on August 1, 1989, Congress enacted into 
law Republic Act 6734 entitled "An Act Providing For An Organic Act For The 
Autonomous Region In Muslim Mindanao". 

The people of Mindanao would now decide on it for the sake of their future 
and that of the Republic's. 

Voice Of The People 

The Administration's position of "active neutrality" attracted criticisms. But it 
maintained its stance that the issue of autonomy, a fundamental change in the po- 
litical arrangements of the citizens, must not be treated along partisan, political 
lines. To ensure that the people affected were fully informed before they cast their 
decisions, the Commission on Elections (COMELEC) conducted a thorough infor- 
mation campaign on the proposed Organic Act. 

Republic Act 6734 was submitted for ratification to the people of Mindanao in 
November 1989. Four provinces opted to join the Autonomous Region in Muslim 
Mindanao (ARMM): Sulu, Tawi-Tawi, Lanao del Sur, and Maguindanao. None of 
the cities voted for autonomy. The will of the people was made known and asserted. 

The democratic process had won. 

The ARMM had become the concrete manifestation of a peaceful political so- 
lution to a national problem that could have otherwise diminished the Republic of 



Power to the Regions 



11 



the Philippines into a disunited and chaotic country. And now it must translate itself 
into a meaningful and stable structure responsive to the needs of its constituents. 

On February 17, 1990, the ARMM conducted its first elections for their re- 
gional officials. Major national and local political parties fielded their candidates 
for the following positions: regional governor, vice governor, and 21 seats in the 
regional assembly. 

Zacaria A. Candao, as governor, and Benjamin T. Loong, as vice governor, 
were proclaimed by the COMELEC as the new officials of the autonomous region. 

Governor Candao, in 1976, served as legal adviser to the MNLF. A 
Maguindanaoan, Candao was also a member of the MNLF during the negotiations 
in Libya of the Tripoli Agreement. 

After EDS A, a number of Muslim leaders which included Candao and Loong 
pledged their allegiance to the Republic. And now they were on the threshold of 
genuine self-rule. 

Start Of Self-Rule 

On July 9, 1 990, Candao took his oath of office before the President as the first 
Regional Governor of the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao. This marked 
the formal establishment and organization of the Autonomous Regional Govern- 
ment (ARG). Upon the leadership of the autonomous government, the task of creat- 
ing the Office of the ARG and the transfer of specific powers and functions from the 
national to the new regional government, as provided by law, came into effect. 

An Oversight Committee headed by the Executive Secretary was created to 
supervise the transfer of powers vested on the new regional government by the 
Organic Act. The Committee was also tasked to oversee the transfer of appropria- 
tions, properties, assets and liabilities, and personnel of national agencies devolved 
to the ARG; and, to identify other line agencies and government-owned and control- 



12 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



led corporations (GOCCs) that may be absorbed by the regional government. The 
tasks included overseeing the terms and conditions of the turnovers. 

On July 24, 1990, Candao and Ismael Abubakar Jr., the Speaker of the Re- 
gional Assembly, met with the Oversight Committee to discuss the process of devo- 
lution of these agencies from the national government to the Autonomoiis Regional 
Government. Candao was concerned about the orderly transfer of powers of the 
line agencies so as not to disrupt the delivery of public services. 

The Oversight Committee (OC) was composed of then Executive Secretary 
Catalino Macaraig, then Secretary Guillermo Carague of Budget, Candao, 
Abubakar, Senators Mike Tamano and Nene Pimentel, and Congressmen Arden 
Anni and Guimid Matalam. 

The Technical Working Group (TWG) was constituted to thresh out the nitty- 
gritties of the tasks that will have to be carried out by the Committee. The Head of 
the Presidential Management Staff (PMS) was elected the Chairman of the TWG 
and the members were the representatives appointed by the members of the OC. 

On October 12, 1990, the President signed four Executive Orders aimed at 
providing the ARC in Muslim Mindanao the powers and resources needed for its 
operations and for infrastructure development. 

Devolved to the ARC were the powers, functions, assets, equipment, person- 
nel, and budget of line agencies dealing with local government (DLG), social serv- 
ices (DSWD), science and technology (DOST), labor and employment (DOLE), envi- 
ronment and natural resources (DENR), tourism (DOT), public works and high- 
ways (DPWH), and barter trade operations. 

The Face Of A Regional Government In Mindanao 

The powers and functions of the Autonomous Regional Government were all- 
encompassing. It was vested with powers to exercise jurisdiction over matters cov- 
ering administrative organization; creation of sources of revenues; ancestral do- 



Power to the Regions 



13 



main and natural resources; personal, family and property relations; regional, ur- 
ban and rural planning and development; economic, social and tourism develop- 
ment; educational policies; preservation and development of the cultural heritage; 
and other powers. 

The national government, however, maintained the last say on foreign affairs; 
national defense and security; postal service; coinage and fiscal and monetary poli- 
cies; quarantine, customs and tariffs; citizenship, naturalization, immigration and 
deportation; general auditing, civil service and elections; foreign trade; maritime, 
land and air transportation and communications that affected areas outside the 
Autonomous Region; and patents, trademarks, tradenames, and copyrights. 

Defining which areas of responsibilities overlapped and which did not required 
of the OC members infinite patience and wisdom. Centuries of struggle have at last 
arrived at a peaceful solution, thanks to Aquino and the carefully constituted group 
who could not afford to let history slip away - through one careless misstep. 

The Organic Act provided that the powers of the Autonomous Regional Gov- 
ernment be exercised through the Regional Governor and the Regional Legislative 
Assembly. It also called for the institutionalization of the Shariah Court system, in 
consideration of Muslim customs and culture. 

The Executive power was vested in the Regional Governor who was assisted 
by nine Regional Cabinet members, four of whom were to come from cultural com- 
munities. There was also a Regional Vice Governor. 

The Regional Governor exercised control over all regional executive commis- 
sions, boards, bureaus, and offices including local government units within the 
ARMM. During the Aquino presidency, he was supervised only by the President of 
the Philippines, thus enjoying a direct relationship with the highest office in the 
country. 

No other governor in the country had this direct relationship with the Presi- 
dent, all were supervised through the Secretary of Local Government. 



14 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The Autonomous Code also set to establish a system of tribal courts, which 
were to include a Tribal Appellate Court for the indigenous cultural communities in 
the Autonomous Region. These courts were to settle matters involving personal, 
family, and property rights according to the tribal codes of these communities. 

Candao says: . .in the past, one administration after another had resorted to 
many forms of strategies to deny the Muslims their quest for self-rule and autonomy. 
This is the only administration that has recognized the aspirations of the Muslims". 

The Autonomous Act also enabled the Autonomous Region to raise its own 
resources to support its programs. It had the power to raise revenues from local 
taxes, fees and charges, appropriations, donations, endowments, foreign assistance, 
and other forms of aids, subject to the Constitution and national policies. 

Upon the recommendation of the Oversight Committee, the Autonomous Re- 
gion in Muslim Mindanao were to be given seed money of P615 million for an infra- 
structure package for five years starting 1 991 . Additional assistance to be sourced 
from the Official Development Assistance (ODA) of the national government would 
be granted to the Autonomous Region on a program proposal basis. On top of 
these, national programs and projects in the Autonomous Region would continue to 
be financed out of national funds. 

The Culture Factor 

Aside from those mentioned above, the Organic Act clothed the Autonomous 
Regional Government with substantial powers to shape the life of the people in the 
region according to their culture and peculiarities. 

To protect the rights of the indigenous cultural communities with respect to 
ancestral land, the Organic Act provided that the Regional Government shall imple- 
ment and enforce the customary laws, traditions, and practices of the indigenous 
cultural communities on land claims and ownership and settlement of land dis- 
putes. Moreover, the Autonomous Regional Government was granted the power to 
enact its own version of Agrarian Reform provided it was consistent with the na- 



Power to the Regions 



15 



tional policy. The Regional Assembly passed a resolution suspending the Compre- 
hensive Agrarian Reform Law in their area, but this was overruled by the OC. 

The Organic Act also mandated the Autonomous Regional Government to for- 
mulate its own urban and rural development plan. For this purpose, a Regional 
Planning and Development Board was created with private sector participation, in 
emulation of the government-private sector tie-ups set by the President. 

The regional government was also granted the power to exercise, control, and 
supervise the exploration, utilization, and development of the natural resources 
within its jurisdiction. The regional government was also granted substantial au- 
thority to regulate foreign investments in its area. 

The preservation and development of the cultural heritage of the people in the 
Autonomous Region was given due importance in the Organic Act, too. It called for 
the strengthening and development of the madrasah or Islamic teaching in the Au- 
tonomous Region. 

The Regional Government was also empowered to evolve its own low-cost 
housing program, promote the well-being of women and the youth, and protect the 
rights of labor. 

Public Order And Security 

The Autonomous Regional Government had a share in the responsibility of 
keeping the peace in the region. Towards this end, the Regional Assembly was to 
create, by law, a Regional Police Force which shall form an integral part of the 
Philippine National Police under the administration and control of the National 
Police Commission. 

While the defense and security of the Autonomous Region remained to be the 
responsibility of the National Government, a regional command of the Armed Forces 
of the Philippines for the Autonomous Region was set up. 



16 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



What then did these efforts signify? 

In a nutshell, while the governnnent adhered to the spirit of the Tripoli Agree- 
ment and used it as a general framework of the Organic Act, the government, in 
establishing meaningful autonomy in Muslim Mindanao, went beyond it by adding 
new provisions which strengthened the structure of the regional government and 
armed it with more substantive powers and resources for effective governance. 

It may be too early to tell, but the strife in Mindanao may have come to pass. 
President Aquino pursued the process of peace with sincerity and determination. 
Again, the vision was put into work. 

Meanwhile, up north in the Cordilleras in Luzon, another group of Filipinos 
with a heritage and history of distrust for the lowlands was also clamoring for au- 
tonomy. To this, the President responded with dispatch. 

The Cordilleras: A Shot At Autonomy 

On September 13, 1986, noontime, the President's chopper lifted from the 
Malacanaiig grounds and headed towards north to meet with Fr. Conrado Balweg, 
romantically dubbed by the press as the Rebel Priest. In a little over 30 minutes, the 
chopper and its escorts hovered over towering pine trees and the Mt. Data Lodge. 
The thick fog which covered the area a few hours before had lifted. 

Fr. Conrado Balweg greeted the President with profuse warmth. He gifted the 
President with a shield and spear - his part of the alasiw, the exchange of peace 
tokens which signified the sipat, the cessation of hostilities. The President gave Balweg 
a Bible and a rosary. 

The exchange of peace tokens at Mt. Data ushered in the start of the Cordillera 
peace talks. 

The Cordillera region broke into the nation's political consciousness in the mid- 
70s when they expressed opposition to the government plan to set up a series of 
dams along the Chico River in the Kalinga-Apayao area. 



Power to the Regions 



17 



The Chico Dam project was opposed by the people since it would result in the 
destruction and inundation of ancestral lands. It was seen as an attempt to impose a 
central government decision without considering the views of the residents in the 
affected area. Moreover, the project was resented since the hydroelectric energy 
that would be generated would benefit mainly the population of the lowlands, bring- 
ing little benefit to the communities that would be displaced. 

The awakening of the Kalinga tribe stirred similar sentiments among other 
natives in the Cordillera region. The Tingguians in the province of Abra, led by 
Balweg, waged a resistance against the Cellophil Resources Corporation timber 
project which was seen by the highlanders as an attempt by the lowland business- 
men to exploit the natLiral resources of the area with little benefit accruing to the 
natives and, in the process, destroy the environment. Elsewhere in Apayao, Mt. 
Province, Ifugao, Benguet, and the City of Baguio, the fervor snowballed and the 
crusade for a unified cry for autonomy started. 

In both instances, the efforts to push through with the projects were accompa- 
nied by repressive measures enforced by the military. A revered pangnt (village 
chieftain), Macli-ing Dulag, was killed on April 24, 1980. In a number of cases, 
persons opposing the projects were summarily arrested, a number reportedly tor- 
tured by military and police authorities. And in some instances, persons were killed 
under mysterious circumstances. 

These developments led to the rise of insurgency in the region. The Communist 
Party of the Philippines and its armed wing, the New People's Army, successfully 
moved into the Cordillera Region to assist the various tribes in their resistance move- 
ments. The Cordilleras became heavily militarized at the peak of the anti-Chico 
dam struggle. Up to this writing, the NPA has a foot in the area but has difficulty 
establishing a wide and deep base due to the unique culture of the people and their 
conservative nature. The NPA is viewed as an outside force, consisting principally 
of lowlanders who are trying to gain a foothold in the ancestral lands of the 
Cordilleras. 

Autonomy became the call of the unified natives of the Cordilleras in the 80s. 
Larger mobilizations against the Chico River Dam Project led to the organization of 



18 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



the militant pangats and the Cordillera People's Alliance (CPA), an urban-based 
umbrella of more than 100 cause-oriented groups in the region. These groups put 
the campaign for autonomy into high gear. Linking up with traditional leaders in 
rural areas and merging more modern organizational methods with traditional cul- 
tural forms, the CPA launched an organized agitation for genuine autonomy in 
1985. 

But the people-powered presidency toppled the central government in Manila 
in 1986. The political equation changed. The new President had promised demo- 
cratic reforms and the people of the Cordilleras waited in silence. 



Laying The Groundwork 

The President had authorized Agapito "Butz" Aquino (who later became Sena- 
tor) to initiate talks with the group of Balweg, the Cordillera People's Liberation 
Army (CPLA), to seek for peaceful solutions to the smouldering problem. At the 
same time, other groups were invited to participate in the peace initiatives and to 
put forth proposals for the future of the Cordilleras. Thus was formed the Cordillera 
Broad Coalition (CBC) which was made up of sectoral representatives, local gov- 
ernment appointees, concerned individuals, and middle-class professionals. 

In November 1986, a Covenant of Unity was forged among the CBA-CPLA, 
CBC, and LGUs at Mt. Data. Together, they requested the government to cancel the 
Chico River Dam Project, to create an Interim Cordillera Administrative Region 
(ICAR), and to continue the dialogue even after the ceasefire and after the 
regionalization of the Cordilleras. 

The President moved quickly. She cancelled the Chico Dam project in Kalinga- 
Apayao, Mountain Province and revoked the license of the Cellophil Resources Cor- 
poration in Abra. 

Then the government made it possible for the Cordillera people to prepare 
themselves for autonomy by providing for the systems and structures that gave 
Cordillerans the options for self-government. 



Power to the Regions 



19 



The Constitution of 1987 was very explicit on the establishment of a Cordillera 
Autonomous Region (CAR). As said on Article X, Section 15: 'There shall be created 
autonomous regions in Muslim Mindanao and in the Cordilleras consisting of prov- 
inces, cities, municipalities and geographical areas sharing common and distinctive 
historical and cultural heritage, economic and social structures, and other relevant 
characteristics within the framework of this Constitution and the national sover- 
eignty as well as territorial integrity of the Republic of the Philippines". 

"Indeed, the political trend during the [first] three years (1986-1989) of the 
Aquino Administration has shown and afforded more avenues for the continuous 
political awakening of the Cordillera people. Compared to the past regimes which 
caused more alienation of the Cordillera communities, i.e. driving many of them to 
the underground movement, the Aquino government has launched a series of initia- 
tives that somehow address the historical problems of the Cordillera people" wrote 
Dr. Maximo Garming, a U.P. professor who is himself a Cordilleran, in his paper, 
'Towards Understanding the Cordillera Autonomous Region' ". 

The institution of the CAR did not come easy. Sociocultural differences be- 
came pronounced while political strategies came into conflict. 

But the government negotiating panel headed by Ambassador Emmanuel 
Pelaez kept away from the intramurals and faced only those who were willing to 
tackle the difficult task of laying the foundation for an autonomous region. 

On June 9, 1987, Pelaez and the Cordillera negotiating panel, headed by Abrino 
Aydinan who was acting for the CBA-CPLA, announced in Baguio that an agree- 
ment had been reached on an Interim Cordillera Regional Administi'ation (ICRA) as 
part of the overall peace talks. 

Divergence In Approaches 

The CBC people walked out. It accused the government of favoring Balweg. 
Later, the CBC disassociated itself from the CBA-CPLA saying that "no one indi- 
vidual or group can claim copyright or patent to the definition of a Cordillera 



20 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Autonomous Region". It objected most vehemently against the formation of a "re- 
gional peacekeeping force" between the CPLA, the AFP, and other government 
offices without the participation of the regional groups in the Cordillera. It also 
scored CBA for its"divide- and-rule" tactics wherein it dangled favors in the CAR to 
individuals and groups in exchange for their support. 

Another source of conflict between the CBC and the CBA/CPLA was the insist- 
ence of the latter to prescribe the bodong, an indigenous political institution in cer- 
tain parts of the Cordilleras, as the form of government of the region. 

Traditional politicians also contributed to the ruckus. 

These leaders, notably Congressmen William Claver (Kalinga-Apayao), 
Gualberto Lumauig (Ifugao), Samuel Dangwa (Benguet), Victor Dominguez (Mt. 
Province), and Honorato Aquino (Baguio City) strongly advocated a regional ad- 
ministration similar to those already existing in the other regions of the country. 
Further, these officials also objected to the usage of some indigenous terms such as 
pangat and bodong and complained about undue advantage given to CBA and 
CPLA. 

Finally, in July 1987, the President signed into law Executive Order No. 220, 
which created the Cordillera Administrative Region. The CAR was to be composed 
of the provinces of Abra, Benguet, Ifugao, Kalinga-Apayao, and Mt. Province and 
the chartered city of Baguio. This law "reunited" the Cordillera provinces which 
were previously divided into the Ilocos and Cagayan Valley regions. 

After the release of E.O. 220, public protests were mounted by the CBC and the 
Cordillera People's Alliance (a left of center group operating in the Cordillera). In a 
statement, the CBC questioned the "immediate implementation of E.O. 220 which 
imposes neither an autonomous nor administrative Cordillera region whose struc- 
tures, composition, process or function is unclear or known only to the same so- 
called negotiating panels". 



President Aquino receives a souvenir from 
the people of Bongao, Tawi-Tawi during 
her second visit to the province on May 15, 
1989. She is the only Philippine President 
to visit the province twice. At right is Sen. 
Santanina Rasul. 



President Aquino breaks protocol and 
Personally meets with Nur Misuari, Chairman 
oj the MNLF on September 5, 1986 in Sulu. 
with the President were Secretary Juan 
Ponce Enrile, AFP Chief of Staff Fidel 
Hamos, Maj. Gen. Jose Magno, and Foreign 
Tk 'i^^ Deputy Minister Mamintal Tamano. 
I he President is shown in photo with Nur 
Misuari on her left and Nur's wife, 
Desdemona, on her right. 




On September 13, 1986, a little over a week after 
meeting with Misuari, President Aquino meets 
with 'Rebel Priest' Conrado Balweg of the CPLA in 
Bontoc, Mountain Province. With her during the 
meeting are Secretaries Ernesto Maceda, Juan 
Ponce Enrile, and Chief of Staff Fidel Ramos. 

Balweg is one with microphone. 




Balweg said he 'only 
trusted Cory.' President 
Aquino meets with him at 
the Dining Room of the 
Presidential Guest House 
in Malacanang to discuss 
programs for the 
Cordilleras. 




The President before Chief Justice Claudio 
Teehankee swearing her allegiance to the 
New Constitution on February 11, 1987. 
Holding the Bible is President's daughter 
Ballsy Cruz. 

Receiving a copy of the Constitution, while 
Vice President Salvador Laurel and Concern 
President Cecilia Munoz Palma look on. 




I 




The President meets with the 
provincial governors on 
August 22,1988. At left, in 
barong, is DILG Secretary 
Luis Santos. 



J 




MORE TEETH. President 
Aquino meets with mem- 
bers of Region XI 
"Jeveloment Council (RDC- 
aI) headed by Atty. Chito 
Ayala on November 20, 
1987 in Malacanang. 




■5J > 

^ ^ ^^ 



Members of the legislative led 
by Senate President Jovito 
Salonga and House Speaker 
Ramon Mitra witness the 
signing of the Local Govern- 
ment Code on October 10, 1991. 






Addressing newly-elected 
I governors and mayors in March 
1988 at the Philippine Interna- 
tional Convention Center. 




ON TO PEACE. The President 
pins a medal of valor on a 
soldier who was wounded 
aunng a confrontation with 
""ushm secessionists during 
ner visit to Jolo, Sulu on 
September 5, 1986. 





The President, Senate 
President Salonga, DFA 
Secretary Raul 
Manglapus listen to 
speech of Governor 
Zacaria Candao during 
the launching of the 
Autonomous Region of 
Muslim Mindanao. 



DEVOLUTION. The Presi- 
dent signs Executive 
Order devolving power to 
the regions while Candao 
assists. 



Power to the Regions 



21 



The Cordillera negotiating panel, on the other hand, defended the issuance of 
E.O. 220. They stressed "that the establishment of the CAR recognizes and sympa- 
thizes with our inherent right and desire for autonomy, self-government and self- 
determination. The purpose for which the CAR was formed, its scope of authority 
and responsibility and its powers and functions all point to the path we must take to 
achieve complete self-rule". 

The Presidential Management Staff (PMS), in coordination with the Philippine 
Information Agency (PIA), launched a massive information campaign to create 
awareness on CAR and the setting up of its structures. Furthermore, through the 
assistance of local experts and elders in the region, PMS conducted a research to 
identify the different ethnolinguistic and tribal groups in the Cordilleras which will 
be represented in the CAR structures. 



Crafting The Organic Act 

As provided in E.O. 220, the Cordillera Regional Assembly was created to 
serve as the policy-formulating body of CAR. The Assembly was composed of 250 
representatives from the tribes, the municipalities, and Baguio City, including non- 
government organizations CNGOs) in the CAR. 

Public consultations were held in all the provinces and city of CAR to inform 
the people of the nomination process for the Assembly. Tribal groups and indig- 
enous political institutions were encouraged to nominate their representatives. Like- 
wise, NGOs, and barangay and municipal councils nominated individuals to repre- 
sent them in the CAR. All the nominees were screened by PMS and a short list was 
submitted to the Cordillera Panel for endorsement to the President. 

Atty. Sergio Kawi was appointed by the President as the Chairman of the As- 
sembly and was also designated as the titular head of the CAR. 

E.O. 220 also provided for the creation of the Cordillera Executive Board (CEB), 
the development body and implementing arm of the CAR, to be composed of the 



22 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



governors of the provinces of the CAR, the Mayor of Baguio City, six representa- 
tives of the CBA, the ethnolinguistic groups, and NGOs. 

Upon the assumption of office of the CEB members, the PMS assisted the CEB 
in setting up its office in Baguio. The PMS, together with the National Economic and 
Development Authority (NEDA), also assisted the CEB in linking with government 
line agencies in the region. 

On September 23, 1987, the President issued Administrative Order No. 36, 
establishing regional offices of the national government in the CAR to facilitate the 
delivery of government services there. Among the noteworthy provisions of A.O. 36 
is the preference extended to Cordillerans in the filling-up of positions in CAR line 
agencies. 

As provided for in the Constitution, an organic act for the Cordillera shall be 
drafted to define the basic structure of government for the region. 

The Cordillera Regional Consultative Commission (CRCC) was created by vir- 
tue of Republic Act No. 6658 on June 10, 1988 to draft and assist Congress in the 
formulation of the Organic Act for the Cordillera Autonomous Region. 

It had 29 commissioners selected by a panel from the Office of the President 
headed by then Department of Finance (DOF) Undersecretary Ramon Katigbak. 
The commissioners were chosen from nominees and applicants whose main qualifi- 
cation was that he/she must be a knowledgeable Cordilleran. The PMS, also a mem- 
ber of the panel, conducted a thorough research and investigation on the applicants. 
Chosen to serve in the Commission was Abrino Aydinan, who was elected as its 
Chairman. 

The CBC lost much of its independent stance when its leaders and members 
were drawn into the CEB and now, the Commission. 

In July 1988, the Commission started to conduct consultations with their con- 
stituents. They listened to Cordillera elders, women, farmers, minors, and the youths. 



Power to the Regions 



23 



After apparently taking heed of their views, the draft of the proposed Organic 
Act was completed by the Commission on December 21, 1988. The 29 members 
except Dr. Amelia Miranda voted in the affirmative for approval and submission of 
the draft to Congress. Republic Act No. 6766, an act providing for an organic act for 
the Cordillera Autonomous Region, was approved on October 23, 1989. 

Finally, on January 1 990, the plebiscite on the Organic Act was held in the CAR 
provinces. 

But the people turned it down. The votes showed the rejection of the proposed 
organic act by the City of Baguio and by four out of five CAR provinces. Ifugao was 
the only province that voted favorably on this act. 



Back To The Drawing Table 

On February 1 4, 1 990, the COMELEC issued Resolution No. 2259 stating that 
the Organic Act for the Cordillera Autonomous Region constituted only the prov- 
ince of Ifugao. This was concurred by a Department of Justice (DOJ) memorandum 
reiterating that Ifugao alone, can legally and validly constitute the Cordillera Au- 
tonomous Region. 

On February 5, 1990, then Executive Secretary Catalino Macaraig Jr. issued a 
memorandum which granted authority to wind-up the affairs of theCRA and the 
CEB. Congress also enacted Republic Act 6861 , setting the elections in the Cordillera 
Autonomous Region. 

In December 1990, the Supreme Court gave the government a jolt when it 
ruled that the lone province of Ifugao can not constitute an autonomous region and 
declared that the CAR would have to revert back to the structures outlined in E.O. 
220. 



In the light of the Supreme Court's decision, the government was faced with 
the difficult task of restoring the structures that existed under E.O. 220. But some 



24 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



saw this as a cleansing process. The Assembly and the CEB were reconstituted with 
new members. 

On February 16, 1992 reappointed CRA Chairman Atty. Sergio Kawi, the re- 
constituted CEB with new members, notably Fr. Balweg and Joel Obar of the CB A, 
took their oath of office before the President. The CEB and CRA became fully opera- 
tional. 

The CAR again operated under the same setup it had in 1 987. The autonomy 
dream remained to be a goal for the Cordillerans. But former Secretary Rafael 
Ileto encouraged thus, "The Cordillera dream is not beyond reach. You ought to 
continue a consensus-building for a new organic act". 

As of this writing, the CEB and CRA are facing the difficult task of rewriting the 
Cordillera organic act - one which would be acceptable to the different tribes and 
cross-sections of society in the Cordillera. For the first time in their existence, the two 
bodies are closely working - holding meetings more frequently, gathering feedbacks, 
and embarking onjpint projects. They aim to come up with a rewritten organic act 
for presentation to their people by the end of 1 992. 

Whatever happens. President Aquino had expressed it time and again: the 
people's fate is in their hands. 



Regional 
Development 
Councils 



THE REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT COUNCILS (RDCs) were envisioned to be 
bodies responsible for preparing and updating long-range as well as annual devel- 
opment plans for the regions. They were also meant to be the go-between of the 
national government and the LGUs. This setup was conceived to effect bottom-up 
planning process. 

The RDCs is an old concept. But saying that it worked is an entirely different 
matter. 

The RDCs were institutionalized by the National Economic Development Au- 
thority (NED A) in 1972. Supposed to coordinate the implementation and to moni- 
tor development activities, they failed because the previous dispensation exerted a 
strong influence over the planning and implementation of development projects. 

The RDC Executive Committee was an irritant in the political gambit of the old 
regime. After all, during those times, development projects were confused with the 
dispensation of favors. 

The old RDC and its Chairman had no formal authority and moral back-up 
from the former presidency over the representatives of regional agencies of national 
departments or the representatives of LGUs. As such, the RDCs became hapless 



26 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



watchers of the plans and programs undertaken by sectoral agencies and LGUs. 
Without visible clout, the RDC failed to attract the people, the NGOs, and the pri- 
vate sector to join its activities. Sadly, the RDCs proved to be futile. 

In addition, the RDCs were saddled with the problem of lack of technical or 
planning expertise. In the end, this role was done by the NEDA regional offices. 

Aquino Recasts RDC 

The Aquino administration set a quiet revolution in governance - one which 
reposed great trust on the capability of her people to work directly for their dreams. 
The role of the administration was to provide the structures and the instrumentalities 
with which the people could work with. 

One of the government entities that was evaluated and reshaped was the RDC. 
In November 1987, the President issued Executive Order No. 308, making RDCs as 
the "primary institutions in the region which shall set the direction of economic and 
social development". 

Unlike the paper tiger RDCs of the previous administration. President Aquino's 
RDC had flesh and had clout. 

This issuance defined the RDC members and prescribed that one-fourth of the 
composition was to come from representatives of the private sector. This move was 
meant to involve the wider participation of the private sector in regional planning. 
This move was foreseen to make the RDC capture both the sectoral and areal 
approaches to planning. 

The first batch of RDC Chairmen appointed by President Aquino consisted of 
outstanding governors, regional directors, and a representative from the NGO sec- 
tor. Among them were Governors Lito Osmena (Region VII), Lutgardo Barbo (Re- 
gion VIII), Antonio Gallardo (Region X), Roberto Pagdanganan (Region III), Rafael 
Colet (Region I), Director Vicente Lopez (Region II), and Atty. Jesus Ayala 
(Region XI). 



Power to the Regions 



27 



The RDCs assumed critical roles. One such role was their budgeting function. 
They adopted the Synchronized Planning- Programming and Budgeting System 
(SPPBS). This system gave due recognition to the provinces to determine which 
projects in their area needed most attention. Starting 1 990, budget had been deter- 
mined at the regional level. 

The Aquino budget, which had been criticized by detractors as being exces- 
sive, was actually a reflection of the people's true needs. 

The RDC, in any given area, had the power to say yes or no on any proposed 
development project. 



RDC Broader Power 

In addition, the RDCs were given broader powers such as the administration of 
most of the integrated area development programs (lADPs) which used to be a 
function under the Office of the Prime Minister. Authority over the lADPs fmances 
were also transferred to the RDCs. 

The linkage of the RDC with the President and the heads of the 
ments were also strengthened. The then Office of the Cabinet Secretary (OCb^^ 
ther initiated an unprecedented step by institutionalizing the participation o 
RDC Chairmen to the monthly meetings of CORDs with the , 
these regular meetings, the RDCs were able to call the attention of the l^esiaent a 
the Cabinet on practically any major subject which were of great ^"^P™'^ 
former. These meetings also served as venue for feedback necessary in the review 
and formulation of policies and programs. 

The RDCs also organized Problem Solving Sessions with the President through 
the assistance of the then OCS and, at times, the Presidential Management Staff. 

Part of the linkage to the Office of the President is the participation of PMS in 
the RDC meetings in an observer status. Items taken up during the RDC meetings 
were immediately reported to the Office of the President. In fact, some projects/ 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



programs the RDCs cited as their priorities were immediately acted upon by the 
President. 

In such manner did the Aquino administration strengthen the RDCs. The Coun- 
cils had been transformed into catalysts of growth. They were no longer mere exten- 
sions of the national government to the people. On the contrary, they became the 
extensions of the people to their government. 



Local 
Government 

Code 



FOR MANY YEARS, Philippine political power had been concentrated in the 
national government, an orientation that were fossils of our colonial past. The na- 
tional government was the humungous blob gorging on the wealth and resources o 
its nation, while its people partook of the morsels that were never enough to sustain 
the life of, much less energize, their respective communities. 

The national government controlled the purse of the nation. Like ^^""^"^^^ 
took all the revenues into its vault and dispensed it only as they saw fit. 
planning came from the top, from the central government, masticated an w 
down into the bowels that were the local governments. 

The state of affairs was such that the local government units had to stiretch 
meager resources to deliver basic services to the people. The leaders had to look to 
the central government for adequate infrastructure, health care, and agricultural 
support services. They had to scramble for ambulances, communication facilities, 
allotments for irrigation and barangay roads, and such. 

The situation only perpetuated the system of patronage. Local governments, 
oftentimes, were deprived of self-determination, responsibility, and respect. 



30 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



As a consequence, communities particularly in the rural areas, stagnated. The 
populace became restive. 

In response, the Aquino government encouraged and supported tlie organiza- 
tion of cooperatives to improve the economic plight of the rural folk. It encouraged 
the participation of the nongovernment organizations in running numerous govern- 
ment projects, to widen the involvement of the private sector. As a third canto, the 
leadership saw that it was time to give the local governments more power and 
access to the country's resources. 

The President then certified as priority bill the Local Government Code. But 
perhaps, many congressmen saw that it would give local governments more access 
to resources. Ergo, power. The bill gathered dust in Congress for five years. 

But slowly, the political landscape began to change with the President's relent- 
less, indefatigable campaign of tapping the grassroots, of linking with the rural folk 
and NGOs. 

Furthermore, the President met regularly with the mayors, the governors, and 
their constituents. She called on them in planning sessions. 

De Facto Devolution 

On May 30, 1988, the Aquino government created the Cabinet Action Commit- 
tee on Decentralization (CACD) to study how certain additional powers and re- 
sponsibilities could be devolved to local government units. 

The President appointed the DBM Secretary as Chairman of the CACD with 
the following as members: Secretaries of DLG, DOF, DPWH, DECS, DOTC, DOLE, 
DA, and the PMS head. 

The Committee subsequently launched the Pilot Decentralization Project which 
was aimed at addressing the problems of red tape and delay in the delivery of 
services by transferring administrative and budgetary responsibilities to the local 



Power to the Regions 



31 



governments of four pilot provinces namely, Tarlac, Laguna, Negros Occidental, 
and Davao del Norte. The President herself chose these four provinces to be models 
of the project. 

The governors of the four provinces worked closely with the committee and 
hammered out agreements that were considered a breakthrough in managing local 
governments. The provincial governments were allowed to implement budgets with- 
out prior approval from the Budget Office. They were allowed to purchase equip- 
ment and vehicles and hire personnel without getting the nod of the central govern- 
ment. The President granted each of the four pilot provinces PI 20 million for devel- 
opment projects. Again, this act of faith spurred further growth to theprovmces. 

The President also directed the secretaries and heads of line agencies to del- 
egate more duties and authority to regional directors for them to be able to respon 
to local problems more quickly and efficiently. 

People power institutionalized, with or without Congress imprimatur, became 
moot and academic. 

Finally on October 1 991 , Republic Act No. 71 60, otherwise known as the Local 
Government Code of 1 991 was signed into law by the President 



The Local Government Code At Last 

The Code aimed to enable local government units (LGUs) to attain their full^t 
development as self-reliant communities and make them more effective partners m 
the attainment of national goals. It gave them more powers, authority, responsibili- 
ties, and resources. 

"Devolution" was the key word. The Code mandated that national government 
agencies must transfer functions, responsibilities, and eventually facilities, records, 
equipment, assets, and personnel to LGUs. 



The shift of power is awesome. But such is the spu-it of the EDSA revolution. 



32 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The local governments were to assume the delivery of basic services and facili- 
ties in the following areas: agricultural support services; health and social welfare 
services including maintenance of hospitals, health centers and day-care centers; 
general hygiene and sanitation, beautification, and solid waste collection; mainte- 
nance of roads and bridges; local infrastructure intended primarily to serve the 
residents; community forest projects; and more. 

The devolution was to undergo an orderly and systematic process. For 1992, 
eight national agencies greatly affected by this new management of government 
were to turn over their personnel, records and equipment to the LGUs. These de- 
partments included the Departments of Agriculture, Environment and Natural Re- 
sources, Health, Public Works and Highways, Social Welfare, Tourism, and Trans- 
portation and Communication. 

The ramifications of this power shift on the government employees was far- 
reaching. To protect the personnel, the President issued Executive Order No. 503 
which stated that "no involuntary separation, termination, or lay-off of permanent 
personnel of national government agencies affected by the devolution" shall take 
place and, further "there shall be no diminution in pay or benefits of devolved 
personnel". 

EO 503 provided a clear cut answer to the fears of many government employ- 
ees that many of them would be laid-off as a result of the Code. The EO gave them 
security of tenure and the appropriate benefits. 



Building Strength 

The basic services and facilities were to be funded from the share of the LGUs 
in the proceeds of national taxes and other local revenues and funding support from 
the national government, its instrumentalities, and government-owned or -control- 
led corporations. 

On February 24, 1992, the President issued Executive Order No. 507 directing 
the transfer of the amounts appropriated in the 1992 General Appropriations Act 



Power to the Regions 



33 



for devolved services and facilities, projects, and activities of affected national 
government agencies and departments to the IRA of the LGUs. 

One of the significant featiires of the Code was that the LGUs were given greater 
share in the national wealth. Upon the effectivity of the Code, the LGUs were to have 
greater share in the national internal revenue taxes. 

The share of LGUs in the national wealth were to be appropriated by their 
respective snnggunians to finance local development projects. And as an additional 
benefit, LGUs were to be given the power to adjust rates prescribed by the Code, 
with certain restrictions. 

In cases where a town fails to meet its target revenues and may affect the 
delivery of services, the national government may come in to subsidize it. 

The Code had a unique provision that gave more room for resources for LGUs 
that are located in areas that can help provide energy for the nation. A barangay, 
for instance, which plays hosts to a hydrothermal, geothermal and other source ot 
energy facility would be given substantive discounts in its cost of electricity. 

The Code recognized that the target beneficiaries of decentralization were the 
people and that their involvement in local governance was vital ^ns^rmg 
local autonomy works to their best interests. Thus, the Code mandated LUUS to 
back-up people's organizatioons (POs) and NGOs to become active partners m tne 
pursuit of local autonomy. It broadened and strengthened the development ro es of 
NGOs and the private sector. It welcomed the private sector in the local legislative 
and policy-making bodies, such as representation and membership in the 
sangguninns, the local development council, local school board, local health board, 
and the local prequalification bids and awards committees. 

More significantly, the Code gave preferential treatment to cooperatives and 
small fisherfolk. Concerned sangguninns were mandated to prioritize cooperatives 
in leasing public utilities owned by the LGUs and in granting franchises for the 
establishment and operations of ferries, wharves, markets, and slaughterhouses. 



34 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The Sangguniang Bayan was also mandated to prioritize small fisherfolk in 
granting fishing privileges such as building fish corrals, oyster, mussel or other 
aquatic beds. Finally, marginal fisherfolk would not be charged any fee for the right 
to fish in municipal waters. 

Truly, the Local Government Code of 1991 freed the LGUs from the limitations 
of a centralized form of governance. By setting the framework for the devolution of 
powers from the national to the local levels, the Code concretized the aspirations of 
local officials and the people to run their localities as they deem fit. 

However, the Code, which gave more power to local executives, was like a 
loaded gun. Used in the wrong manner by the wrong people, it could be a weapon 
for abuse as much as an instrument of change. 

As pointed out by the President in her speech on February 24, 1 992, on the 
occasion of the first National Symposium of the Local Government Code: "Greater 
powers mean greater responsibilities. This challenge to our local governments and 
leaders goes beyond exercising these powers prudently, within the parameters of 
the law. The challenge is to wield this new strength with a moral force, lashing out 
against temptations for abuse or misuse, delay or decay. For we have made the 
local government units our first line of defense, defense against underdevelopment, 
against curtailment of our freedoms. Thus the example of any one of you becomes 
a cue for all others to follow. Leadership is example. This is what public account- 
ability means. This is what people power means". 



Epilogue 



ON MAY 11, 1992, the Filipino people trooped to the polls to elect the Presi- 
dent's successor. The synchronized elections was a tremendous task for the popu- 
lace, the media, and the concerned government instrumentalities. But in the end, the 
faith of Corazon Aquino in the capacity of the Filipinos to see the democratic exer- 
cise through with dignity was vindicated. 

There-were threats from the left and the right to disrupt the elections as well as 
attempts from a few to make a mockery of democracy's fundamental "g^t- 
days of "guns, goons and gold" seemed to have breathed their last. The tUipmo 
voters remained steadfast, vigilant, and unperturbed. The elections were said to 
have been the most peaceful, orderly, and honest in the history of the Republic, just 
as President Aquino willed it to be. Just as how the Filipinos learned it shouia De. 

Through its various interventions, the Aquino administration delivered power 
to the people - to the leaders, to people's organizations, to cultural communities, to 
the grassroots. For the first time, the people wielded real power to chart their own 
destinies and were energized by it. 

With structures in place, and awareness ingrained in its people, the Philippines 
has become a showcase of democracy this side of the globe; where dictators shall 
never rise again. By making this possible. President Aquino gave her countrymen 
what may well be the greatest gift she can offer. 



