Amendments to the Ordinance Appended 
to the Constitution of the Philippines 

PROPOSED BY THE 

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

IN ITS RESOLUTION NO. 39 ADOPTED SEPTEMBER 15, 
1939, INCLUDING THE ACT OF CONGRESS OF 
THE UNITED STATES APPROVED 
AUGUST 7, 1939 



86282 



AMENDMENTS TO THE ORDINANCE APPENDED 
TO THE CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 
PROPOSED BY THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY IN 
ITS RESOLUTION NUMBERED THIRTY-NINE 
ADOPTED SEPTEMBER FIFTEEN, NINETEEN 
HUNDRED AND THIRTY-NINE. 

"Subsection (5) of section 1 of the Ordinance appended 
to the Constitution of the Philippines is amended to read 
as follows : 

"*(5) Trade relations between the Philippines and the 
United States shall be upon the basis prescribed in section 
Bix of Public Act Numbered One hundred and twenty-seven 
of the Congress of the United States approved March 
twenty-four, nineteen hundred and thirty-four, as amended 
by the Act of Congress of the United States, approved 
August seven, nineteen hundred and thirty-nine/ " 

"Section 3 of the Ordinance appended to the Constitu- 
tion of the Philippines is amended to read as follows : 

" ^Sec. 3. All other provisions of Public Act Numbered 
One hundred and twenty-seven of the Congress of the 
United States, approved March twenty-four, nineteen hun- 
dred and thirty-four, as amended by the Act of Congress 
of the United States, approved August seven, nineteen hun- 
dred and thirty-nine, applicable to the Government of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines, are hereby made a part 
of this Ordinance as if such provisions were expressly 
inserted herein."' 

The Act of Congress of the United States approved Au- 
gust 7, 1939, referred to in the above-proposed amend- 
ments to sections 1 and 3 of the Ordinance appended to 
the Constitution of the Philippines reads thus: 

[Public— No. 300— 76th Congress] 
[Chapter 502— 1st Session] 
[H. R. 7096] 

AN ACT TO AMEND AN ACT ENTITLED "AN ACT TO 
PROVIDE FOR THE COMPLETE INDEPENDENCE 
OF THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, TO PROVIDE 
FOR THE ADOPTION OF A CONSTITUTION AND 

^ 86282 



m 



3 

A FORM OF GOVERNMENT FOR THE PHILIP- 
PINE ISLANDS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES." 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives 
of the United States of America in Congress assembled, 
That section 6 of the Act of March 24, 1934, entitled **An 
Act to provide for the complete independence of the Philip- 
pine Islands, to provide for the adoption of a constitution 
and a form of government for the Philippine Islands, and 
for other purposes" (48 Stat. 456), is hereby amended to 
read as follov^s: 

"Sec. 6. During the period beginning January 1, 1940, 
and ending July 3, 1946, trade relations between the United 
States and the Philippines shall be as now provided by law, 
subject to the following exceptions: 

"(a) On and after January 1, 1941, the Philippine Gov- 
ernment shall impose and collect an export tax on every 
Philippine article shipped from the Philippines to the United 
States, except as otherwise specifically provided in this 
section. Said tax shall be computed in the manner here- 
inafter set forth in this subsection and in subsection (c) 
of this section. During the period January 1, 1941, through 
December 31, 1941, the export tax on every such article 
shall be 5 per centum of the United States duty; on each 
succeeding January 1 thereafter the export tax shall be in- 
creased progressively by an additional 5 per centum of the 
United States duty, except that during the period January 
1, 1946, through July 3, 1946, the export tax shall remain 
at 25 per centum of the United States duty. 

"(&) (1) No export tax described in subsection {a) of 
this section shall be imposed or collected upon any Philip, 
pine article of a class or kind in respect of which a quota 
is established by subdivision (3) of this subsection, nor 
upon copra or manila (abaca) fiber not dressed or manu- 
factured in any manner. 

'*(2) The United States duty shall be levied, collected, 
and paid in the United States upon every article which is 
of a class or kind in respect of which a quota is established 
by subdivision (3) of this subsection and which is entered, 
or withdrawn from warehouse, for consumption after De- 

86282 



cember 31, 1939, in excess of its respective quota: Provided, 
however, That nothing in this section or any subsection 
thereof shall be construed to exempt the quota of coconut 
oil therein provided for from the excise taxes provided for 
in section 2470 of the Internal Revenue Code (I. R. C., 
eh. 21, sec. 2470). 

"(3) For the purposes indicated in subdivisions (1) and 
(2) of this subsection, there are hereby established the 
following quotas of the designated Philippine articles : For 
the calendar year 1940, the quotas, hereafter called original 
quotas, shall be as follows: 

"a. cigars (exclusive of cigarettes, cheroots of all 
kinds, and paper cigars and cigarettes including 
wrappers), two hundred million cigars; 

"6. scrap tobacco, and stemmed and unstemmed 
filler tobacco described in paragraph 602 of the Tar 
iff Act of 1930, four million five hundred thousand 
pounds ; 

''c. coconut oil, two hundred thousand long tons- 
-d. buttons of pearl or shell, eight hundrld and 
fifty thousand gross. ^ nunared and 

For each calendar year thereafter through the calendar 
year 1945, each of the said quotas shall be the same as the 
corresponding quota for the immediately preceding calendar 
year, less 5 per centum of the correspondintr ov\^L.T t 

.•Fo. the period Januar. 1, I946,'thr„„"Jr,Xt\"9t 
each of said quotas shall be one-half of thp ^.^,.^1 
quota specified for the calendar year I945 '^^'^^^^Pondmg 

"(c) The Philippine Government, in imposinc. n a 1 
lectins export taxes on Philippine embroideries 11 
pute the tax in accordance with the formula « 'J^-l 
subsection (a) of this section, except that ,^^^"^6^ 
the taxable value of any such article an 1 "^^^^^^n^^g 
be made equal to the cost-cost, insurance anrr'\^^t" 
Philippines— of any cloth of United State'., • -^^^ 
the production thereof. "^^^^^ used in 

"(d) The United States duty shall be levio,! n . ^ 
and paid, in the United States, upon all Phib'n ' 
which are entered, or withdrawn from wareh 
sumption in any calendar year after lOqQ ' 

86282 ' ^^cess of eight 



5 

hundred and fifty thousand long tons, of which not more 
than fifty thousand long tons may be refined sugars: Pro- 
vided, hoivever, That for the period January 1, 1946, through 
July 3, 1946, the quota of Philippine sugars, not subject to 
the United States duty, shall be four hundred and twenty- 
five thousand long tons, of which not more than twenty- 
five thousand long tons may be refined sugars. Any export 
tax imposed and collected on Philippine sugars entered or 
withdrawn from warehouse for consumption in excess of 
the quotas established by this subsection shall be refunded 
by the Philippine Government. 

'*(e) Upon the expiration of the Act of June 14, 1935 
(49 Stat. 340), as extended to May 1, 1941, by proclamation 
of the President, dated January 26, 1938, the total amount 
of all Philippine cordage coming into the United States 
which may be entered or withdrawn from warehouse, for 
consumption during the remainder of the calendar year 
1941, shall not exceed four million pounds and in any cal- 
endar year after 1941 shall not exceed six million pounds: 
Provided, however, That for the period January 1, 1946, 
through July 3, 1946, the total amount of Philippine cordage 
which may be entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, for 
consumption shall not exceed three million pounds. 

"(/) (1) The quotas for sugars established by subsection 

(d) of this section shall be allocated annually as prescribed 
in section 6 (d) of the Act of March 24, 1934 (48 Stat. 
456), which section in this respect is not repealed by this 
amendatory Act. 

'*(2) The quotas for cordage, established by subsection 

(e) of this section, and by the Act of June 14, 1935, shall 
be allocated by authorities of the Philippine Government 
among the manufacturers of such commodities propor- 
tionately upon the basis of the shipment of each such manu- 
facturer to the United States during the twelve months 
immediately preceding the inauguration of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines. 

"(3) The quotas for all articles for which quotas are 
established by this section, except sugars and cordage, shall 
in each instance be allocated by authorities of the Philippine 
Government among the manufacturers whose products were 

86232 



o 

shipped to the United States during the calendar year 1937 
on the basis of the proportion which each manufacturer's 
maximum production shipped to the United States directly 
or through other persons, in any calendar year during the 
five-year period, 1933 through 1937, bears to the total of 
such maximum shipments of all such manufacturers 
+1, u i."' "^"^ "^«"ths of any quota year 

Shed btt? the quU eS 

lished by this Act or by the Act of June 14, 1935 is or 
wil be unable for any reason to ship to the Un ted States 
by the end of the quota year the totai amount of tis al o a 
ion or that year, the Philippine Government sha appor^ 
tion that amount of such allocation which it is estabHshPd 
by sufficient evidence cannot be shipped to the Unitod . 
during the remainder of the quota year in such manner and 
m accordance with such rules and regulatinl ! 
prescribe. regulations as it may 

"(ff) (1) The Philippine Government ^ilioii 
Secretary of the Treasury of the UnTt!d 4 f *° 
of each calendar quarter, all of the ' 
such quarter from export taxes less refund 7'^"^' "^"^^"^ 
collected in accordance with the nr ™posed and 

and said moneys shall be deDositpHT^'"^"^ ^^^^ section. 
Treasurer of the United States and shall ^''"''"^ ^^^e 
plementary sinking fund for the x^JZVT^'^''^^ ^ «"P- 
Philippines, its Provinces, cities anH ^ • ^'""'^^ of the 
prior to May 1, 1934, under author^tt of a?'"^^^^' 
Provrded, however. That moneys receivL f' ^^^^^^^^ 
tax imposed on any article which is sMnn /f"" export 
Pmes to the United States prior 0 JuTv ! f^"^ P^iP- 
is entered, or withdrawn from warehoused '''' ^"'^ ^-^ich 
on or after July 4. 1946, shall ^e rl?.^' "^^^^^^^Ption, 
pendent Government of the Philip^i^el "^^^ ^^de: 

(2) The said Secretary of the Tvl 

to accept the deposits of the proceeds authorized 
referred to in subdivision (l) of th^ ^ export taxes 
ance With the Act of June 111 193 4^^^^^^^^^ in accord! 

(3) The Secretary of the 929) 

with the approval of the mS'I °' U-ited States 
— to purchase with such s^^^SlT? ^ 

sinking fund 



bonds of the Philippines, its Provinces, cities, and munic- 
ipalities, issued prior to May 1, 1934, under authority of 
Acts of Congress and to invest such fund in interest-bearing 
obligations of the United States or in obligations guaranteed 
as to both principal and interest by the United States, 
Whenever the Secretary of the Treasury finds that such 
fund is in excess of an amount adequate to meet future 
interest and principal payments on all such bonds, he may, 
with the approval of the Philippine Government, purchase 
with such excess any other bonds of the Philippines, its 
Provinces, cities, municipalities, and instrumentalities. 
For the purpose of this subsection obligations may be ac- 
quired on original issue at par, or by purchase of outstand- 
ing obligations at the market price. Any obligations ac- 
quired by the fund may, with the approval of the Philippine 
Government, be sold by the Secretary of the Treasury at 
the market price and the proceeds of such sale and the 
proceeds of the payment upon maturity or redemption of 
any obligations held in the supplementary sinking fund, as 
well as all moneys in any manner earned by such fund or 
on any obligations acquired by said fund, shall be paid into 
the said fund. 

"(4) During the three months preceding July 4, 1946,. 
the Philippine Government and the Secretary of the Treas- 
ury of the United States shall confer to ascertain that 
portion of the bonds of the Philippines, its Provinces, cities^ 
and municipalities, issued prior to May 1, 1934, under au- 
thority of Acts of Congress, which will remain outstanding 
on July 4, 1946; and the Philippine Government shall turn 
over to the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States 
for destruction all such bonds that are then held, canceled, 
cr uncanceled, in any of the sinking funds maintained for 
the payment of such bonds. After such outstanding portion 
of this indebtedness is thus determined, and before July 4, 
1946, (i) there shall be set up with the Treasurer of the 
United States a special trust account in the name of the 
Secretary of the Treasury of the United States to pay future 
interest and principal payments on such bonds; (ii) the 
Philippine Government shall pay to the Secretary of the 
Treasury of the United States for deposit in this special 

86282 



trust account all of the sinking funds maintained for the 
payment of such bonds; and (iii) the Secretary of the 
Treasury of the United States shall transfer into this special 
trust account all of the proceeds of the supplementary sink- 
ing fund referred to in subdivision (1) of this subsection. 
Any portion of such special trust account found by the 
Secretary of the Treasury of the United States on July 4, 
1946, to be in excess of an amount adequate to meet future 
interest and principal payments on all such outstanding 
bonds shall be turned over to the Treasury of the inde 
pendent Government of the Philippines to be set up as an 
additional sinking fund to be used for the purpose of Hani 
dating and paying all other obligations of the Philippines" 
Us Provinces, cities, municipalities, and instrumentalitie.,' 
To the extent that such special trust account is dpt^.>.rv,- j 
by the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States to be 
insufficient to pay interest and principal on the m a- 
bonds of the Philippines, its Provinces, cit es and 1 
ipalities, issued prior to May 1, 1934 ' ZT' ?u 
Acts of Congress, the Philippin Govtlent sh^? 
before July 3, 1946, pay to the Secretarv of 
of the United States for deposit in such special 
an amount which said Secretary of the TrrasuVv I. 
is required to assure payment of principaran J ^'^"'"'^e^ 
such bonds: Provided, however That S tif o 0^ 
the Treasury of the United States finds that tl?'""*^"^ 
ment would impose an undue hardshin unnr, il ^^^uire. 
then the Philippine Government shaVcCt Ll ^^^^^ 
annually the necessary funds tor the navn- f Provide, 
and principal on such bonds until such tLl J interest 
of the Treasury of the United State' dXt^'^ '^^^^^^^y 
amount in the special trust account irrJ ^^e 
Interest and principal payments on such bn.^^"^*^ *° "^^et 

"(5) On and after July 4, 1946 1. c^"' 
Treasury of the United States is authorirJ''^*^'^ the 
proval of the independent Government of th td^'^^ ap- 
purchase at the market price for the snpr.;!i^. "^P^nes, to 
bonds of the Philippines, its Provinces citiP ^^^o"^* 
ities, issued prior to May 1, 1934^ ' ^nd municipal- 
of Congress. The Secretary of the Trea.nv ""'^y Acts 

'^'^y of the United 



9 

States is also authorized, with the approval of the independ- 
ent Government of the Philippines, to invest all or any part 
of such special trust account in any interest-bearing obliga- 
tions of the United States or in any obligations guaranteed 
as to both principal and interest by the United States. Such 
obligations may be acquired on original issue at par or by 
purchase of outstanding obligations at the market price, 
and any obligations acquired by the special trust account 
may, with the approval of the independent Government of 
the Philippines, be sold by the Secretary of the Treasury 
at the market price, and the proceeds of the payment upon 
maturity or redemption of such obligations shall be held 
as a part of such special trust account. Whenever the 
special trust account is determined by the Secretary of the 
Treasury of the United States to be adequate to meet in- 
terest and principal payments on all outstanding bonds of 
the Philippines, its Provinces, cities, and municipalities, 
issued prior to May 1, 1934, under authority of Acts of Con- 
gress, the Secretary of the Treasury is authorized to pay 
from such trust account the principal of such outstanding 
bonds and to pay all interest due and owing on such bonds. 
All such bonds and interest coupons paid or purchased by 
the special trust account shall be canceled and destroyed by 
the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States. From 
time to time after July 4, 1946, any moneys in such special 
trust account found by the Secretary of the Treasury of 
the United States to be in excess of an amount adequate 
to meet mterest and principal payments on all such bonds 
shall be turned over to the treasurer of the independent 
Government of the Philippines. 

''(h) No article shipped from the Philippines to the 
United States on or after January 1, 1941, subject to an 
export tax provided for in this section, shall be admitted 
to entry in the United States until the importer of such 
article shall present to the United States collector of cus- 
toms a certificate, signed by a competent authority of the 
Philippine Government, setting forth the value and quan- 
tity of the article and the rate and amount of the export 
tax paid, or shall give a bond for the production of such 
certificate within six months from the date of entry." 

86232 



10 



Sec. 2. Section 8 of the said Act of March 24, 1934, is 
hereby amended by adding thereto a new subsection as 
follows : 

"(rf) Pending the final and complete withdrawal of the 
sovereignty of the United States over the Philippine Is- 
lands, except as otherwise provided by this Act, citizens 
and corporations of the Philippine Islands shall enjoy in 
the United States and all places subject to its jurisdiction 
all of the rights and privileges which they respectively 
shall have enjoyed therein under the laws of the United 
States in force at the time of the inauguration of the Gov- 
ernment of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands." 

Sec. 3. Section 10 of the said Act of March 24, 1934, is 
hereby amended by adding the following subsection thereto: 

"(c) (1) Whenever the President of the United States 
shall find that any properties in the Philippines, owned by 
the Philippine Government or by private persons, would 
be suitable for diplomatic or consular establishments of 
the United States after the inauguration of the independ- 
ent Government, he may, with the approval of the Phil- 
ippine Government, and in exchange for the conveyance of 
title to the United States, transfer to the said Government 
or private persons any properties of the United States in 
the Philippines. Title to any properties so transferred to 
private persons, and title to any properties so acquired bv 
the United States, shall be vested in fee simple in such pe 
sons and the United States, respectively, notwithstanding 
the provisions contained in subsection (a) of this sect* 

"(2) Whenever, prior to July 4, 1946, the President^of 
the United States shall find that any properties of the Unit d 
States in the Philippines would be suitable for diplomat* 
and consular establishments of the United States after th 
inauguration of the independent Government, he shaH d 
signate the same by the issuance of a proclamation 
clamations, and title to any properties so designated^ h^^ 
continue to be vested in fee simple in the United St t 
notwithstanding the provisions contained in subsecti ^( ^\ 
of this section. 

*'(3) Title to the lands and buildings pertaininfi" t 
official residences of the United States High Commi ^ 
86282 ssioner 



11 



to the Philippine Islands in the cities of Manila and Baguio, 
together with all fixtures and movable objects, shall con- 
tinue to be vested in the United States after July 4, 1946, 
notwithstanding the provisions contained in subsection (a) 
of this section. 

"(4) Administrative supervision and control over any 
properties acquired or designated by the President of the 
United States pursuant to this subsection, and over the of- 
ficial residences in the Philippines of the High Commis- 
sioner, shall, on and after July 4, 1946, be exercised by the 
Secretary of State, in accordance with Acts of Congress 
relating to property held by the United States in foreign 
countries for official establishments/' 

Sec. 4. Section 13 of the said Act of March 24, 1934, is 
hereby amended by striking out the proviso and inserting 
in h*eu thereof the following: '^Provided, That at least two 
years prior to the date fixed in this Act for the independence 
of the Philippine Islands, there shall be held a conference 
of representatives of the Government of the United States 
and the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philip- 
pine Islands, such representatives, on the part of the United 
States, to consist of three United States Senators appointed 
by the President of the Senate, three Members of the House 
of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the House, 
and three persons appointed by the President of the United 
States, and, on the part of the Philippines, to consist of 
nine representatives to be appointed by the President of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines, with the consent of the 
Commission on Appointments of the National Assembly, 
for the purpose of formulating recommendations as to fu- 
ture trade relations between the United States and the in- 
dependent Philippine Republic, the time, place, and manner 
of holding such conference to be determined by the President 
of the United States; but nothing in this proviso shall be 
construed to modify or affect in any way any provision 
of this Act relating to the procedure leading up to Philip, 
pine independence or the date upon which the Philippine 
Islands shall become independent. 

'In the event any vacancy occurs in the Commission by 
reason of the death, resignation, or retirement of any mem- 

86232 



12 



ber thereof, such vacancy may be filled by the authority 
appointing the member whose death, resignation, or retire- 
ment caused the vacancy." 

Sec. 5. The said Act of March 24, 1934, is further 
amended by the addition of the following new section : 
"Sec. 18. (a) As used in sections 6 and 10 of this Act— 
The term 'United States,' when used in a geograph- 
ical sense, but not the term 'continental United States,' 
includes all Territories and possessions of the United States, 
other than the Philippines. 

'*(2) The term 'cordage' includes yarns, twines (includ- 
ing binding twine described in paragraph 1622 of the Tariff 
Act of 1930 (46 Stat. 675) ), cords, cordage, rope and cable, 
tarred or untarred, wholly or in chief value of manila 
(abaca) or other hard fiber. 

'*(3) The term 'Philippine Government' means the Gov- 
ernment of the Commonwealth of the Philippines. 

"(4) The term 'United States duty,' when used in con- 
nection with the computation of export taxes, means the 
lowest rate of ordinary customs duty in effect at the time 
of the shipment of the article concerned from the Philip- 
pines and applicable to like articles imported into the conti- 
nental United States from any foreign country, except Cuba 
or when more than one rate of ordinary customs duty is 
applicable to such like articles, the aggregate of such rates 
'*(5) The term 'refined sugars' possesses the same mean^ 
ing as the term 'direct-consumption sugar' as defined in 
section 101 of the Sugar Act of 1937. 

''(6) The term 'Philippine article' means an article the 
growth, produce or manufacture of the Philippines, in th 
production of which no materials of other than Philin * ^ 
or United States origin valued in excess of 20 per centum 
of the total value of such article was used and wh* Vi • 
brought into the United States from the Philippines^^ 

"(7) The term 'American article' means an article th 
growi:h, produce, or manufacture of the United States 
the production of which no materials of other than PhT^^ 

per 



pine or United States origin valued in excess of 20 



36232 



13 



centum of the total value of such article was used and which 
is brought into the Philippines from the United States. 

"(8) The term 'Philippine import duty' means the lowest 
rate of ordinary customs duty applicable at the port of 
arrival, at the time of entry, or withdrawal from warehouse, 
for consumption of the article concerned, to like articles 
imported into the Philippines from any other foreign coun- 
try or when more than one rate of ordinary customs duty is 
applicable to such like articles, the aggregate of such rates. 
"(b) As used in subsection (a) of this section: 
"(1) The terms 'includes' and 'including' shall not be 
deemed to exclude other things otherwise within the mean- 
ing of the term defined. , . , u n 4- • ^ a 

"(2) The term 'ordinary customs duty' shall not include 
any import duty or charge which is imposed to compensate 
for an internal tax imposed in respect of a like domestic 
product or in respect of a commodity from which the 
imported product has been manufactured or produced m 
whole or in part." 

SEC. 6. The said Act of March 24, 1934, is further 
amended by the addition of the following new section: 

"Sec. 19. (a) The proceeds of the excise taxes imposed 
by section 2470 of the Internal Revenue Code (I. R. C, 
eh. 21, sec. 2470), and of the import taxes imposed by 
sections 2490 and 2491 of the Internal Revenue Code (I. 
R, C, ch. 22, sees. 2490, 2491), collected on or after Jan- 
uary 1, 1939, and accrued prior to July 4, 1946, and re- 
quired to be held in separate or special funds and paid 
into the Treasury of the Philippines, together with any 
moneys hereafter appropriated in accordance with the au- 
thorization contained in section 503 of the Sugar Act of 
1937 (50 Stat. 915) by virtue of accruals of excise and 
import taxes prior to July 4, 1946, shall be held as separate 
funds and paid into the Treasury of the Philippines to be 
used for the purpose of meeting new or additional expendi- 
tures which will be necessary in adjusting Philippine econ- 
omy to a position independent of trade preferences in the 
United States and in preparing the Philippines for the 



36232 



14 



assumption of the responsibilities of an independent state : 
Provided, ho7vever, That the portion of such funds expended 
by the Government of the Commonwealth of the Phihppines 
shall be budgeted, appropriated, and accounted for sep- 
arately from other moneys of that Government. 

''(b) If the President of the United States finds that the 
Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines has 
failed or is about to fail to comply with any requirement 
of subsections (a) and (c) of this section, he shall direct 
the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States to 
withhold or discontinue, during any period or periods of 
time specified by the President of the United States further 
payments in whole or in part. 

The provisions contained in section 2476 of the 
Internal Revenue Code (I. R. C, ch. 21, sec. 2476), pro- 
hibiting further payments in the event that the Govern- 
ment of the Commonwealth of the Philippines should pro- 
vide by law for the subsidization of producers of copra 
coconut oil, or allied products, and the provisions contained 
in the Sugar Act of 1937, specifying the purpose for which 
such appropriations could be used by the said Government 
and the manner and condition of transfer, shall not apply 
to any moneys collected or appropriated pursuant to said 
Acts on or after January 1, 1939, and to this extent are 
hereby repealed: Provided, hoiuever, That the restriction 
contained in the proviso to section 503 of the Sugar Act 
of 1937 shall continue in full force and effect: And provided 
further, That no part of the proceeds of the excise taxes 
herein referred to shall be paid directly or indirectly as a 
subsidy to the producers or processors of copra, coconut 
oil or allied products, except that this provision shall not 
be construed as prohibiting the use of a portion of said 
funds for facilities for better curing of copra, or for bona 
fide production loans to Philippine copra producers. 

''(d) Nothing contained herein shall be construed as 
obligating the United States to continue for any period of 
time any or all of the excise and import taxes imnn^pH 
by sections 2470, 2490, 2491 of the Internal Revenue Code 
or by sections 3490, 3500, 3501 of the Internal Revenue 
Code (I. R, C, ch. 32, sees. 3490, 3500, 3501). 

36232 



15 



"(e) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 4 of the 
Act of March 8, 1902 (32 Stat. 54), or of any other pro- 
vision of law, on or after the first day of the second month 
following the passage of this amendatory Act, except as 
otherwise provided in this section, all customs duties col- 
lected in accordance with sections 6 and 13 of this Act, on 
any article the growth, produce, or manufacture of the 
Philippines, in the production of which no materials of other 
than Philippine or United States origin valued in excess of 
20 per centum of the total value of such article, was used 
and which is brought into the United States from the Phil- 
ippines, and all customs duties collected on any other article 
brought into the United States from the Philippines, shall 
be covered into the general fund of the Treasury of the 
United States and shall not be paid into the Treasury of the 
Philippines/* 

Sec. 7. (a) Sections 1 to 5, inclusive, of this amendatory 
Act shall become effective on January 1, 1940, if before 
that date — 

(1) Subsection 5 of section 1 of the Ordinance appended 
to the Constitution of the Philippines shall have been 
amended in the manner now provided by law, by changing 
the final period of said subsection to a comma, and by add- 
ing thereto the words: ''as amended by the Act of Congress 
of the United States approved (followed by the date of the 
approval of this amendatory Act)", and section 3 of the 
said Ordinance shall have been amended by inserting imme- 
diately after the words ''approved March 24, 1934" the same 
amendatory language mentioned above. 

(2) The President of the United States shall have found 
and proclaimed that the Philippine Government has enacted, 
subsequent to the adoption of the amendments to the Con- 
stitution of the Philippines (as provided in subdivision (1) 
of this subsection), a law relating to export taxes (as pro- 
vided in section 1), and has retained those Philippine laws 
relating to sinking-fund and currency matters which were 
in effect on May 20, 1938. 

(b) Section 1 of this amendatory Act shall remain in full 
force and effect from the effective date thereof until July 
4, 1946, unless the President of the United States shall, 

86232 



16 



prior to July 4, 1946. have found and proclaimed that the 
Philippine Government has, in any substantial respect, re- 
pealed or amended, or failed or refused to enforce or ad- 
minister any Philippine law referred to in subdivision (2) 
of subsection (a) of this section. In the event of such a 
finding and proclamation, section 1 shall immediately be- 
come ineffective and trade relations between the United 
States and the Philippines shall be as provided by section 6 
of the Act of March 24, 1934, prior to the enactment of 
this amendatory Act and by section 13 of the said Act. 

(c) Sections 6 and 7 of this amendatory Act shall become 
effective upon its enactment. 

Sec. 8. Notwithstanding the provisions contained in sec- 
tion 8 (a) (3) of the Act of March 24, 1934 (48 Stat. 456), 
entitled "An Act to provide for the complete independence 
of the Philippine Islands, to provide for the adoption of a 
constitution and a form of government for the Philippine 
Islands, and for other purposes", Foreign Service officers 
may, under commissions as diplomatic and consular officers, 
be assigned to the Philippine Islands, during which assign- 
ments such f;fficers shp.ll be considered as stationed in a 
foreign country, for such periods of time and under such 
regulations as the Secretary of State may prescribe for the 
performance of any of the duties customarily performed 
by Foreign Service officers stationed in foreign countries 
and of additional duties in connection with advising and 
assisting the United States High Commissioner to the Phil- 
ippine Islands in the supervision and control of the foreign 
affairs of the Commonwealth of the Philippines in accord- 
ance with section 2 (a) (10) of the Act approved March 24 
1934, and section 1 (10) of the ordinance appended to the 
Constitution of the Philippines adopted February 8, I935 

This section shall become effective upon its enactment. 

Approved, August 7, 1939. 

36232 



O 



