
by 

Teodoro Benigno 



Foreword by 

Corazon C Aquino 

Former President Republic of the Philippines 



Published by 

Benigno S. Aquino, Jr. Foundation 



The National Library of the Philippines CIP Data 

Recommended entry: 

Benigno, Teodoro C. 

Ninoy Aquino : portrait of a 
hero / by Teodoro C. Benigno. - 
Makati, Metro Manila : Benigno S. 
Aquino, Jr. Foundation, cl993. - 
lv 

L Aquino, Benigno S., Jr. - 1932- 
1983. 2. Politicians - Philippines 
- Biography. 3. Philippines - History. 
L Benigno S. Aquino, Jr. Foundation. 
II. Title. 

DS686.6A72 324.2'092 1993 P93200O0O4 
ISBN 971-91376-1-4 



Production Editor: 
Design and Layout: 
Photo Editor: 
Typist9: 

Proof Reading: 
Production Unit: 



Guillermo M.Luz 

Maricel A. Bisuna and Nonette C. Climaco 
Marc P. Opulencia 

Merz V. Zabala, Reynaldo R. Cancio and 

Ronald P. Jacinto 

Maricon G. Fortuna 

Makati Business Club 

Design & Publishing Department 



Printed in the Philippines by Echanis Press, Inc. 



This booklet is dedicated: 

To all who believed in Ninoy 
And helped make his dream come true. 



Ninoy Aquino 



Table of Contents 

Foreword 

Preface 

Chapter I 

Death at High Noon: People Power 

Chapter II 

Ninoy: The Wonder Boy 

Chapter III 

Martial Law: Life in Prison 

Chapter IV 

Heart Attack: Exile to America 

Chapter V 

Murder and Martyrdom 



Foreword 



I n the histories of families and nations, of races and 
religions, of armies and even athletics, it is men and 
I W omen of flesh and blood who challenge us and move 
usinthelivingofourlives,andthedoingofgreatdeeds-more 

than mere principles or precepts. Churches hold up saints 
before our eyes, nations enshrine their heroes and heroines 
sports have their halls of fame. And faith teaches us that God 
"draws us by the bonds of Adam": for God brought His 
revelation to its fulfillment by sending us His Son, born ot 
woman," to become "like us in all things save sin, and so lead 
us back to the Homeland for which He destined us. 

In his own life, my husband NINOY always kept a place 
for heroes. Even in the arrival statement he wrote for his 
homecoming that fateful Sunday of 21 ^August 1983 he 
speaks of Gandhi, citing his words, to reaffirm his belief that 
the way of non-violence was the path our people should take 
in the pursuit of change, that violence would only bnng more 

blood, more pain and suffering/more death and tears to our 
afflicted country. 

Itis ten years since NINOY gave his life in witness to his 
convictions, to his belief in the way of non-violence his 
burninglove for his people and his native tod. During these 
years, many people, Filipinos and non-Filipinos alike, nave 
told me that his life and dying awakened them from inaction 
andprssiveacceptanceofevilsandinjustice, challenged them 
to stand up and be counted for the cause of freedom and the 
defense of human rights, even moved them, during the four 
days of February at EDSA, to the readiness to lay down their 
lives so that freedom and justice might return to our nation. 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

NINOY himself said more than once that courage is caught by 
infection, thatbrave deeds would call forth brave deeds, that 
self-sacrifice would summon self-sacrifice, that life given in 
love would become for others a wellspring of "impossible 
dreams." 



Teddy Benigno was NINOrs friend. He has written this 
little.book as a tribute to him, in the hope that in times which 
continue to cry for heroic dedication and love for our country, 
NINO rs deeds and words might summon renewed integrity 
and courage from all of us, especially from the young people in 
our land. It is his prayer, and surely it is ours also, that the 
gift of self, so totally made, which sealed NINOrs life might 
rekindle that faith in the Filipino and faith in God which 
burned like a sacred flame in NINOrs heart to the last It is 
with this same prayer that we bid this little book, written as 
a labor of love, godspeed' on its way to the hands, the hearts 
and minds of our fellow-Filipinos on this tenth anniversary of 
NINOrs sacrifice. 



Corazon C. Aquino 
August 16, 1993 



Preface 



Tj* very now and then, a nation sheds its daily labors 
11 j to pause, to bring back to vivid memory the men 
J&J) and women who sacrificed their fives for the cause 
of national pride and dignity. It is well that the citizenry 
today remembers once again that 10 years ago, a man did 
iustthat. The assassin's bullet that pierced his brain also 
pierced the nationalconscienceandjarreditloosefromadeep 

and fitful slumber. 

And so we observe the 10th anniversary of Benigno 
Aquino, Jr.'s death not simply as a ritual recollection but a 

^Sta call to armsin terms of rovoltor revolutionor 
a summoning to the barricade^ It is a ca to a moral 
reawakening. Itis something like the pealing of churchbells 

rsltpafall. A*Mi*>VW«toM*w«™ 
Ninoy Aquino should come alive again in our minds and our 
consciences More than any other contemporary Fdipino, he 
L M thTglfight against «?*ff^£E 
„f.L lime hefoueht it alone in the desolation of his ton, 

^'what made it majestic was that Nino, .even .when 
atoost embody desertsd him * J*£ 
conviction that the Mp™ was worth dym^^ 
dictatoiship triedtobreakhnnineyeiyway. """"S™™ , 
p rifon sA for seven yea* an = mon te» 
nf heinz a communist leader ana sememe 

to «"iP hcld 8 Russian ronlette pistol tolus head 



Ninoy Aquino: PortmiUofa Hero 

through daily psychological torture. The dictatorship also 
offeredNmoyfabled riches and shared political power if he 
would say amen to the rulers of Malacanang. 

TheycoulMbreakhim. His utterance before the mili- 
tary tribunal that tried and sentenced him has a deathless 
nng: Some people suggest that Ibegformercy. But this I 

cannotmconsdenredoJwoddratherdieonmyfeetinhonor 
than live on bended knees in shame." 

It was a grim, gruelling epic battle between the Man in 
Uie Palace and the Man in Prison. President Ferdinand 
Marcos had aU the power in the world. He governed the 
nabon through the barrel of a gun as virtually the entire 

Sh S ent,P ° Iice ' and PuMicofficialdomagreed 
todo his bidding. He couldbuy almost anything and anybody. 

Nmoyhadjustonepower.Thatwasthepowerofmsmindand 
bs^nscienceandthe rosary he bore in hisrighthand. In 
ft e end the bayonets 0 f the dictatorship could not prevS 
over^the resolution of this man, his courage, his dignity, his 

«n l ! Wa !^ sdeaththat gaverisetoPeople Power. Who 

est 1 * ^*ass 

are back mpower. We cannot, must not let go of Ninoy's 
memory agau, A nation lives b, the power of ifc my ZZ 
A nationstruggles up the mountain and not down to the sea 
because the greatghosts of the past stir again and again and 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

hold us by the gut. Jose Rizal. Andres Bonifacio. Apolinario 
Mabini. We look around today and what do we see? Crime 
is on the rampage. Graft and corruption is a hydra-head that 
multiplies and terrifies. The police force harbors a cesspool 
of hardened criminals. There is again a darkness that grows 
and spreads with frightening alarm. 

It is thus that Ninoy's memory this 10th anniversary of 
his death is vital. It must quicken us the way blood quickens 
when a great crisis has to be faced. Make no mistake about 
it. We area nation in deep crisis. And we need Ninoy all the 
more today because we need a man who defines the moment, 
who stands alone at the cliff to convince all of us he is not 
afraid of the enemy. And then we follow. And this precisely 
is also the purpose of this little tome that we have written 
for this year's anniversary. Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of 
a Hero. 

We might as well recall in this preface a favorite quotation 
of Ninoy from a Chinese sage, which we also quoted to 
conclude this portrait. Ninoy never imagined it would ever be 
applied to him, even if drama was the very core and center 
of his extraordinary life. The sage said: 

"There is a sublime thieving in all giving 
A man gives us all and we are his forever." 

Teodoro Benigno 
August 8,1993 



Chapter One 

Death at High Noon: 
People Power 

I . an anybody forget that face? It was the solemn, im- 
\J passive, almost frozen mask of approaching death. 
At the behest of his scowling military escorts, Ninoy 
Aquino rose from his seat in the China Airlines plane. The 
curt, almost hostile mood of his escorts convinced him right 
then and there that something terrible was going to happen 
andthatpossiblydeathawaited him down below. Whatmust 
have deeply disturbed Ninoy was that not a single member ot 
his old military escort was there. They were the mctotor's 
minions, yes, but they .treated him with <** "™ 
civility. Now his escorts were all ground soldiers, all total 
strangers to him. And they were grufT. What must have 
struck him even more was that no W-«J ku ^S 
officer was around to take him into custody, that was 
downright strange. Ninoy slung his travel bag on his right 
shoulder, movedforward, while all the other passengers in the 
aircraft sat still in fear and trepidation. 

co-passenger? Soantayopupunta? Nmoyasked. Theydidnt 

have long to wait. , . 2 ; — 

Even before Ninoy Aqumo could finish his escen down 
a side ramp, 25 shots rang out. One shot was fired by a 
jLyesL directly behind him. The bullet pierced h s 

^^^^^^^^^^ 
a trice Ninoy pitched forward, his white safari shirt smoth- 
ered with blood. At high noon, his body sprawled prone on the 
tarmac of the Manila International Airport. Ninoy's arms 
were extended semi-diagonally. There was an eerie atmos- 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

phere in that normally bustling airport. Hardly anything was 
moving in the vicinity. Later on came the information there 
were hidden military TV cameras that recorded his death. 

The official autopsy report of the National Bureau of 
Investigation (NBI) medico-legal division mentioned as cause 
of death: "Brain laceration and intracranial hemorrhage 
secondary to gunshot wound." 

Ninoy's presumed killer was a communist hitman by the 
name of Rolando Galman. Just to make it look genuine, 
Galman was also killed by the military during the fusillade of 

25 shots. Nobody, of course, 
believed the dictatorship's 
claim that Galman killed 
Ninoy Aquino because the 
communist leadership of the 
New People's Army had a 
score to settle with him. It 
wasnotonlyabotchedjob. It 
was clumsy, hideous and gro- 
tesque. It was a conspiracy 
hatched in Malacanang Pal- 
acetodoawaywithNinoy. It 
was a public execution of the dictatorship's No. 1 political 
enemy. 

The date was August 21, 1983. The name etched on 

BenignoAqumo.Jr.'spassportwasMarcialBonifacio Hehad 
traveled all the way from Boston in the US after a three-vear 

self-exiletofulnlladatewithdestiny.Thedeadmanchosehis 
pseudonym carefully. Marcial was for martial law which the 
Actator Ferdinand Marcos declared Septet 2^1972 
Bonifacio was Fort (Andres) Bonifacio where Ninoy la* 

guishedmisolationforsevenyea re andsevenmonths.Hewas 
the first of hundreds of top political prisoners the dictator 
arrested on that day. 




Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

Why was Ninoy killed? And why was he killed so 

outrageously? 

Because he was the only Filipino who stood up to the 
dictatorship the way he did, fearless, refusing to bend a knee 
even for one instant, staring at Ferdinand Marcos eyeball to 
eyeball, and daring him to do his worst. He was killed 
outrageously because the murder at high noon was meant to 
beanexample. Itwasmeanttospreadinstantfearandterror. 
The citizenry would be transfixed. With Ninoy Aquino dead, 
thedictatorshipcouldrelax. The dead opposition leader could 
no longer weave his political magic on anybody. Besides, he 
was killed by the communists, wasn't he? And Ninoy Aquino 
was accused by the President as the top communist leader of 
the CPP-NPA, sentenced way back in 1977 by a Marcos 
military tribunal to death by firing squad. Ithardly mattered 
that these charges of Ninoy Aquino being a communist were 
absolutely false. The dictator said so and what he said was 

law. So who cared? , , 

Theearlier calculation thatfearandterrorwouldgnpthe 

population was correct. 

That fateful August 21 day, people talked in whispers as 
news of Ninoys death spread. The shock the silence were so 
palpable nobody dared to speak out in protest. Or go out into 
Ihestreets.Evenat^^^ 

Quezon City, those who kept night vigil while awaiting his 

hushed tones. Among them ^^J^^ES 
oldmanoftheopposition,Jose(Pepe)D^ 

Laurel, Francisco (Soc) Rodrigo, Eva Estrada Kalaw. In tha 
hushed atmosphere, somebody sprang to his fee t He wa 
Salvador Gonzalez, a well-known science specialist and he 
said- "Why are we all afraid? I was ra.sed by parents who 
taught me not to be afraid. Ninoy was killed by Malacanang 
on the orders of Imelda Marcos and General Fabian Ver! If 
they want to take me, they can take me!" 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

The bent knot of people in the house burst into applause. 
But in seconds, everybody fell to talking in whispers all over 
again. Many disagreed with the professor while praising his 
courage. They said it was only the dictator Ferdinand Marcos 
who could have ordered the assassination of Ninoy. 

Once upon a time before Ninoy was arrested at the outset 
of martial rule, his Times Street house was a bustling bazaar 
of politicians and close friends and associates. Here, Senator 
Benigno Aquino, Jr. held forth as only he could hold forth. 
Ninoy talking was a drumfire of excitement and animated 
conversation. He was the Boy Wonder of Philippine politics. 
Words poured out from his mouth like bullets from a gun His 
arms gestured like twin artillery pieces' almost always di- 
rected at Ferdinand Marcos whom he loved to twit and 
sometimes spin like a top with bursts of raillery and elo- 
quence. 

No 25 Times Street was silent. Night gathered at the 
white and green stuccoed house like a thick overhanging fog. 
ine people inside occasionally stared out of the windows 
wondenngif^ 

fte arrival of Nino/s remains. It was a sepulchral wait, at 
fames punctuated by sobs from the women. The men contin- 
ued to whisper, declining even to answer foreign newsmen's 

tote lyandsohideously^ And who were the masterminds? The 
MMarcos-controlled press stayed out ofthe vigil coverage. 
Nobody believed the Galman angle. 

Whateveritwas,thedictatorshipmiscalculated History, 
it seems, at times has a hidden hand. And like that of a great 
orchestra conductor, that hand moved during the night and 
touched the common people. The masses that Ninoy Aquino 
loved so well Before dawn, they started to come silently and 
without fanfare. They formed a street-long queue in the 
beginning, a queue that eventually twisted and serpentined 
through many streets. At first they came by the hundreds, 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

then by the thousands, then the tens of thousands. Who were 
they? They were sweepstakes vendors and vendresses, jani- 
tors, streetrsweepers, nightclub workers andhostesses, clerks, 
small sari-sari store owners, factory workers, seamstresses, 
lowly government and private business employees. 

Eventually,themiddleclass joined. And so did a. handful 

of the rich and upper classes. 

IftheywereafraidofFerdmandandImeldaMarcos,they 

didn'tshowit. Andthereitwas. The fear had hfted as if by 
somemagic. Some brought food. Others pressed money -into 
the hands of Aquino family members. A lavandera brought 
her day's earnings, a sweepstakes vendor a ten-pesc , bill , an 
old bent woman her only silken scarf to wipe Ninons M 
with A morning downpour came but not a single person left 
S queue, each coming into the Aquino residency .drenched 
but contented and fulfilled that they had seen Ninoy and 

It was as though Ninoy had a premoni eveball -to- 

Domingo <^*^'SJ^». There, day in and 
aLgtheroutefromManilatoTarlachundredsef thousands 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

of thousands emerged. Peasants and farmers by the legion. 
(Atone time, the hearse bearing Ninoy's casket was taken over 
by a tumultuous throng, claiming Ninoy's body as their own ) 
Many shouted that now he belonged to the people and not just 
to Ninoy's family. Cory Aquino and Dona Aurora, Ninoy's 
mother, had a dread feeling for a split-second that the adula- 
tion was spinning out of control. 

IntheTarlaccapital, therewasnearpandemoniumasthe 
whole town turned out in heaving, feverish crowds to pay their 
last respects to their favorite son. The nation didn't have a 

A^r \ % I J ° n 5 time - NowNin °y Aquino filled the bill. 
And how he filled the bill! 

unbeHevabt 60 ' ^ phen ° men0n ° f People Power was already 
It reached its climax even more unbelievably during the 

inha Ltf ^ empti ^ ° f itS bdlding and residen «al 
inhalants for an event. The people came like a gully flood 

Th re was nothing the dictatorship could do about it.' 

mU rt haV K ^ h6d " h ° rror as the ™<* from 
banto Domingo Church in Quezon City to Manila Memorial 
Cemetery in Paranaque bulged with humanity WhTSe 

almost immediately "«?/ i™ n u i P only to close 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

march. Surprisingly, the white-maned Lorenzo Tanada, Sr. 
Nino/s chief defense counsel and closest political confidant, 
withstood the long funeral procession without having to go to 
the CR. The Grand Old Man of the opposition was inside the 
van of the Aquino family together with Cory and the children. 
Marchers formed a protective cordon around the van, some 
vowing openly to die for the Aquino family if something 
dreadful would happen. 

Marcos' police and military stood silently by, their faces 
unable to conceal their astonishment at the unprecedented 
turnout There were sporadic insults thrown at them by some 
marchers like "HoylMga tuta ni Marcos! Magsialis na kayo!' 
But they kept their peace. Some even smiled good-naturedly. 
Shouts of Ni-noy! Ni-noy! Ni-noy! 
punctured the air. The nation's new 
national hero lay silent inside a cas- 
ket atop a ten-wheeler, sunflowers 
spread in a yellow sheath all around. 
The shouts came again and again -Ni- 
noy! Ni-noy! Ni-noy! It was a shout 
that came from the heart and the gut, 
a long silent subterranean welling 

that now came like lava flow. 

Headofficesoftheworld'sbiggestnewspapersandmaga- 

zines international news agencies and TV networks shook 

theirheadsindisb^^ 

ears as their correspondents reported a fff^eZl 
to two million mourners. They decided 
announced hundreds 

was in the millions. They weaved and bobbed like huge, 
Stated clusters of grapes from windows and roofs o budd- 
ings, all paying homage to this man who defied the dictator. 
Those who didn't know Ninoy Aquino during the martial law 
years because ofa controlled media knew him now. A dejected 
ImeldaMarcostwodaysafterthefuneralsaidthecrowdswere 




Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

there to have a good time because they missed her interna- 
tional film festivals. "It was onebig fart (utot)" she told foreign 
newsmenin a display of churlishness and execrable bad taste. 

Was it? Outside of the masa, there were toddlers on the 
streets, even babies borne on the arms of their mothers, boys 
perched on branches of trees, nuns in their habits, priests in 
their soutanas, foreign diplomats, businessmen, schoolchil- 
dren m uniform, schoolteachers, professors, professionals, 
college students. And many of them also joined the shouts of 
Ni-noy Ni-noy Ni-noy! belted out like a mantra from a boiler 
dam of noise. All government offices must have been closed at 
he time for everybody wanted to see the cortege of Ninoy and 
line the funeral route. 

Imelda, like her husband, completely missed the point. 
Ninoy was now the national hero, her husband the national 
™X , ED t SA : was *° vali °ate this three years later when 

A™ < Z ° mUltitud6 ' the middle class ^ the Yellow 
Amy of Ninoy and Cory, chased the Marcoses out of 
Malacanang all the way to Honolulu. 

nf I,™ 6 6 3 page out of Tolsto y, an epic sweep 

mITm ?n d farewe11 The mouraers entered the 

heXh?^ ld t the r^ Careandvehicleshon ked, their 

ity Suddenly, lighted candles materialized in the cemeterv 
hnost from nowhere. That candle-lit throng, wLse ™ 

ceremony that laid that great warrior of France Charle- 

white-washed tomb that bore his name and not much else. 



Chapter Two 




Ninoy: The Wonder Boy 

ho was this man Ninoy? What did he do? How did 
he live to merit a funeral of such great, unprece- 
dented scope? Why did his name travel from mouth 
to mouth like with such fervor? Why was he 

now a national hero? flfe-v*""" 
BenignoAquinowas50whenhedied. He 

was born November 27, 1932. He was a cub 
reporter for the Manila Times at 17. He 
covered the Korean War at 18. He married 
Cory Cojuangco Aquino at 21. He became the 
youngest mayor of Concepcion, Tarlac at 22, 
then the youngest governor of Tarlac at 28. 
He was elected the youngest senator of the 
realm ever in 1967, 13 days short of the 
constitutional age required. In 1973, he was 
tried by a military tribunal on charges of £3 
communist subversion, illegal possession of 
firearms and murder. In 1975, he went on a 
40-day hunger strike. In 1977, he was sen- 
tenced to death by military firing squad for 

he CoryAquinoandtheirlivecniiareuiivcu 

where Ninoy was a fellowship grantee at Harvard and 

SS^tate of Technology. He returned to the Phil. 

them out to understand Ninoy Aquino. He was as simple as 




Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 



he was complex, a man who lived life to the full and sought 
adventure the way a moth seeks the flame. He could emit 
words in bursts and also release them sometimes like church 
bells. But most of all, Ninoy Aquino sought the heights. There 
the eagle flew and high conviction resided on the mountain- 
top. There resided heroic courage, as did the loftiest principles 
of democracy and Christianity. Ninoy died as he lived - 
dramatically. 

Where do we begin? 

We begin when he was a small kid during the four-year 
Japanese occupation. Ninoy even then was irrepressible, with 
no hang-up at all as he talked with his father's prominent 



Domei was the Japanese news agency one heard on radio 
frequently duringthe Japanese Occupation. Whensomebody 
kidded the kid then that his eyes were chinky and looked like 
the Chinese eyes of Cebu's political kingpin Sergio Osmena 
Sr., Ninoy immediately piped in: "Yes, the eyes are those of 
Osmena. But the brains are those of Manuel Quezon " 

WebeginagainattheendoftheSecondWorldWar Ninoy 
was thirteen, a gangling kid who hardly understood what the 
global holocaust was all about. What he knew wounded him 
badly, hurt him to the core. His father Benigno Aquino Sr. was 
a top official in President Laurel Sr.'s cabinet during the 
Japanese Occupation. He had adored his father. Heshined 





colleagues and visitors and 
did thesamewithfamily driv- 
ers and domestic help. The 
family called him TVT or 
Domei because somehow he 
always got the news first and 
regaled everybody as they 
came home with what he had 
picked up. TVT was for 
Taliba, La Vanguardia and 
Tribune, ahighlyprestigious 
newspaper chain then. 



Nirury Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

Don Benigno's shoes, was always athis beck-and-call, carried 
his portfolio. When Don Benigno, at one time Speaker and 
another time Agriculture secretary, was accused of collabora- 
tion with the Japanese after Liberation, Ninoy's little world 
began to shake. • 

Inside and outside school, he was taunted as the son ot a 
traitor. How could they do this to his father? Howcouldthey 
do this to him? Of himself and the children of wartime 
President Jose P. Laurel Sr. which included Salvador (Doy) 
Laurel, he said:.«We clung to each other...because here we 
were, once upon a time little princes and now nobody wanted 
to talk to us." Hie charges then of couaboration hardy 
mattered where Papa was concerned. He stuck by his father 
through thick and thin. A • c winnv 

During the funeral rites for Benigno Aquino Sr., Ninoy 

wascrestfal^^ 
1947wWlewatehingtheworldbantom^ 
beLm Manuel Ortiz and Filipino challenger T*sc de 
RosarioattheRizal Ground, ^^^Jj 
said- Thev were all praising him and now that he was dead 
^SteraUheworld. ^f^^ 

could still go on talking and ^XX^^ 

still loaded with parties when my father lay deaa. 

first time to learn bitterness. I was 15. . ,j alks 

Forabriefperiod,hebecame^ 
andwenttothemoviesallbyhimselfHefan^^ 

come*e S ,andNidaBlan™ 

But somewhere in Ninoy's ^.^^adas 
gyroscopebegantoturn. , Hes * oret ^^^^^^^ 
hVgrewup,hewouldseekto^ 

tntreTnd excellence, the Ninoy who loved going to ^ 
cUffbecausethatwaswhere dangerwas, where thechallenge 
was where theair was thinnest and the wind blew the coldest 
and'hardest. Ninoy "grew too old to soon" his elder brother 



12 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

Tony Aquino later commented. 

Classes in Ateneo, La Salle, UP didn't catch the fancy of 
theyoungAquino. Somehow they bored him. Presumably it 
was also because he felt he was in hostile territory. Students 
continuedtoheckle him abouthis father being a collaborator 
A pnest-professor had the habit of heckling him, giving him 
bad marks, tearing up his essays. Eventually, Ninoy Aquino 
made a decision that was to leave a lasting mark on him. 
Without any raining for the job, without any previous expe- 
rience, m 1949 he applied for a cub reporter's slot in the 
Manila Times His name of course was his entree. But the 

At the age of 18, he had the temerity to ask for an 

US LIT th T? *~ for th ~ %2 

all theManihTimes reporters weremarriedandthevweren't 

Did his courage faU him i. the face of del? M * 7 °? 1 
he had to go back to Korea" 7 £ U^SftfE 
oonscjence no matter what torn the war hTtdUwas a 

homdwax.menNmoycouldarreadylookdeathaWghtto 
the eye, he knew he had conquered himself. Laterhewasto 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

say: "The experience aged me nearly 10 years. I wasn't 18 
when I wentback to Korea. I was 28. 1 had a different outlook. 
The plaything was over." Only then did he agree to come back 
home. As a war correspondent in Korea, he was awarded the 
UN Medal of Honor before he left. 

Life for the young man swifted on the wings of Pegasus. 

After he married Corazon Cojuangco at the age of 21, he 
made another fateful decision. He entered politics. Ine 
journey from mayor to governor to senator was an unprec- 
edented political whirlwind in itself. He moved always like a 
jaguaronthelope. "Let's go!" was his favorite expression. It 

was during this period that the King 
Lion of Philippine politics, President 
FerdinandMarcos, spotted the young 
man. Did he see a likeness? Did he 
see an adversary? Worse, an enemy? 
Did he see a young Marcos, a lion cub 
in the youthful Aquino? And there- 
fore a person to be feared? Or coz- 
ened, courtedandeventuallycoopted? 
Whatever it was, this was where the 
battle began. In due time, it became 
the battle of the two titans of Philip- 

^wou^^ 

pahticsinTarlac. ^^^"^^^^ and 
Z communist-laden Central ^^eTl^ng 
Hukinsurgents played ^J^^tadtofl-d 
fatricidalwar. to«>Umeatan,P«»^ tion 
Ninoy as a communist subers.ve a pms ^ent 
that normally should make normal men so 
Ninoy loved it. He reveled in it ^ 
,,n, on kp r an for senator at the age oi «>«*, 

rcfmrnunism against him. While denying the charges, he 
p anted banderillas on Marcos' back like an agile, swivel- 



"I would rather die on 
my feet in honor than 
live on bended knees 

in shame." 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

hipped matador. At the outset of the senatorial campaign 
where Nmoy ran in the Liberal Party ticket, only 6 per cent 
could recognize his name nationwide. But he proved to be a 
wizard as a campaigner. He travelled by helicopter to the 
remotest villages, distributing goodies, T-shirts, pins, food 
and, yes, the Ninoy charm. When the campaign ended and the 
electoral results were in, only Ninoy Aquino survived the 
Liberal Party senatorial debacle. He landed an amazing 
second to Jose Roy of the Nacionalista Party. 

He was IN and Ninoy knew it. IN meant he could now 
aspireforthe presidency. IN meant he could now growl in the 
political jungle like a great lion and square off with King Lion 

in Malacanang. IN meant 
the whole town was now talk- 
ing about him. "Pogina,goli 
pa," almost everybody said. 
He was good-looking and had 
a very clean reputation be- 
sides. His"white-sidewalled" 
haircut made him look like a 
choirboy. His grin was infec- 
tious, his machine-gun ora- 
tory impressive. Ninoy had 
i-j i a11 the credentials. He had 

the potacal pedigree. He had harvested a lot of honored 
awards as a pubhc servant and politician along the Z For 
foorconsecnttveyears, 1968-1971, he was voted onSdin* 

Man ot the Year by the Philippines Free Press 
wit ?u 6 p h " d ^ 

'S^teST^ ! h r h / m ' the charisma - » e rea ^ 

nfLZ ? ^ the f eatestofeaseH ealsohadthegoodluck 

issz r q ; ino -, High,y educated 

po hshed and also pedigreed, Cory realized early on'that the 

onlywayshecouldgetalongwiththishumanwLlwindwas 
to be a good wife and a loving mother to their five kids. Yes, 




Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

she would stand in the shadows and serve as Ninoy took the 
whole world as his political oyster. They bore five children: 
Maria Elena, Aurora Corazon, Benigno Aquino III, Victoria 
Elisa, Kristina Bernadette. 

And so it was just a matter of time before Senator Benigno 
Aquino Jr. positioned himself to be the next president of the 
Philippines. And like a good bullfighter, his capework and 
sword thrusts were beginning to gash and highly irritate the 
President. At one time, recalls Ninoy, he was summoned to 
Malacanang by Marcos. After the usual amenities, the 
President came straight to the point and said: "Look ^Nmoy, 
youwillbepresidentafterme. So what's your hurry? Why do 
you keep attacking me? You know, I may not be able to stop 
my people. And one day, your body will just be discoyered m 
a ditch " TowhichNinoydeftlyreplied:"Mr.President,iftha 
happens and they find my body in a ditch, I certainly will not 
be able to stop my people from getting even with Imelda and 

fast on the uptake, and faster with a quip. 

He had the best stage for squaring off with ^Marcos » the 
Sena to There he was the most eloquent 
biting slashing and almost always drawing blood. He de- 

Man Tanada was his Senate mentor, n 

W trial When the Laban ticket was set up in 1978 for he 
p r amentary elections in Metro Manila, Tanada was the 
campaign manager. Ninoy's most effective ^campaigner was 
Kris Aquino, then only seven years old. Ninoy took all the 
trouble to write a letter to his youngest child about Tanada. 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

He wrote: "He (Tanada) gave me hope when I teetered on the 
brink of despair and courage, when I almost succumbed to the 
deadly embrace of fear. He has been the welcome lightning in 
my long hot summer." 

Needles to say, despite a city-wide pro-Ninoy, pro-Laban 
noise barrage that for the first time underscored the bitter 
resentment of Manilans against the dictatorship, Laban lost 
totheKBL. Ithadtobe. Ninoy could notbeallowed to getout 
of prison and join the interim Batasang Pambansa. That 
wouldbe anactofsuicide for the dictatorship. Andsince Ninoy 
could not win, no other Laban candidate could either. The 
noise barrage April 6, 1978, scared Marcos out of his wits. 

Manilans by the tens of thou- 

sands came out into the streets. They 

mm —^— banged pots and pans. They banged 

anythingtomakenoise. Carscaromed 

"Apactwiththedevil tr^CchSS 
is no pad at all " E™!*t metropolisran /- 

r beat policemen rejoiced and emptied 

their guns into the air. Motorcycle 



cops revved their engines and smiled 
at the demonstrators. The citizens 
flashed the Laban sign of extended 
forefinger and thumb. For the first time, Marcos realized how 
much the people, particularly the middle class, hated his guts. 

So Laban had to be cheated wholesale and Imelda topped 
the elections for Metro Manila. It was a KBL sweep. The 
dictator gloated and said the noise barrage was a concoction 
of the communists. Outraged, Laban led by Tanada, staged 
a "funeral march" for the "death of democracy". About 600 
joinedincludingmanyoftheLafcancandidates. The marchers 
were stopped by the military on Espana St. long before they 
could reach the Manila Cathedral. They were all arrested and 
brought to Fort Bonifacio on charges of sedition and subvert 
sion. 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 



Herblock, the mordant cartoonist of Washington Post, 
drew one of his prize-winning masterpieces on this event. The 
cartoon showed a defiant Tanada extending the Laban sign at 
his captors and being bundled into a military van, while 
Marcos in Malacanang harrumphed: "I already gave them the 
right to vote. Why, the ingrates! They were also demanding 
that their votes be counted!" 

The more Marcos called him a communist, the more 
Aquino relishedit. For him the false communistcharges were 
the bow on which he would fasten his sharpest and surest 
arrows andsendthemramingonMalacanang.Nuioyalready 
adscore-He^xposedtheJabidahscandalhatchedsecretlyby 
Malacanang. Jabidah was the code-name for top-secret 
Philippine government military operations to get into Saban, 

N ° t oSvent that catapulted Ninoy into the Umelight 

wastheAugust21,1971Plaza" 

entire Liberal Party senatorial ^/Jf-^SJ 

have it, was attending a Laurel party at plaza 

Jai-Alai. a^t^WBt^^^^™ 

Miranda rally's last speaker, J fc ^jS; 
woddbringthehousedownwithbsoratoryandwit. jn 

was secretary-general of the Uberal Fta* tion 
Almost everybody suspected the Marcos a 

of being behind the ^^rSS^m^ 
laterafterEDSA,riffcin« 
outthemformation^ fc heighten 

the CPP, conceived ^^^^^^mssnr 
revolutionarytens^ about plaza 

° n d M rnot" Aquino 
Sere P Hewentn,undtownincombatunifonn,.tauntin ) g 
Marcos, driving his critical knife deeper into the Presidents 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

sides. The result of the senatorial elections saw a Liberal 
Party sweep. Ninoy was jubilant. Marcos countered by 
hinting Ninoy and the communists had something to do with 
the Plaza Miranda bombing. This, of course, didn't jell. 

There was no doubt in the mind of anybody that if 
presidential elections were held in 1973, Ninoy would win 
them over Imelda Marcos, whom the president was grooming 
at the time to succeed him. A national survey was taken. It 
showed that Ninoy would beat Imelda handily if the two' 
should ever square off in a presidential election. 



Chapter Three 



Martial Law: Life in Prison 



What to do? In retrospect, the realization dawned that 
Ferdinand Marcos would not allow anybody outside 
his official family to succeed him in Malacanang. 
Since Imelda could not win in 1973, Ninoy had to be stopped 
at all costs There was only one way to do it Marcos would 

She arrows and Ninoy was his bow. Ninoy would be the 

charged as a top communist leader and a muitary tnbunal 

over Marcos said he had to save the repnbht He also 
Soned the •c.enco.fascisto' as a t hrea , — * 

princes of the Roman Catholic church and U^T^ 
LinessButitv^sthe-commnnfets-Ma^sa^fare 

most. This was prepostorens on *™J*£2 J& 
there wereonlyabout400NewPeo^W^n' 

entire country. At the tune 2 lid leave 

Central luzon and run for cover "> 

of the deep north. Then empti- 

S to U Toreln anybody else, more than Nino, 
S toe Mareos knew how fragile democracy in he 
?Lhppines was. He knew the weakness, the surface docility 
of the Filipino, how easy it was to corrupt their leaders, how 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hen 

malleable the military establishment whose leaders he bent 
and bought at will. He knew a golpe could do it. A coup 
unfolding in the first three hours after midnight. 

He would arrest Senators Benigno Aquino Jr., Ramon 
Mitra, Jose Diokno and a host of others, among them promi- 
nent journalists. The nation would be stunned, silenced, 
petrified, shocked beyond belief. But he had the power that 
fiowedfrx)mthebarrelofagun.Andforhimthatwassufficient 

forthemoment.Whatwouldcomenextwasprt)paganda.This 
wasthestuff^ 

after Kmtdnacht when theJews were laidsiege on. Eventu- 

ZT? tT: aidenek - J ventua11 * thousa *k * KB- 

fec^ ' ^^benerdedtoMarcosjailsaUover 

Mar^K-TT ^ ° f martial "*> * ^ 
£Sh«M r^T 1 ^^tuatethemselvesinpower: 

^k tL g ,h 66 ^ ^ bein ^ Bongbong 

sional seat and headed the Kabataang Bamngay Ninoy 

military musketry, and that was that 7 
This was Ah Baba with a difference. Even as he and his 

S ' , P/w/ W> wes «»// be gnat again » That was 
foe Marcos slogan. Later on, after he was released from Z 
Bonifecio much ahead of Ninoy, Sena J^S w ^ 

of jail by 49 million cowards and one sonavabitch." He was 
nght. But again not right all the way 

Pol ^ d ^^ the ^ maticduel betweentheManinthe 
Palace and the Man m Prison. 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 



The dictator gambled right and ingeniously up to a 
certain point. Indeed, the entire country clammed up. Indeed, 
eventheleft-wingyouthdarednotventureoutintothestreets. 

Indeed, the military ate from his hands, particularly General 
Fabian Ver andhisjackbootedco/w/ofierre. Indeed, thefriends 
and political associates of Ninoy Aquino deserted him as they 
beat a path to the goodies of Malacanang and the glory of 
basking in the shadow of the Marcoses. Indeed, the .United 
States of America continued to support him and the dictator- 
ship. Indeed, the military tribunal led by the dour- aced 
imperious General Jose Syjuco sentenced him to death by 



military musketry. 

Ninoy simply enjoyed 
relating the following inci- 
dent. He sought and got an 

audience with Marcos in 
Malacanang after his first 
year in Fort Bonifacio. This 
time, they addressed each 
other as brod, both being 
members of the same UP 
fraternity Upsilon Sigma 
Phi. Marcos started off by 




saying:"Brod,whydon'tyou Verted you 

and even some of your closest ad ^ a ra n T How about it?" 
antshaves™mauegian«tw^ 

It shocked particularly the United States American media 
ledbytheprestigiousfcyor*Times,condemnedtheverdict 

andcudgeledthedictatorforit-AhostofAmericanpolitiaans, 



Nitioy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

led by Senator Alan Cranston, angrily demanded that the 
death sentence be set aside, in the face of this international 
furor, the dictator had to retreat. He couldn't afford at this 
time to antagonize the US Congress. He badly needed Ameri- 
can economic and military aid to sustain his dictatorship. He 
backed off. Ninoy knew the death sentence was coming. But he 
told Cory and the children not to worry. He somehow knew 
Marcos was not yet ready to make a martyr out of him. 

Previous to the death sentence, Ninoy underwent two 
experiences, two events that seared into him like twin spir- 
itual branding irons. The first was his 30-day imprisonment 
in FortMagsaysay, Laur, Nueva Ecija from March 12 to April 
wmmmmm _ mmm ^ mmmmmmmm 11, 1973. The second was the 40-day 

,„ „ . hun & er st "ke he waged in Fort 

/ Cannot in all Conscience Bonifacio April 4 to May 13, 1975 to 

ro^in c%nl u,U* z P^'his kangaroo trial at the hands 
remain Silent While a ofthe military tribunal. The first saw 

n/fhlw c dictator mice in Nmoy question the J ustice and fair " 

rutmess dictator rules m ness of God as day after day> death 
my country which has ^"tf* I continuing click of a 

y y slow-motion Russian roulette. The 

become a garrison state. " s ™?? saw Nin °y s1 ™p into a Gan- 

Potest hunger strike which 

, tested his last physical and spiritual 

reserves and resources. In both, he triumphed 

I^ngbeforehelaunchedhishungerstrike,Ninoy Aquino 
told the military tribunal on August 27, 1973: "Some Deoole 

suggestthatlbegformercy.ButthisIcannotinconsciencedo 
I would rather die on my feet in honor than live on bended 
knees m shame. Again on August 3, 1976, Ninoy told the 
same military tnbunal: 'To acquit me, you have to declare 

Marcosguilty.Thi S youcannotdo...Thereissomuch anguish 
and despair so much faint courage demanding to be rein- 
forced by bold imaginative, resolute and committed leader- 
ship. He would furnish that leadership against all odds. 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 



In the matchbox prison that was Laur (where Pepe 
Diokno was also imprisoned at the same time), Ninoy asked 
God: "What terrible crimes have I committed to deserve this 
fate? The magnanakaws are living it up and I who tried to 
walk the narrow path of public service with integrity am now 
about to meet an uncertain fate? Is this justice?" Stripped 
naked, stripped of his wedding ring, watch, eyeglasses, shoes 
and the clothes he was wearing when brought over from Fort 
Bonifacio, Ninoy pondered his fate. Then all his will, all his 
strengthturnedinwardlikeoutgoingfloodwaterssuckedback 

to their origin. . T 

Even then, it took tremendous willpower to survive Laur 
In a subsequent letter to President Marcos, Ninoy recounted 
that to keep himself from going insane he set his ; mind to 

First they came in bits and pieces as ^T^^ 
could sometimes blur. Then they came in npp ^ ™ 

they came in waves as the recollection touch lti*mgj 
events of his life. All the time, Ninoy was 
aroundhissteelcot,roundand^^ 

fell, exhausted. Laur made Ninoy reahz* > how mortal he , 
how finite, how puny in the universe^ ^l«£> 

art^t! Xo-s resolve and ^gnation. As 
i£ ,™i it: "Ninoy realized that without God, he wonld not 
be able to continue being in detention. 

Finally, in his letter to Fort Bonifacio co-pnsoner Fran- 
cisco (Soc) Rodrigo, he wrote: "In the depths of my solitude and 
desolation,duringthoselonghoursofmeditations,Ifoundmy 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

inner peace. He stood me face to face with myself and forced 
me to look at my emptiness and nothingness, and then helped 
discover Him who has really never left my side. But because 
pride shielded my eyes and the lust for earthly and temporal 
power, honor and joys drugged my mind, I failed to notice 
Him." Back in Fort Bonifacio, Ninoy was reciting more than 
100 rosaries daily. 

The40-dayhungerstrikewouldhavelookedlikemadness 
coming from anybody else. Hunger strikes, like those of 
Mahatma Gandhi, have to resonate nationwide and world- 
wide to achieve their goal. The Mahatma succeeded in un- 
leashing world public opinion against British colonization of 
India. Gandhi became an international figure. Ninoy fasted 
when he had no access to local media, when the war in 
Vietnam fully occupied the international press. 

But he hunger-struck just the same. Nino/s trial was a 
disgraceful farce. Surrendered NPA commanders such as 
Melody and Pusa testified that Ninoy was not only a commu- 
nist but had led NPA raids. At one time, Commander Pusa 
testified he accompanied Senator Benigno Aquino Jr. in his 
Mercedes car. They reportedly made the rounds of luxury 
subdivisions such as Forbes Park and Ninoy identified the 
prominent people living there so they could later on be 
assassinated by the NPA. It was absolute rot, incredible 
jf j I covered that trial for the Agence FrcincB-PressB and 
1 heard the testimonies of Pusa and Melody. I felt like 
vomiting. 

Ninoyshrankandlostabout43poundsduringhishunger 
stnke. Towards the end of his fast, he had to be helped out of 
bed by Cory. Then both of them walked shakily like desert 
stragg ers for the bathroom. Ninoy would alternately rest on 
three folabng chairs along the way to nurse his fast fading 
strength. Then Cory would wash him, first his head, then his 
body which emitted a foul odor because of stomach acids 
generatedbythefast.Onthewaybacktobed,itwasthesame. 



1 

Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

They way-stopped on the same folding chairs as Ninoy scraped 
his fading lungs for the last fragments of his physical strength. 
His rationale was patriotism to the very core. Even when it 
seemed the whole world had caved in against him, particu- 
larly his fellow countrymen, to Ninoy "the Filipino was worth 
dying for." 

Ninoy had fallen unconscious on May 13. Prior to that, he 
was administered the last rites in his Fort Bonifacio cell by 
Jaime Cardinal Sin. Ninoy was then close to approaching the 
verge of passing away, or at the very least of lapsing into a 
vegetable state for the rest of his life. The military rushed him 
to the Veterans Memorial Hospital. There they force-fed him. 
And so he lived. 

On December 20, 1979, _ 
President Marcos allowed 
Ninoy out on- prison on a 

temporary furlough so he "There can be no deal with 

could celebrate the Christ- _ , „ 

mas and New Year holidays a dictator. 

with Cory in their Times 

Street residence, Quezon ^ ^ mmmmmmm m — — — — ■ - 

City. It was at this time that 
I and other foreign corre- 

spondents had long conversations with Ninoy. It was then 
that he developed the "historic rendezvous" theory. He fig- 
ured that Marcos was in a bind, and knew he was in a bind 
because the nation was going from bad to worse, economically 
and socially. Besides, Ninoy disclosed that the president was 
seriously ill with lupus erythematosus, a deadly skin disease. 
Marcos therefore would desire to "dismount the tiger and link 
hands with me in a historic rendezvous/ he said. Together, 
they would scuttle martial rule and restore democracy . 

This was probably Ninoy Aquino's Achilles heel. He felt 
that there was a real Christian in every man, that m the 
dictator the Child of Nazareth was simply waiting to be 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

touched, encouraged or succored. He seemed convinced thatin 
the end Marcos was willing to reform and step down. His 
"historic rendezvous" proposal, which certainly was moni- 
tored by Marcos because the Times residence was bugged, fell 
on deaf ears. Marcos was not going to meet him, neither in 
Malacanangnorin Fort Bonifacio. Itwas General Fabian Ver 
who went to Fort Bonifacio. He told Ninoy that Marcos was 
strong andhealthyasabull.All this talk aboutthe President 
suffering gravely from lupus erythematosus was baloney, the 
general said. 3 

Ninoy was deeply disappointed. It was then that he 
thought of going into exile in the United States. 

But even this Marcos shot down. He could not allow his 
prize prisoner to slip away. In a handwritten letter to Lorenzo 
lanadaSr. who workedhard to secure the president's permis- 
sion to allow Ninoy Aquino to leave, Marcos was polite but 
curt. Ine president said this was just not possible "under the 
present circumstances.'' Maybe later when there was no 

pressurebeingexertedonhim in behalf ofNinoy This was the 
Qictator^s way of saying no categorically. Ninoy was his prize 
cateh. The dictator would see to it that amenities would be 
extended to Ninoy from time to time to show the world he was 

human^ButhisrealobjectivewasfortheworldtoforgetNinoy 
andforNinoytorotslowlyin prison since he could not kill him 
at tne time. 



Chapter Four 



Heart Attack: Exile to America 



Soaflerthe Christmas and New Year holidays, Ninoy 
returned to his prison cell. After the flush of that 
Christmas season furlough and all the publicity it 
generated in the foreign press, Ninoy disappeared anew into 
the nation's forgetfulness. But fate was. tointervene again. On 
March 19, 1980, during his early — — — 
morningexercise, Ninoy felthis chest "Very few people in the worid 

constrict as he *j^^J» am given the opportunity to die 
pain was piercing. When the doctors * rr 7 

finally diagnosed what happened, for their country. Don't you 

they pronounced that the prisoner f tM % don't feel sorry foi 
had suffered a heart attack. More 5 ' 

thoroughexamsanddiagnosisatthe me. Because this is the greatest 

Philippine Heart Center where he opportunity ever given to 
was rushed showed -after another 
attack-thatthepatientwasinvery meoyi/oa. 

serious condition. An operation ~tri- — — 

pie heart bypass - was called for as soon as possible. 

Theprisonerbalked-Hewasafraidtheheartsurgeonsof 
theHeartCenterwoulddohiminontheordersofthedictator. 

Herequestedthatthesurgerybe^ 

ownlioosing and this would be at the Baylor Hospital in 

suS ThTs time it was the dictator who hesitated. For 

couldn'tgranthimhisrequestto be operated abroad, then he 

preferred to go back to his prison cell in Fort Bonifacio. There 

he would die. And he wanted it that way. 

ThistimeitwasPresidentMarcoswhohesitated.lfNinoy 

woulddie in prison, all the world would blame him. Hewould 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 



be denounced as heartless, gutless and ruthless, a dictator 
who sought only pomp and power, who could not be gracious 
and merciful to a dying prisoner. Imelda too realized that 
predicament. As Ninoy removed his necklace and offered it to 
Imelda to forward to the president, the regal First Lady, 
dressed in a shimmering floor-length pink terno, offered to 
guarantee Nino/s behavior abroad. Marcos reluctantly agreed. 
He had no choice. 

And thus the curtains lifted on the Third Act of the 
political duel between Marcos and Aquino. 

The triple heart bypass on May 13, 1980 in Baylor 
Hospital was successful. In no time, Ninoy Aquino was on his 



Cory and the children he would turn his back on politics and 
they would live a new life in America. Why not? Everything 
now was a bonus, Ninoy repeatedly said. In Harvard he 
became an almost instantcelebrity notbecause he was Benigno 
Aquino but because he too was an intellectual giant among 
America's famed intellectual giants. 

Ninoy would say later on that Harvard was a "paradise* 
for learning and he was very lucky to be in this paradise. He 
was particularly intoxicated by the fact that well-known 
authorshereadbackhomeinhisFortBonifaciocellwerewith 
the Harvard faculty. Now he not only knew them but had the 
opportunity to discuss with them, even at times cross intellec- 




le gs, jogging in Dallas, 
breathing the air of freedom, 
realizing all over again how 
wonderful the world could be 
after seven, years and seven 
months in solitary. An offer 
for a fellowship in interna- 
tional studies in Harvard 
University in Boston came. 
Ninoy Aquino snapped it up. 
The first year in Boston was 
idyllic. Ninoy had promised 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

tual swords with them. Stanley Hoffman, Lucien Pye, 
Benjamin Houston Brown, David Steinberg, were just four of 
many. Harvard teemed with intellectual heavyweights. 
Harvard professors were amazed with Ninoy's intellec- 

tual range. „ „ 

Ben Brown, the redoubtable head of Harvard s Fellow- 
ship Studies who I interviewed in 1984 after Ninoy's death, 
told me there was nothing they could discuss without Ninoy 
coming in and enriching the discussion. "Even when we 
discussed American history and politics," Mr. Brown said, 
"Ninoy had something to add and we were all amazed. Ninoy 
after all had a deep incisive intelligence of his own and in 
prison he must have read thousands of books, magazines and 
otherpublications.Onalmosteverything.NinoyquotedMarcos 

as telling him through an emissary: "I envy you because you 
have all the time in the world. At your fingertips you have the 
greatest symbols available to you, the greatest books, which 
Lnotavailabletomebecauseallmyworkinghoursarespent 

with people. Here you are with the greatest luxury of the 
greatest minds in the world." 

This was what Ben Brown had to say of Ninoy Aug. 26 
1983 after his death at the Aquino Memorial Service at he 
Hoy FamilychurchinNewYork City: "The* 'wasNin yth 
Thinker, deLhed in analysis, hungry or to* 
ideas - the Ninoy who read everything, forgot nothing, and 

alwavs had what was germane to the discussion right at his 
always naawnaiwdg most mformed 

fingertips. If I am not mistaKen.ue wa » 

public figure I have ever known. But reserved. Skeptical. 

MIT Center for International Studies Director Eugene 

tive and superbly analytical. I have no doubt ..that if he 
succeeded in reaching the presidency (of the Philippines), he 
would have made a supreme leader." Another Harvard 
eminentoStanley Hoffman talked highly ofNinoy. I believe it 
was Hoffman who together with another Harvard professor 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

enthusiastically supported the proposal to invite Ninoy as a 
Harvard Fellow. 

I went back to Boston, as mentioned earlier, a year after 
Ninoy's death. With Cory Aquino's approval, I started to 
undertake a biography of Ninoy, a book I worked hard on but 
never finished. Just when I had dug deeper into research on 
his life, Cory had become President of the Philippines In no 
time at all, she offered me the post of spokesman and press 
secretary, and I had to drop everything. I interviewed person- 
alities from the West Coast to the East 
CoastwhoknewNinoywell,butHarvard 
would provide the main ingredients of 
Ninoy's three-year exile in America. 

Among those I interviewed in 
Harvard was the attractive academic 
secretary of that famed university. Her 
name I now forget because I lost all my 
notes and tapes of that Harvard so- 
journ. With nothing short of rapture, 
shetoldme:"WhatapityNinoywasnot 
an American! He would have made an 

excellentpolitician.Hewouldhavegone 
all the way to the top and I would have 
voted for him as president." 

lt was Ben Brown however who 

Hke ^ rf^ gl Tf? 40 think Iike men °f action and act 

In H^T I T"* in the fullest measure." 

ohilolhvT W ! 6dener KbrM * Ninov g<»ged on the 

sute 7llzl^Tu He read tomeS and tomes 0" this 
Z>r K ™ r Wlth 0 Mahatma ^ndhi, followed by Martin 

Nil ^Jy 8 ** Dietrich Bonhoe ffer, Reinhold 
N ;t t'' Th ° rea , U ' Tolstov - But in due time the closed world 
of Philippine politics began to open again. Fellow Filipino 




Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

exiles living in America sought him out and urged Ninoy to 
lead them. Soon he was on the speech circuit. Then the old fire 
started to come back, the sharp cutting edge, the legendary 
one-liners, the wit, the jab, the crushing right cross. He had 
made a pact in Manila to behave, not to embarrass the Marcos 
dictatorship while he was in the US. Ninoy, at the urging of 
the Filipino opposition in the US who clamored for him to 
speak out, turned back on his promise. 

"A pact with the devil is no pact at all,** he said. He spoke 
to cheering audiences. He was told by the American diplomat 
who manned the Philippine desk in the State Department to 
lower his political profile since after all he was a guest of the 
US. "After all," he told Ninoy, "you are next in line for the 
presidency. Whycan'tyoubepatienflknow all aboutthisfor 

I interviewed this diplomatic officer in August 1983 m Wash- 
ington after my many talks with Ninoy late July and early 
August. I sharply disagreed with him thatNinoy had to keep 
quiet in America. Well, Ninoy's reply was predictable. I 
cannotin all conscience remain silent while a ruthless dictetor 
rules in my country which has become a garrison state." 

Even as he eschewed violence, Ninoy could nothelp being 
obsessed by Ferdinand Marcos. The dictator was on his mind 
every day. The lupus thing had grown into a something like 
a nagging Frankenstein in Ninoy's consciousness. Lupus 
erythematosus is a crippling skin disease that gradually hits 
the vital organs of the human body. Ninoy thought Marcos 
was on the verge of death. Ninoy was convinced he had only 
oneyearin which tomove.toconvincethemctatortodismount 
the tiger of martial rule. And so he made another fateful 

decision. _ , . ,. 

He would return to the Philippines. The horizon in his 
country was darkening, the NPA guerillas were getting 
stronger, the economy was sinking. Up the road he felt there 
would be an explosion and he had to return to head it off. 



Chapter Five 

Murder and Martyrdom 

! I wasinBostonatthetimehefirmeduphisdecisionto 
i I return I had a formal interview with him as Manila 
JL bureau chief of the Agence Franci-Presse. This was 
hislastpressinterviewinBostonbeforehesetoutforManila. 

Outsideoftheinterview,wehadlonganimatedconversa- 
tions-Itwasduringonesuchconversationthatthetelepho^ 
rang, and Ninoy simply listened most of the tune. He would 
just ^ayoh, is that so, really and all that. This wasun^al 
Ninoy just listening. Without identifying his caller Ninoy 

told me this man warned him not to go back it was m£ 
Ninoyhadafarawaylook,asofanexplorerouttoembarkon 

a fateful and dangerous journey. 

ThedictetorsWpwamedaUmtemation^ 

taking Benigno Aquino *• - -JS^SSi 

they did so. Ninoy therefore had towson J rt 
MarrialBonifacio. ^^^^JL 
from a friend and contoct in z WW ^ m 

death warnings and Marcos f^i, audacious. Nobody 
effect. Ninoy was determined, purposeiui, 

could deter him. ^ 0 f that 

He almost ^^/TJ^^M^^ 
telephonecallHelooke^^^ 

siU, then turnedtome Teddy, 1 winr d and 

threughthebackdoor^^^^^ 

Iwillfightfremthere^ Itoldhim 

SS^L ThenthedictatorcouldannouncethatNinoy 
rsreauTanouUaw,andnowhad P rovenhewasadangerous 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

outlaw. Now the dictator could hunt him down and kill him. 

But as easily as he had thought of going back through the 
Philippines' backdoor in the South, he changed his mind. He 
was probably also testing how I would react if he decided to go 
back through the southern backdoor. He shifted fast. He 
would go back as he had planned, through the front door, and 
riot all the dictator's soldiers and all the dictator's men could 
frighten him. Ninoy, I also realized, was terribly homesick. 
And the imminence of returning home drew a nostalgic mist 
in his eyes. He would tell close relatives who visited him in 
Boston that they were very lucky, they were living in the 
Philippines. 

Ninoy told Howard Fine, 
well-known human rights ad- 



z/A i r ,/ . . / vocate, in Boston: "Very few 

Now, for this single people in the world are ^ ven 

Opportunity, lam theopportunitytodiefortheir 
rr 7 country. Don't you forget 

putting my life on the that So don,t feel son ? for 

me. Because this is the great- 
line, " est opportunity ever given to 

me by God." Much earlier, he 
^■^^^"■^^■^^^■■■■i told a favorite brother-in-law 
, _ Ricardo (Baby) Lopa, mar- 

nedtoCoryseldersisterTerryr'Touknowiflshouldbe killed 
on my return to the Philippines, that would be something. 
Only twice m contemporary history has this golden opportu- 
nity befallen two Asians. Jose Rizal and Mahatma Gandhi, 
if fate wills it, I shall be the third." 

Cory, his mother and all the members of his family had all 
tried to deter him earlier. Now the suspicion he would be killed 
brought him back to the pitholes of Laur. Back to the 
appantion of the Virgin Mary which he thought he saw in a 
moment of utter desolation. Ninoy's jaw clenched. 

What mattered was courage. Ninoy would show Filipinos 
he was not afraid of the dictator. What mattered was the 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

historic opportunity, yes the "historic rendezvous" he had 
never really set aside. What mattered was that he might be 
able to convince Marcos to give him "one hour, just one hour" 
and in that hour both of them could reach an understanding 
to restore democracy. Ninoy was smitten with that rendez- 
vous thing, and couldn't get it off his mind. 

One of the replies of Ninoy in that August 1 1983 
interviewIhadwithhiminhisBostonresidencehadtodowith 

SS *at prompted me to return? If I do not move 
now there will be nothing to reach for in five years Smce 

alncetetolktehim,my P ^ 
and honest elections -- they must be credible.... If I fail, okay 
Ze At least, I can face my God and say: I have toed 
ever^hing Icoulddototheextent ° fsaCri firing my life and my 
Mother quote from that interview: "I'm still convinced 
thatthe safest and cheapest way to retuni our dem^s 
through Mr. Marcos. When you consider all the options 
^vindngMr.Marcostoretumustodemocracywouldbe^e 

Tafest the least costly of all the other options. Now, Mr. 
^Li^diudpa^. Hehasresidualauthonty. Hehas 
Sal legitimacy to pull it off. If Mr. Marcos tomorrow 
decides to have clean and honest elections - yes, people wul 
SSmup. AfewwillpossiblyobjectevenvcKnferous^ 
wtn even not follow him. But I think 70 per cent will follow 

^And finally: "Now, for this single opportunity I am 
outttog my life on the line. Just a chance to talk to him one 
n one I know he doesn't trust me. He thinks I'm most 
unreliable. Maybe he hates me. But all I am asking in 
exchangeformylife,formyfreedom,isonehourtotolktohim. 

After talking to him, after making my presentation, it s up to 
him But at that point, I can rest peacefully and say: I have 
done everything I can do, and after that, there's nothing more 
I feel I should do." 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

Death hovered over this mission and Ninoy felt it. At one 
time, he and Cory kidded each other about the color of amulets 
they would wear upon their return to stave off the assassins' 
bullets. He had earlier planned to return to Manila with son 
Noynoy and daughter Kris. Cory would follow later with 
daughters Ballsy (the eldest), Pinky and Viel. With the death 
threats becoming more persistent, Ninoy decided he had to 
come back alone. He also thought of asking President Marcos 
to grant Cory and the kids a safe-conduct pass on their return 
but changed his mind. 

But even as far back as August 4, 1980, Ninoy already 
seriously pondered the idea of going back to the Philippines. 
At that time, he told the Asia Society in New York: "I have 
asked myself many times: Is the Filipino worth suffering, or 
even dying for? Is he not a coward who would readily yield to 
any colonizer, he be foreign or home-grown? Is a Filipino more 
comfortable under the authoritarian leader because he does 
not want to be burdened with the freedom of choice? Is he 
unprepared, orworse, ill-suited for presidential orparliamen- 
tary democracy? I have carefully weighed the virtues andthe 
faults of the Filipino and I have come to the conclusion he is 
worth dying for because he is the nation's greatest untapped 
resource. Dying, that was always in Ninoy's mind. Dyingfor 
a cause. 

That was flashback. Now let's flash forward. * 
On August 20, 1983, in Taipei, the eve of the last stage of 
his return journey to Manila, Ninoy was telling a group of 
foreign journalists in his hotel: "You have to be ready with 
your hand cameras because this action can become very fast, 
in a matter of three minutes, it could be over, you know. I may 
not be able to talk toyou again after this. So this is the danger, 
the big danger. Now I am taking some precautions. Ihavemy 
bulletproof vest, hoping that that could be some kind of 
protection. Butiftheyhitmeinthehead,thenthere'snothing 
I can do there." 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 

And again before the same group in Taipei: "My feeling is 
that we all have to die sometimes. Now if it's my fate to die by 
an assassin's bullet, so be it. But I cannot be pertified by 
inactionorfearofassassinationandthereforestayinacorner. 
I have suffer with my people. I have to lead them because of 
the responsibiUty.given to me by our people." 

In between bis departure from Boston and his arrival m 

Taipei, the death threat loomed even more ominously. In 

Taipei' Ninoy must have received reliable intelligence reports 

from Manila that upon arrival, they would get him. A 

communist gunman would do the job. So it was in his mind 

almostallthetime. ButNinoycould _— — 

not, could never be deterred Either y ^ aMy weigne( ithe 
herehshedorwasfatedforthatsort 

ofthing-goingtotheedgeofthechfT, virtues and the faults of the 

feeling the wind whip at his face, f///p/ no an dlhave come to the 

daring the fates. Danng conclusion he is worth dying for 

sin's bullet. 5 
This was where great decisions because he is the nation s 

are made, where heroes are sepa- • • 

are maue, w greatest untapped resource. 

rated from ordinary mortals. s 

The arrival statement Ninoy 
Aquinoboreinhishand-carried travel 
bag as hewentdownthe China Airlines plane atMIA August 
21 was never delivered. He was for national reconciliation and 
unitybutthiscouldonlybeachieved"withjustice"and"There 
can be no deal with a dictator" and certainly "no compromise 
with dictatorship." Again, the heroic breath of Gandhi was in 
one paragraph: "According to Gandhi, the willing sacrifice of 
the innocent is the most powerful answer to insolent tyranny 
that has yet been conceived by God and man " But the 
concluding quotation was taken from Archibald Macleish: 



Ninoy Aquino: Portrait of a Hero 



"How shall freedom be defended? By arms 
when it is attacked by arms; by truth when it 
is attacked by lies; by democracy when it is 
attacked by authoritarian dogma. Always, 
and in the final act, by determination and 
faith" 

And by heroic death and martyrdom when finished offby 
an assassin's bullet. What happened on that airport tarmac 
at high noon fitted perfectly into a favorite quotation of Ninoy 
from a Chinese sage: 

"There is a sublime thieving in all giving. 
A man gives us all and we are his forever" 



38 




