, -I 



SPIRITUAL REGENERATION 
OF THE FILIPINO 



ADDRESS BY HIS EXCELLENCY 

Manuel L. Quezon 

PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 
DELIVERED BEFORE 

THE FACULTIES AND STUDENT BODIES 
OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SCHOOLS 
COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES 

AT THE 

JOSE RIZAL MEMORIAL FIELD 

MANILA, AUGUST 19, 1938 



26640 



MANILA 

BUREAU OF PRINTING 
1938 



f 



SPIRITUAL REGENERATION 
OF THE FILIPINO 



ADDRESS BY HIS EXCELLENCY 

Manuel L. Quezon 

PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPQJBS - 

[Delivered before the Faculties and Student Bodies of Public and Private 
Schools, Colleges, and Universities, at the Jose Rizal Memorial Field, 
Manila, August 19, 1938.] 

Mr. Vice-President, My Friends: 

The significance of this unprecedented assemblage of 
the faculties and students of all the universities and of 
the teachers and pupils of the public and private schools 
of Manila, as conveyed to me by my friend, the Vice- 
President, thi'ills me with unbounded happiness, and will 
spur me to go onward, with renewed faith in the policies 
I have pursued, and with redoubled determination to carry 
them on to a successful completion. The honor you have 
done me has touched the depth of my heart. I thank 
you all. 

In response to this magnanimous gesture, far beyond my 
deserts, I shall give you a brief account of my steward- 
ship of public affairs during the first half of my term of 
office, and then tell you the principal objective to which 
I shall devote my attention and efforts in the next three 
years, coupled with the appeal that you render me your 
support and help to carry it out. This objective is nothing 
less than the spiritual revival of the FiUpino people. 

Since the inauguration of the Commonwealth, it has 
been my task to erect the governmental structure upon 
the broad and unshakeable foundations of the Constitu- 
tion. I have estabUshed precedents which, I hope, will 
serve as signposts in the administration of the public 
business. My eager purpose has been to give vitality and 
power to democratic processes and to adapt them to the 
ever exacting demands of the complex social and political 
problems of our day. We have succeeded, I believe, in 
proving that representative government in the Philippines 

8 



4 



can be as competent in action as it is fundamentally soimd 
in principle; that it can act promptly and effectively in 
any emergency, without sacrificing either its form or sub- 
stance; and that a regime of popular deliberation and ex- 
pression can promote social welfare and the happiness of 
the people. 

Keeping faith with the spirit of the Constitution, as I 
imderstand it, I have acted as the leader of the nation 
rather than as the spokesman of a political party. I have 
chased narrow partisanship from the councils of govern- 
ment. I have scrupulously maintained religious freedom 
and the separation of Church and State. I have sate- 
guarded free thought, free expression, and the una bridge- 
able right of the people to work, and to possess and 
enjoy the fruits of their toil. Every possible precau- 
tion has been taken to insure speedy and impartial 
justice, maintaining, in fact, the equality of all men before 
the law. I have not tolerated corruption, inefficiency, or 
injustice in public office; and I pledge myself to persevere 
in my efforts to sweep every nook and cranny of the Gov- 
ernment clean of every deleterious influence that might 
impair the vitality of the body politic. I have kept the 
public finance in a sound condition and have succeeded 
materially in introducing approved business practices in 
the management of the people s money. 

Having set up the Government, the next concern of 
my administration was to safeguard it against possible 
dangers from within and without. It was necessary to 
erect effective defenses against subversive movements, the 
possible tyranny of aggressive minorities, or the danger 
of mob rule. That has been accomplished. The Philip- 
pines is definitely secured against lawlessness and disorder, 
and I shall offer no quarter to any man or gi'oup of men 
who seek to attain social or political aims through force 
or resistance to legitimate authority, in preference to the 
expeditious procedure guaranteed by the Constitution to 
everyone who desires a redress of grievances. The armed 
forces of the Nation will be maintained free from politics 
and as clear and unstained of pernicious influence as the 
courts of justice. 

Our national defense is being organized without reference 
to any foreign aggressor. I can see none now. We are 
surrounded by friendly nations that, I believe, entertain 
no untoward designs against us. It shall be to our lasting 



5 



benefit to maintain these friendly relations, avoiding every 
act that may disturb them or virhich may entangle us in 
the quarrels of others. After we shall have attained the 
full statui-e of independence, I trust that our foreign poUcy 
shall be fair and just to all nations, gi*anting special 
privileges to no one, and seeking none for ourselves. As 
I look at the events of these days, I am strengthened 
more and more in my belief that if we follow this course 
we should have no fear for our national integrity. 

In the field of public welfare, I have been unflagging 
in my effort to promote social justice and to ameliorate 
social conditions among the masses of our people. The 
attainment of these objectives depends not only upon 
economic and moral factors, but also upon the people 
themselves, for only through productive work can social 
standards be improved. Within the realm of government 
action, I believe I have advanced towards these objectives 
as far as the laws of the land or the circumstances have 
allowed. We have built more schools, more hospitals, and 
new roads; we have extended the benefits of numerous 
other social services, particularly to the poorer classes of 
our population. We have endeavored to maintain indus- 
trial peace by increasing wages and improving working 
conditions. I have stamped practically aU the important 
activities of the Government with a social purpose, because 
I believe intensely in the principle that it is the duty of 
the State, not only to keep order, administer justice, and 
safeguard individual rights and property, but also to pro- 
mote the people's welfare, assuring to everyone an equal 
economic opportunity, wholesome hving conditions, a chance 
to work for a decent livelihood, a fair share in the fruits 
of the country's material progress, and the enjoyment of 
a standard of living in accordance with the basic needs 
of self-respecting, intelligent men. My ambition is to give 
to every Filipino the opportunity to acquire through toil 
his necessities in food, clothing, and shelter, together with 
reasonable comforts, and a leisure which wUl permit cul- 
tural self-improvement and a participation m the blessings 
of an enlightened civilization. I should hke to give to all 
our countrymen social security in youth as well as in old 
age, for themselves and their families. 

The task of economic prepai-ation for independence has 
not been overlooked. The Government has done much 

26540 2 



6 



to stimulate industry, help business, and promote material 
progress. I sought to reopen the question of our trade 
relations with the United States with a view to obtaining 
a modification of the economic provisions of the Independ- 
ence Law. The President of the United States lent a 
sympathetic ear to my request and, in consultation with 
me, he appointed the Joint Preparatory Committee on 
Phihppine Affairs, which committee has already studied 
the question of our future trade relations with America 
and submitted its recommendations. With the income that 
we are receiving from excise tax collections in the United 
States, and with the expected changes in our trade rela- 
tions with America, I feel that we shall be in a fairiy 
good position to face the problems of economic read] us c- 
ment and reconstruction, the solution of which we cannot 
long delay. I propose in the remaining years of my ad- 
mmistration to give impetus to economic development 
pursuant to a carefully prepared plan. 

I have briefly outlined my policies and our achieve- 
ments during the first half of my administration, now 
about to close. I look upon these policies and these achieve- 
ments as affecting merely the superstructure, the fi^ame- 
work, of our national edifice. But just as a building of 
magnificent architectural design, adorned with golden colon- 
nade and arches, would topple down and crumble to pieces 
when the earth trembles in seismic activity, or when 
lashed by the fury of the winds, unless it be built upon 
solid foundations, so our national structure, if it is to 
endure and be capable of resisting political disorders and 
grave social upheavals, must rest upon the rock-bottom 
of the character, the toil, and the physical prowess of the 
people. 

National strength can be built only on character. A 
nation is nothing more nor less than its citizenry. It is 
the people that make up the nation and, therefore, it 
cannot be stronger than its component parts. Their weak- 
ness is its failings, their strength its power. Show me a 
people composed of vigorous, sturdy individuals, of men, 
and women healthy in mind and body; courteous, brave, 
industrious, self-reliant; purposeful in thought as well as 
in action; imbued with sound patriotism and a profound 
sense of righteousness; with high social ideals and a strong 
moral fiber; and I will show you a great nation, a nation 



7 



that will not be submerged, a nation that will emerge 
victorious from the trials and bitter strifes of a distracted 
world, a nation that will live forever, sharing the common 
task of advancing the welfare and promoting the happiness 
of mankind. 

Wisdom and self-interest as well as a proper regai-d for 
our future security and happiness should induce us to 
entertain no illusions nor a mistaken pride as to ourselves. 
It was Rizal himself, in his "NoH Me Tangere," who taught 
us the need of detecting and exposing our weaknesses, 
for thus alone may they be corrected. We are engaged 
in the epic task of building our nation, to hve and flourish, 
not for a day, but for all time. We must find the flaws, 
if there be any, in our concept of individual and com- 
munity life, as well as in our character, and proceed at once 
to remedy them. 

I have an abiding faith in our people. I know that 
they have all the faculties needed to become a -powerful 
and enlightened nation. The Filipino is not inferior to 
any man of any race. His physical, intellectual, and moral 
qualities are as excellent as those of the proudest stock 
of mankind. But some of these qualities, I am constrained 
to admit, have become dormant in recent years. If we 
compare our individual and civic traits with those that 
adorned our forefathers, we will find, I fear, that we, the 
Filipinos of today, have lost much of the moral strength 
and power for growth of our ancestors. They were strong- 
willed, earnest, adventurous and daring people. They had 
traditions potent in influence in their lives, individually 
and collectively. They had the courage to be pioneers, 
to brave the seas, clear the forest and erect towns and 
cities upon the wilderness. They led a life of toU and 
communal service. Each one considered himself an active 
part of the body politic. But those traditions are either 
lost or forgotten. They exist only as a hazymist in our 
distant past. We must revive them, for we need the an- 
chorage of these traditions to guide and sustain us in the 
proper discharge of our political and social obligations. 

The upward climb of mankind has not been universal. 
In the human landscape there are peaks and valleys 
and deep chasms. Generally, there is need of potent so- 
cial upheavals, volcanic in proportions, to raise the lower 
levels to greater heights. 



8 



There is no substitute for isuJffering and privation to 
bring out the finer qualities ; in . man, just as physical 
struggle develops his sinews. This is in accord with bi- 
ological laws. The battle for ^ existence and the sui'vival 
of the fittest is ever the riil^' of life in nature and among 
men. Stern necessity, the urge that comes from fear of 
destruction, the loss of honor or of freedom, reacting 
upon latent human faculties, brings out the best that is 
in man. In this respect, humanity as a whole has merely 
shown that it possesses the same degi'ee of adaptability 
exhibited by all species of nature. But man, after sporadic 
periods of advancement, has not been able to hold per- 
manently to spiritual gains, and very often has slid back 
to his former stage when the pressure is wholly or par- 
tially removed. This is occurring to our race. A period 
of deterioration has started and, unless we check it, we 
shall soon be on the down grade. 

Freedom, no less than prosperity, has come to us, much 
more as a gift of Heaven, than as the fruit of our own 
hard efforts through a long period of suffering and priva- 
tion. During the last forty years, life has been too easy 
for us. We have secured political rights almost for the 
asking, and we have gained prosperity not only because of 
the bounties of our extraordinarily fertile soil, but also 
through the advantages that our economic association with 
the richest and most generous people in the world has 
given us. The youth of the land that did not take part 
in the death-struggles of their fathers nor have tasted the 
hardship of their lives, have led, from childhood, a life 
of ease and relative comfort, and are enjoying the bless- 
ings of liberty for the achievement of which they have 
done nothing and the lack of which they had not felt. 

Let us be realists. And let us above all be true to 
ourselves. The stakes are too high — our liberties, those 
very liberties for which the Filipino of yesterday fought 
and died, our happiness, and our very existence as a 
nation and as a race. We cannot afford to suppress truth 
or to extenuate om- shortcomings. Let us cast away pre- 
tense and futile pride. Let us look at ourselves stripped 
of the veil and trappings with which in our vanity we 
often cover ourselves. That we are at all capable of doing 
this and detecting the weaknesses from which we suffer 
is vindication enough of the excellence of our race. 



9 



We, the Filipinos of today, are soft, easy-going. Our 
tendency is towards parasitism. We are uninclined to 
sustained strenuous effort. We lack earnestness. Face- 
saving is the dominant note in the confused symphony of 
our existence. Oui' sense of righteousness is often dulled 
by the desire of personal gain. Our norm of conduct is 
generally prompted by expediency rather than by prm- 
ciple. We show a failing in that superb courage which 
impels action because it is right, even at the cost of self- 
sacrifice. Our greatest feai' is not to do wrong, but that 
of being caught doing wrong. We are frivolous in our 
view of life. Om^ conception of virtue is many times con- 
ventional. We take our rehgion Ughtly. We think that 
lip-service and profession ai'e equivalent to deep and abid- 
ing faith. We are inconstant; we lack perseverance; the 
first obstacles baffle us, and we easily admit defeat. The 
patriotism of many of us is skin-deep, incapable of in- 
spiring heroic deeds. There are those among us who are 
apt to compromise with ethical principles and regard truth 
as not incompatible with misrepresentation or self-deceit. 

Social decorum is fast becoming prostituted by a mis- 
taken conception of so-called modernity. A wrong adap- 
tation of foreign customs creates in us, especially among 
the young, a feeling that pohteness is commonplace and 
that smartness and insolence are the equivalent of good 
breeding. We do not seem to realize that civility is the 
consummate flower of culture and civilization, for it em- 
braces all the virtues and in turn sustains and enhances 
them all. 

Self-restraint is not an active power in us. Those who 
are high-strung and emotional seldom utilize this gi'eat 
source of energy fcir the attainment of desirable objec- 
tives. Our nerves snap into a frazzle when confronted with 
danger or seemingly insurmountable difficulties. We ab- 
hor discipline, either moral or physical, forgetting that 
self-discipline is the most effective process of building for- 
titude of body and spirit. 

Socially, we are inefficient. We are loathe to accept 
our social responsibilities. We look upon our Government 
as the fountain source of living, to which we are reluctant 
to give anything, but from which we expect every bounty 
and help. We work slowly and scantily. We are afraid 
to exert ourselves in toil. We prefer a life of ease and 



10 



take pride in it, not knowing that there is dignity only in 
work. We feel no compunction in living on the labor of 
others. This is singularly true of that numerous group 
of small landowners who are content with the meager 
income from the rent of their land, instead of working 
it themselves, and from their own sweat gain greater 
profits. These are the people who constitute our middle 
class and should be the backbone of the body politic. Yet 
they are a liabiUty in our social structure. Their idleness 
is a drag upon the economic and social advancement of 
our country, too heavy for any - people to carry. They 
form a stagnant pool which breeds anemia into the blood 
streams of the body politic and will cause its certain death 
unless they awake to their responsibilities and realize their 
ignoble existence. 

This appraisal of the character of our people today may 
soxmd too severe. You will realize that I would be hap- 
pier if I could only shower praise upon oui' coimtrymen. 
But my responsibility as head of this Nation compels me 
to face and state facts, however disagreeable they may be 
to me, for it is only thus that we can remedy existing 
evils that threaten to destroy the vitality and vigor of 
the race. Because I have not lost faith that there are, 
within us, all the spiritual and moral forces needed for the 
building of a great nation, I am ruthless in pointing out 
oiu: present shortcomings. Our task — it is a heroic task — 
is to awaken and apply these faculties so that our people 
should become what of right they should be: morally 
strong, virile, hard-working, refined, enterprising, per- 
severing, public-spirited. 

Social and political conflicts have been the crucible in 
which the dynamic faculties and virtues of man have 
been tempered and fused. Chivalry and the Bushido, as 
well as the industrial revolution and the advancement of 
science and art, are the offspring of death-struggles of 
man against man or of man against nature. It is in a 
sense oiir misfortune that God has not visited such trials 
and vicissitudes upon our people in adequate measure. 
We would be a sti-onger, sturdier race if we had faced 
such ordeals. Much as we have endured during our quest 
for liberty, our sufferings are as nothing compared with 
the price paid by other peoples. Nevertheless, while we 
were engaged in our fight for freedom, our nation pro- 



11 



duced men of great worth and character. But— Bonifacio, 
M. H. del Pilar, Mabini, Luna— where are their equals 
now? Who can compare with Rizal, with his serene wis- 
dom and his great coinage, his spirit of self-sacrifice pre- 
ferring death to slavery? Who is there that can tread 
the level of loyalty and gallantry exhibited by Gregorio 
del Pilar, who, like a Spartan soldier, offered his life as 
a holocaust to duty? There were many others, giants 
all, who lived in those days and gave luster to our name. 
They are dead, and it seems that their individual and 
civic virtues were buried with them. But the sparks still 
glow within us, and I know that in an emergency they 
can be fanned into a flame that will fire our souls with 
heroic determination. 

But why wait for an emergency? Are we so devoid of 
every sense of responsibility that we are willing to let fate 
determine our com-se of action? Such is unworthy of 
purposeful men. - I want pur., people to grow, and be. like 
the molave, strong and resihent, rising on the hillside, 
unafraid of the raging flood, the lightning, or the storm, 
CQjafident of its own strength,- If we have the will to 
survive and the will to achieve social efficiency, we cannot 
delay this task of spmtual revival. Let us begin now 
to mold the typical Filipino. 

Besides, we are truly facing an emergency. The emer- 
gency is real. It is at hand. Unless we bring out and 
use all the energies of which we are capable, we shall not 
for long enjoy the blessings of liberty and peace. 

Some leaders of men have advocated the strenuous 
life; others a life of danger and adventure. I offer to you 
the' useful life, devoted to self-improvement and the serv- 
ice of the state. It must be rooted on character, self- 
discipline, and work. It should glorify productive en- 
terprise, a high sense of responsibility, and the ethical 
virtues. Its objectives are personal perfection and social 
efficiency. 

To attain these aims, it is imperative to fashion tne 
culture and character of the people, so as to provide them 
with spiritual and physical energies of the highest order. 

To insure the accomplishment of this task of national 
spiritual reconstruction, we shall formulate and adopt 
a social code — a code of ethics and personal conduct — ^a 
sort of written Bushido — that can be explained in the 



12 



schools, preached from the pulpits, and taught in the 
streets and plazas, and in the remotest corners of our 
land. We shall indoctrinate every man, woman, and child 
in its precepts. By every means and power at my com- 
mand, I shall strive to enforce its principles and to require 
that they be so universally and constantly observed, that 
our childi^en may breathe it in the air and feel it in their 
very flesh. Every Filipino is a part and an objective of 
this great national movement, the success of which de- 
pends upon his own success in building up his character 
and developing his faculties. 

This undertaking— the regeneration of the FiHpino — 
constitutes the paramount interest of my administration. 
My most cherished ambition is to see it realized. It is the 
greatest prize that I can crave for my life. I call upon 
all the teachers, the ministers of every faith, the pohtical 
and social leaders, and particulai'ly upon you the young 
men and young women to be at the vanguard of this 
crusade. 

Every official of the Government will cooperate, and 
ignorance of, or failure to live up to, the rules of conduct 
established, will be a bar to public office. There will 
be some superficial men, self-appointed guardians of de- 
mocracy, who would brand this movement as the first 
step towards totalitarianism. Let us not heed them. It 
is the concern of democracy to raise the character of 
the people to the highest peak, for democracy itself can 
only survive and be eflective promote the common 
welfare if the people are intelligent, virtuous, and efficient. 

We have attained our freedom, but our spirit is still 
bound by the shackles forged from the frailties of our 
natui-e. We owe it to ourselves and our posterity to strike 
them down. 

We are Orientals. Orientals are known for their pla- 
cidity and passivity. In the world of humanity we are 
looked upon as a quiet and smooth lake from which the 
adventiu-ous and enterprising may reap enjoyment and 
gain. I refuse to allov/ the Filipino to be so regarded. 
We shall be a flowing stream, a rippling brook, a deep 
and roaring torrent, full of life, of hope, of faith and of 
strength. Through self-discipline we shall harness all our 
energies, so that our power, spreading over the length 
and breadth of this land, will develop its resomxes, ad- 



13 



vance its culture, secure social justice, give puissance to 
the Nation, and insure happiness and contentment for all 
the people, under the segis of liberty and peace. 

Other peoples of the world are straining themselves to 
attain higher levels of progress and national security. We 
shall not, we must not, lag behind. 

The Filipino people are on the march, towards their 
destiny, to conquer then- place in the s\m! 



Sr. Vice Presidente, Amigos: 

El significado de esta congregacion sm precedentes de 
los profesores y alumnos de todas las universidades y de 
los maestros y estudiantes de las escuelas publicas y pri- 
vadas de Manila, tal como me expone mi amigo, el Vice 
Presidente, me conmueve y al mismo tiempo me Uena de 
inmensa felicidad, sera para mi un acicate para marchar 
adelante con renovada fe en la orientacion que he seguido 
y con redoblada resolucion para Uevarla a feliz termino. ^ 

El honor que me habeis tributado ha llegado a lo mas 
hondo de mi corazon. Os doy gracias a todos. En corres- 
pondencia a este acto magnanimo, que excede mis meritos, 
OS dare una suscinta exposicion de como he dirigido^ los 
negocios publicos durante la primera mitad del penodo 
de mi cargo, y luego os dire el ob]eto principal al cuai 
dedicare mi atencion y mis esfuerzos en los siguientes 
tres anos, juntamente con la peticion de que me prestareis 
vuestro apoyo y ayuda para reahzarlo. Este objeto no 
es otro sino el renacimiento espiritual del Pueblo i^m- 

^^Desde la mauguracion del Commonwealth, mi cometido 
fue levantar la estructura gubernamental sobre las amphas 
e inconmovibles bases de la Constitucion. He dejado esta- 
blecidos precedentes que espero servu-an de jalones en la 
administracion de los negocios publicos. Mi vehemente 
proposito fue vivificar y fortalecer las practicas democra- 
ticas, y adaptarlas a las cada dia mas grandes exigencias 
de la complicada situacion politica y social de nuestra 
epoca. Creo que hemos logrado demostrar que el go- 
bierno representativo en Filipinas puede ser tan compe- 
tente en la accion, como fvmdamentahnente bueno en 
prmcipio; que puede obrar con prontitud y eficacia en 
cualquiera contingencia sin sacrificar ni la forma ni la sus- 
tancia; y que un regimen basado en la deliberacion y 
expresion de la voluntad popular puede promover el bien- 
estar y la felicidad del pueblo. 

He guardado fidehdad al sentido de la Constitucion, se- 
gun me es dado entenderla, obrando como caudillo de la 

14 



15 



nacion, mas que como portavoz de un partido politico. 
He arrojado el partidismo ciego de los consejos del Go- 
bierno. He sostenido firmemente la libertad de cultos y 
mantenido la separacion de la Iglesia y el Estado. He 
defendido la libertad de pensamiento y de palabra, y el 
derecho incontestable del pueblo a trabajar y poseer y 
gozar del fruto de su trabajo. Toda posible precaucion 
ha sido adopt ada para que la administracion de justicia 
sea rapida e imparcial y para que sea un hecho palpable 
la igualdad ante la ley. No he tolerado la corrupcion, la 
ineficiencia o la in justicia en la administracion publica, y 
doy mi palabra de que perse verare en mi esfuerzo por 
desterrar de todos los ambitos del gobierno toda influencia 
deleterea que pueda menguar la vitalidad del cuerpo politico. 
He mantenido la hacienda publica en excelente condicion 
y he logrado introducir consagradas practicas bursatiles en 
el mane jo del dinero publico. 

Despues de establecer el gobierno, la subsiguiente pre- 
ocupacion de mi administracion fue protegerlo de todo 
peligro de dentro o de fuera. Fue necesario erigir solidas 
defensas contra los movimientos subversivos y la tu^ania 
de las minorias agresivas o contra los desmanes del po- 
pulacho desenfrenado. Todo esto se ha logrado. La na- 
cion filipina esta definitivamente asentada sobre la firme 
roca de la ley y del orden, y os digo que no dare cuartel 
a ningun individuo o grupo que se proponga realizar sus 
fines sociales o politicos por la fuerza o la resistencia a 
la legitima autoridad, con menosprecio de los remedios ex- 
peditivos que la Constitucion garantiza a todo aquel que 
desea una satisfaccion de sus agravios. Las fuerzas arma- 
das de la nacion seran apartadas de la politica y se man- 
tendran hbres de toda funesta influencia como los mismos 
tribunales de justicia. 

Estamos organizando nuestra defensa nacional sin nin- 
guna alusion a ningun extrano agresor. No puedo pensar 
en ninguno en este momento. Nos rodean naciones ami- 
gas que yo creo no abrigan siniestros designios contra 
nosotros. Sera para nuestro permanente bien el conservar 
estas relaciones amistosas, evitando todo acto que pueda 
perturbarlos o nos complique en los conflictos de los de- 
mas. Despues que hayamos obtenido el completo disfrute 
de la independencia, confio en que nuestra politica exterior 
sera razonable y justa para todas las naciones, no conce- 



16 



diendo ni pidiendo privilegio especial alguno. Al con- 
templar los sucesos de estos dias me afii'mo mas y mas 
en la creencia de que si seguimos por este camino, no 
tendremos motives para temer por nuestra integridad 
nacional. 

En cuanto concierne al comun bienestar, he procurado 
promover sin desmayo la justicia social y el mejoramiento 
de las condiciones sociales en las masas del pueblo. La 
consecucion de estos objetivos depende no solo de f actor es 
economicos y morales, sino tambien del pueblo mismo, 
porque solamente mediante el trabajo reproductivo, pue- 
den mejorarse las normas de vida. En cuanto dependia 
de la accion gubernamental, creo haber avanzado consi- 
derablemente hacia estos objetivos dentro de la esfera que 
me autorizaban las leyes y las circunstancias. Hemos le- 
vantado mas escuelas, mas hospitales y abierto nuevos 
caminos. Hemos extendido los beneficios de muchos otros 
servicios sociales, con mayor predileccion a la porcion mas 
infortunada de nuestro pueblo. Hemos procurado man- 
tener la paz entre el capital y el trabajo, elevando los 
jomales y mejorando las condiciones de trabajo. He in- 
suflado un proposito social en casi todas las actividades 
del gobierno, porque soy un firme creyente en la doctrina 
de que el Estado tiene el deber no solo de guardar el orden, 
administrar justicia y salvaguardar la propiedad y los de- 
rechos individuales sino tambien de promover el bienestar 
del pueblo, procurando a cada uno igual oportunidad en 
el campo economico, condiciones de vida saludables, faci- 
lidad para ganarse decentemente la vida, una justa parti- 
cipacion en los frutos del progreso material del pais y el 
disfrute de un nivel de vida compatible con las necesidades 
elementales de una persona inteligente y digna. Acaricio 
la ambicion de dar a cada ciudadano filipino la oportunidad 
para adquirir, trabajando, cuanto necesita en alimentos, 
ropa y vivienda, con cierta razonable cantidad de como- 
didades, asi como el necesario esparcimiento para su propia 
edificacion cultural y para que pueda gozar de las bienan- 
danzas de una progresiva civilizacion. Mi ideal seria pro- 
porcionar a todos nuestros conciudadanos un estado de 
tranquilidad economica en la juventud y en la vejez, para 
si mismos y para los miembros de su familia. 

No hemos descuidado la tarea de preparar el pais en lo 
economico para la independencia. El Gobierno ha hecho 



17 



mucho para propulsar las industrias, ayudar los negocios 
y promover el progreso material. Trabaje por que se vol- 
viera a discutir nuestras relaciones comerciales con los 
Estados Unidos con el fin de obtener una modificacion 
de las disposiciones economicas de la Ley de Indepen- 
dencia. El Presidente de los Estados Unidos escucho con 
simpatia mi peticion y, en inteligencia conmigo, nombro 
el Comite Con junto Preparatorio en Asuntos Filipinos, que 
acaba de terminar el estudio de la cuestion de nuestras 
relaciones comerciales con los Estados Unidos, y ha some- 
tido ya sus recomendaciones. Con los recursos que la 
cobranza del impuesto de sisa en los Estados Unidos coloca 
en nuestras manos y con los esperados cambios en nuestras 
relaciones comerciales con America, presiento que estare- 
mos en excelente condicion para hacer frente a los proble- 
mas de reajuste y reconstruccion economica, cuya solucion 
no podemos aplazar por mucho tiempo. En los anos que 
quedan de mi gobierno, me propongo dar impulso al des- 
arroUo economico de acuerdo con un plan cuidadosamente 
preparado. 

He expuesto suscintamente mis normas de gobierno y 
nuestros logros durante la primera mitad de mi adminis- 
tracion que est a tocando a su fin. Pero estas normas y 
estos logros, a mi ver, afectan meramente, por decirlo asi, 
la forma de la estructura del edificio nacional. Y asi como 
un edificio de magnifica talla arquitectonica adornado de 
doradas columnas y arcos, se vendrfa abajo y se haria 
anicos, al estremecerse la tierra o al ser azotado por vio- 
lento huracan, si no estuviese asentado sobre solidos cimien- 
tos, del mismo modo nuestra estructura nacional, si ha de 
perdurar y resistir las sacudidas de los desordenes poli- 
ticos y las graves perturbaciones sociales, debera apoyarse 
en el caracter, en el esfuerzo y en el vigor fisico de nuestro 
pueblo. 

El vigor de la nacion solamente puede cultivarse sobre 
la base del caracter. Una nacion no es mas ni menos que 
el conjunto de sus ciudadanos. El pueblo constituye la 
nacion y por tanto esta no puede ser mas fuerte que sus 
partes componentes. Adolecera de la fragilidad y partici- 
para de la consistencia de estas ultimas. Demostradme 
un pueblo de vigorosos y energicos individuos, de hombres 
y mujeres sanos de cuerpo y de inteligencia; respetuosos, 
bravos, labor iosos y llenos de confianza en su propio valer; 



18 



que piensan y obran con un proposito definido; imbuidos 
de patriotismo y de severos principios de rectitud; hechos 
de recia contextura moral y dotados de egregios ideales 
sociales, y os dire que alli teneis una gran nacion, una 
nacion que jamas se ira a pique; una nacion que emer- 
gera triunfante de las tribulaciones y terribles luchas de 
un mundo lleno de confusiones; una nacion que vivira 
para siempre, tomando parte en la mision comun de pro- 
mover el bienestar y la felicidad de la humanidad. 

La prudencia y nuestro propio interes, asi como una 
sabia consideracion de nuestra seguridad y felicidad futm-as 
nos librara de hacernos ilusiones y de caer en un mal 
entendido orguUo. Fue el mismo Rizal en su ''Noli Me 
Tangere" quien nos enseno la necesidad de descubrir y 
exponer nuestras flaquezas porque solo asi pueden ser 
corregidas. Estamos empenados en la epica tarea de hacer 
patria, no para que se marchite el dia siguiente, sino para 
que florezca para siempre. Tenemos que hallar los errores, 
si los tenemos, en nuestro concepto de la vida individual y 
colectiva, asi como en nuestro caracter, y ponernos, sin 
perdida de tiempo, a corregirlos. 

Tengo firme fe en mi pueblo. Se que esta dotado de 
todas las facultades que se necesitan para ser una nacion 
poderosa y progresiva. La raza filipina no es inferior a 
ninguna otra. Sus cualidades fisicas, intelectuales y mo- 
rales son tan buenas como las del grupo etnico mas enva- 
necido de la humanidad. Es forzoso admitir, sin embargo, 
que algunas de estas cualidades han quedado adormecidas 
en anos recientes. Si comparamos nuestros rasgos indi- 
viduals y colectivos con los que adornaron a nuestros 
antepasados, yo temo que veremos que nosotros, los fili- 
pinos de hoy, hemos perdido mucho de la fuerza y poder 
de crecimiento de nuestros ascendientes. Aquellos fueron 
un pueblo de ferrea voluntad, de propositos indeclinables, 
de espiritu audaz y aventurero. Sus tradiciones moldea- 
ban la vida de los individuos y de la comunidad. Tenian 
el coraje de los conquistadores, que cruzaban los mares, 
abrian las entranas de los bosques y fundaban pueblos y 
ciudades en las deshabitadas llanm-as. Vivieron trabajan- 
do intensamente y sirviendo a la comunidad, consideran- 
dose partes integrantes de su sociedad. Pero aquellas 
tradiciones se han perdido o se han olvidado. Solo son 
un vago recuerdo que se desvanece en nuestro remote 



19 



pasado. Debemos revivirlas porque necesitamos el lastre 
de estas tradiciones para orientarnos y sostenernos en el 
debido desempeno de nuestras obligaciones sociales y 
politicas. 

La marcha ascendente de la humanidad no ha sido uni- 
versal. En el panorama humano hay cimas, valles y pro- 
fundos abismos. Son necesarios, en general, grandes cata- 
clismos sociales de proporciones volcanicas, para elevar a 
grandes alturas los bajos niveles. 

Nada hay como el sufrimiento y la privacion para poner 
de realce las buenas cualidades del hombre, del mismo 
mo do que la lucha corporal desarroUa su vigor. Las leyes 
biologicas asi lo exigen. Entre las fieras asi* como entre 
los hombres, la lucha por la existencia y la supervivencia 
del mas fuerte son la ley de la vida. La dura necesidad, 
la reaccion subsiguiente al temor a la propia destruccion 
y a la perdida del honor o de la libertad, al excitar cier- 
tas facultades humanas latentes, ponen de manifiesto lo 
mejor que hay en el hombre. En este respecto la huma- 
nidad ha demostrado poseer la misma adaptabilidad que 
todas las especies del reino animal. Pero despues de estos 
periodos esporadicos de progreso, el hombre no ha logrado 
conservar permanentemente el caudal espiritual ganado, 
y muy frecuentemente ha retrocedido a su condicion an- 
terior cuando ha desaparecido total o parcialmente el hn- 
pulso que lo ha hecho avanzar. Esto esta aconteciendo 
con nuestra raza. Empieza a deteriorarse, y a menos que 
detengamos seme j ante proceso, pronto iremos a la de- 
cadencia. 

La libertad, igual que la prosperidad, ha venido a nos- 
otros como un don del cielo, mas que como fruto de 
nuestros grandes esfuerzos en el curso de un largo pe- 
riodo de sufrimientos y privaciones. Durante los pasados 
cuarenta anos la vida ha sido sumamente facil para nos- 
otros. Hemos obtenido derechos politicos casi con solo 
haberlos pedido, y hemos tenido prosperidad no solo por 
las riquezas que prodiga nuestro suelo fertil, sino tambien 
por las ventajas que nos ha reportado nuestra asociacion 
economica con el pueblo mas rico y mas generoso del 
mundo. Los jovenes del pais que no tomaron parte en 
la lucha a muerte que sostuvieron sus padres ni paladearon 
los sinsabores de su vida, vivieron, desde la infancia, una 
vida indolente y de relativo comfort y disfrutan de las 



20 



dulzuras de la libertad, a cuya consecucion nada contri- 
buyeron y cuya ausencia no tuvieron ocasion de lamentar. 

Tengamos sentido de realidad. Y ante todo, empecemos 
por ser sinceros con nosotros mismos. Estamos arriesgando 
muchas cosas preciosas, sin excluir nuestras libertades 
civiles, nuestra felicidad, inclusive nuestra existencia, y 
no podemos permitirnos suprimir la verdad o disculpar 
nuestros defectos. Dejemos a un lado las falsas pre- 
tensiones y el orgullo vano. Miremonos en el espejo de 
nuestra conciencia, sin el velo y los arreos de la vani- 
dad con que frecuentemente nos solazamos ,en cubrirnos. 
Nuestra capacidad para hacer todo esto y para descubrir 
nuestros defectos serfa en si misma suficiehte vindicacion 
de la excelencia de nuestra raza. • 1 1 

Nosotros, los filipinos de hoy, somos blandos de ca- 
racter, y despreocupados. Nos inclinamos hacia el para- 
sitismo. Rehufmos el tener que hacer un esfuerzo grande 
y sostenido. Carecemos de resolucion. Las apariencias 
son la nota predominante en el desgarbado cuadro de 
nuestra existencia. El afan de bienes materiales ofusca 
nuestro sentido de rectitud. Las conveniencias y no los 
principios gobiernan generalmente nuestra conducta. Flo- 
jeamos en la excelsa vhi;ud que mueve a una buena 
accion, aun al precio de la propia destruccion. Nuestro 
mayor temor no es hacer el mal, sino que nos prendan 
en el acto de perpetrarlo. Tenemos una nocion frivola de 
la vida, y un concepto a veces convencional de la virtud. 
No tomamos en serio nuestra religion. Creemos suplir la 
falta de verdadera fe con meras profesiones externas. 
Somos inconstantes, carecemos de perseverancia; al primer 
obstaculo sufrimos desmayo, y aceptamos facilmente la 
derrota. El patriotismo de muchos de nosotros es super- 
ficial, incapaz de inspirar hechos heroicos. Hay entre 
nosotros quienes trafican con los principios morales y 
creen que pueden ser veraces enganandose a si mismos 
y enganando a los demas. 

Una falsa nocion de la llamada modernidad esta des- 
truyendo rapidamente las tapias del decoro social. Una 
desacertada adaptacion de las modalidades extranas pro- 
duce en nosotros, especialmente entre los jovenes, la 
creencia de que la urbanidad es una vulgaridad y, por 
el contrario, la vivacidad o la insolencia y la buena crianza 
son una misma cosa. No parecemos percatarnos de que 



21 



la cortesia es la flor misma de la cultiu'a y la civiliza- 
cion, porque nace del conjunto de todas las vktudes, y 
a su vez, las cobija y porporciona ambiente propicio a su 
crecimiento. 

El dominio de las pasiones es virtud que no se ejercita 
entre nosotros. Los faciles a emocionarse y exaltarse 
raras voces aprovechan la energia que nace de la emo- 
cion para lograr utiles propositos. Nuestros nervios se 
descomponen cuando se enfrenta con un peligro o una 
dificultad, al parecer, insuperable. Tenemos horror a la 
disciplina, moral o fisica, olvidando que la misma es el 
metodo mas eficaz para fortalecer el cuerpo y el espiritu. 

En lo social, somos ineficientes. Nos resistimos a aceptar 
nuestras responsabilidades sociales. Consideramos el go- 
bierno como fuente de vida: no nos sentimos dispues- 
tos a darle nada, pero de el esperamos todo auxilio y 
toda bienandanza. Trabajamos poco y despacio. Teme- 
mos esforzarnos en el trabajo. Apetecemos una vida de 
holganza y nos envanecemos de vivirla, ignorando que 
no hay dignidad sino en el trabajo. No nos remuerde el 
vivir del sudor de los demas. Esto es especialmente 
cierto respecto al numeroso grupo de pequenos propietarios 
que se contentan con la escasa renta de sus terrenos, 
en vez de trabajarlos ellos mismos y ganar mas. fistos 
son los que constituyen nuestra clase media y debieran 
ser la columna vertebral de la comunidad. Y, sin em- 
bargo, son la obra muerta en nuestra estructura social. 
Su inercia actiia en sentido contrario al progreso eco- 
nomico y social del pais y es una carga demasiado pe- 
sada para los hombros de cualquier pueblo. Constituyen 
un charco de aguas cenagosas que Uevan la anemia a los 
vasos sanguineos del cuerpo politico, y causaran su 
muerte segura, a menos que ellos se den cuenta de sus 
responsabilidades y se percaten de su innoble existencia. 

Esta apreciacion del caracter de nuestro pueblo puede 
parecer excesivamente severa. Vosotros sabeis que me 
sentiria mas feliz si pudiera prodigar el elogio a nuestros 
compatriotas. Pero mi responsabilidad como Jefe de la 
nacion me obliga a encararme con los hechos y a decirlos, 
por amargos que sean para mi, porque solo de este 
modo podremos corregir los males existentes que amenazan 
con roer la vitaUdad y el vigor de la raza. Soy implaca- 
ble en senalar nuestros defectos de hoy, precisamente 
porque no he perdido la fe de que dentro de nosotros 



22 



hay toda la energia espiritual necesaria para edificar una 
gran nacion. Nuestra tarea — una heroica tarea, por 
cierto — es despertar y emplear estas facultades para hacer 
de nuestro pueblo lo que tiene derecho a ser: moral- 
mente fuerte, viril, trabajador, refinado, emprendedor, 
perseverante y patriota. 

Los conflictos sociales y politicos han sido la suprema 
prueba que ha templado las facultades dinamicas y las 
virtudes del hombre. La caballerosidad y el Bushido, 
asi como la revolucion industrial y el adelanto de las 
ciencias y las artes nacieron en la lucha mortal de los 
hombres entre si, o contra las fuerzas ciegas de la na- 
turaleza. Hasta cierto punto, ha sido un infortunio para 
nosotros que Dios no haya sometido nuestro pueblo a la 
prueba de tribulaciones y vicisitudes en la medida ade- 
cuada. Nuestra raza hubiera salido de ella mas fuerte y 
vigorosa. Hemos sufrido mucho en nuestras luchas por 
la Ubertad, pero nuestros padecimientos fueron nada com- 
parados con el precio que pagaron otros pueblos. Aun 
asi, mientras duro aquella lucha, nuestra nacion produjo 
hombres de extraordinario valer y caracter. Pero pre- 
gunto: ^donde estan ahora los sucesores de Bonifacio, 
Luna, Mabini y Del Pilar? ^Quien puede medirse con 
Rizal, con su serena sabiduria y su gran coraje, su es- 
piritu de sacrificio que prefirio la muerte a la esclavitud? 
^Quien puede llegar a las excelsitudes de aquella gallarda 
lealtad de Gregorio del Pilar quien, como un espartano, 
se ofrecio en holocausto al deber? Hubo muchos otros, 
todos de la talla de gigantes, que vivieron en aquellos 
dias y dieron lustre a nuestra patria. Pero murieron ya, 
y no parece sino que muchas de sus hermosas cualidades 
bajaron con ellos a la tumba. Pero la llama esta en- 
cendida aun dentro de nuestros pechos, y se que cuando 
la ocasion lo demande, la llama puede convertirse en 
hoguera de resoluciones heroicas. 

Pero ipor que esperar? Carecemos acaso de todo sen- 
tido de responsabilidad que vamos a dejar al azar la 
determinacion del curso que tenemos que seguir? Seme- 
jante actitud es indigna de hombres previsores. Quiero 
que mi pueblo crezca a semejanza del molave, fuerte y 
resistente, levantado sobre la colina, desafiando el torrente 
embravecido, el rayo y la tempestad. Si hemos de so- 
brevivir y triimfar como sociedad organizada, no podemos 



23 



dilatar esta obra de renacimiento espiritual. Empece- 
mos ahora a moldear el tipo de ciudadano filipino. 

Por lo demas, en realidad tenemos delante momentos 
muy dificiles. La crisis es real y esta delante, y a menos 
que echemos mano de todas las energias de que dispone- 
mos, no habremos de saborear por mucho tiempo las 
dulzuras de la libertad y la paz. 

Algunos caudillos populares ban cantado las excelen- 
cias de la vida estrenua; otros ban tenido predileccion 
por la vida aventurera llena de peligros y de peripecias. 
Nada mejor puedo indicaros que el camino de una vida 
util consagrada a la callada tarea del perfeccionamiento 
propio y al servicio del Estado. Su base debe ser el 
caracter, la disciplina y el trabajo. Debe gloriarse en la 
posesion y despliegue del esfuerzo productor, alto sen- 
tido de responsabilidad y las virtudes morales. Su ob- 
jetivo debe ser la perfeccion personal y la eficiencia social. 

Pero para alcanzar estos fines es imperativo moldear 
e\ caracter y la cultura de un pueblo, dotandole de ener- 
gias espirituales y fisicas del orden mas elevado. 

Para asegurar la realizacion de esta obra de reconstruc- 
cion espiritual de la nacion, formularemos y adoptaremos 
im codigo social — un codigo de etica y conducta personal — 
una especie de Bushido escrito — que pueda explicarse 
en las escuelas, predicarse desde los piilpitos y propa- 
garse en calles y plazas, en los mas remotos ambitos 
de nuestra tierra. Ensenaremos sus preceptos a todos, 
hombres, mujeres y ninos. Por todos los medios a mi 
alcance impondre el cumplimiento universal y constante 
de sus principios de tal modo que nuestros hijos lo as- 
piren en el ambiente y lo sientan en su propia came. 
Todos los filipinos seran parte y objetivo de este gran 
movimiento nacional, que triunfara cuando triunfen en 
sus esfuerzos por edificar su caracter y desarrollar sus 
facultades. 

Esta empresa — la regeneracion del filipino — constituira 
la principal preocupacion de mi gobierno. Mi ambicion 
mas vehemente es verla realizada. Es el premio mas 
grande que puiedo apetecer en la vida. Hago un llama- 
miento a todos los maestros, a los ministros de todas 
las religiones, a los caudillos politicos y sociales, y es- 
pecialmente a vosotros, jovenes que me escuchais, para 
que seais la vanguardia de esta cruzada. 



24 



Todo funcionario del Gobierno tiene el deber de co- 
operar en esta tarea, y la ignorancia o el incumplimiento 
de las normas de conducta establecidas, sera causa de 
indignidad para desempenar cargo publico. Hombres su- 
perficiales habra, voluntarios guardianes de la democracia 
que estigmaticen este movimiento como el primer paso 
hacia el totalitarismo. No les hagais caso. La demo- 
cracia misma debe ver de elevar a la mas excelsa altura 
el caracter del pueblo, porque la democracia solo puede 
sobrevenir y ser eficaz propulsora del bienestar comiin, 
si el pueblo es inteligente, virtuoso y eficiente. 

Hemos alcanzado nuestra libertad, pero nuestra alma 
esta aun aprisionada entre las mallas de nuestras propias 
flaquezas. Tenemos el deber, para con nosotros mismos 
y para con la posteridad, de veneer tales flaquezas. 

Somos un pueblo oriental. Los orientales son conocidos 
por su pasividad y placidez de sus movimientos. Desde 
todos los ambitos del mundo nos miran como un lago de 
aguas mansas donde cualquier aventurero emprendedor 
puede obtener abundante pesca. Me niego a permitir 
que se nos area asi. Vamos a ser un arroyo de sonoras 
linfas, un rio caudaloso, un torrente bramador, Ueno de 
vida, de esperanza, de fe y de fuerza. Mediante la dis- 
ciplina encauzaremos nuestras energias para que, al di- 
fundirse por toda la extension de nuestra tierra, des- 
arroUen sus recursos, propulsen su cultura, establezcan 
la justicia social, den pujanza a la nacion, aseguren la 
felicidad y el contentamiento de todo el pueblo, bajo la 
egida de la libertad y la paz. 

Los demas pueblos de la tierra se esfuerzan por al- 
canzar un alto grado de progreso y seguridad nacional. 
Nosotros no iremos, no debemos ir a la zaga. 

El pueblo filipino esta en marcha, hacia su destine, 
para conquistar su puesto bajo el soL 



o 



