BASTION: 
DE SAN 
DIEGO 

Bastion de San Diego is located 
on the southern tip of Manila's 
walled fortification. Originally 
built as the round tower of Nues- 
traSenoradeGuia between 1585 
and 1587, it was renovated and 
joined to the encircling stone for- 
tification by Governor-General 
G6mez Perez Dasmarinas in 1593. 
It was virtually demolished in 
the earthquake of 1645 and re- 
built by Governor Sabiano Man- 
rique de Lara. It was partially de- 
stroyed by British artillery in 
1762 and rebuilt in the last dec- 
ades of that century. Taken over 
by the American military com- 
mand, the top of its bulwark was- 
leveled and held some of the of- 
fices and headquarters of the 
American forces. It was left to the 
mercy of the elements and itin- \ 
erant squatters, who huddled 
within its ruins. i 

The conservation of Basti6n i 
de San Diego began on March 17, 
1979. This initial effort to clear 
the structure of vegetation and 
waste led to the discovery of 
interesting architectural features, 
many of them previously un- 
recorded and photographed. 

As an archaeological site. Bas- 
tion de San Diego remained re- 
latively undisturbed since the start 
of the twentieth century, back- 
filled to the top of the structure. 
The clayey and sandy soil depos- 
its were dredgings from the Pasig 
River and the Manila Bay area. 
But the intrusion of contemporary 
materials was found at a depth 
of five to six meters from the top 
of the structure-evidence of a 
treasure hunt for gold bars sup- 
posedly buried here by^he retveat- 
ing Japanese military command. 
Through the duration of the ex- 
cavation of this bastion, rumors 






r 





1 






I 




BASTION 
DE SAN 
DIEGO 



i 

1 
I 

I 

} 
) 




I 



BASTION 
DE SAN 
DIEGO 



Esperanza B. Gatbonton 

Doaimentation by the National Museum 




INTRAMUROS ADMINISTRATION 
MINISTRY OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS 



Copyright 1985 by the Intramuros Admin- 
istration. No part of this book may be repro- 
duced in any manner whatsoever without 
written permission except in the case of 
brief quotations embodied in critical articles 
and reviews. 

Design by Ueta Catedral Buenaventura 
Typesetting by West Design Studio 
Printing by Graphicom 



Contents 



Foreword 

Introduction ix 

PART I 

Historical Background 1 

PART II 

Methodology and Excavation of the Structure 32 

PART III 

The Excavated Structures 

Appendices . . ^ 61 

Bibliography 

Picture and Illustration Credits and Sources * . * . . 70 



1 

J 



Foreword 



This monograph describes one of the major 
features of the Intramuros fortifications, Baluarte 
de San Diego, named after the Spanish warrior saint 
also known as Santiago. 

The Baluarte is an arrowhead-shaped structure 
at the southwest comer of Intramuros, facing Rizal 
Park and the Manila Hotel. It encases what remains 
of a circular fort, a tower, erected by the Spaniards 
soon after Legazpi and his men encountered Rajahs 
Matanda and Sulayman. One has to imagine the Ma- 
nila of four hundred years ago, perhaps similar to 
the shoreline of modem Cavite bayside towns minus 
resort cottages, with a gray sand beach and a dense 
thicket of thorny aroma trees, and with groups of 
nipa thatch huts here and there, mainly clustered 
at the mouth of the Pasig River where Sulayman's 
palisade was. Legazpi ejected the native population 
from its settlement and erected a stone fort. Fort 
Santiago. The displaced population moved to Ba- 
gumbayan ("New Town"), roughly where Teodoro 
Valencia's Sunday evening Concert at the Park is 
now held. Impressing the natives into forced labor, 
the new colonizers also hastily erected a round fort 
nearby to keep an eye on the restless population, 
Fort San Antonio Abad in a marshy area near an 
estuary a few kilometers farther south, and across 
the Bay, in Cavite, Fort San Felipe guarding the an- 
chorage of the nao de China, the Manila Galleon. 
There were four alien structures, therefore: the Fort 
at the mouth of the river, the fort near Bagumbayan, 
called the Fort Nuestra Senora de Guia after the 
image of the Virgin found roughly at the same time 
in a clump of pandan bushes a little farther on down 
the seashore, Fort San Antonio Abad in Malate, and 
Fort San Felipe in Cavite, representing the most re- 
mote Spanish presence in the East, the first physical 
evidence of His Catholic Majesty's presence in the 
Indies. 

Our round fort was built so hastily, certainly 
reluctantly, by the forced laborers who had never 
worked with stone-or, for that matter, never lifted 
stone-and supervised by Spanish priests and soldiers 
who themselves probably had little familiarity with 



tHe construction of round forts. A heavy stone fort 
built under such conditions on a sandy beach proved 
to be a shaky project indeed, and the Spaniards spent 
much of the next hundred or so years patching up 
here and there, strengthening the foundations, keep- 
ing the walls up and ultimately encasing the fort in 
the present-day Bastion de San Diego. 

Over the years a curtain wall, punctuated with 
little bastions, two small forts and a gate, were erect- 
ed between Baluarte de San Diego and Fort Santiago 
until it reached its present appearance. It was con- 
nected by a similar curtain wall toward the east, to 
Bastion de San Andres which contained the arsenal. 

The Baluarte and the surrounding areas were 
the scene of three battles of Intramuros. The British 
and the Spaniards fought the first in 1762; the 
Americans and the Spaniards, the second in 1898; 
and the Japanese and the Americans, the third in 
1945. The score was Americans-2, British-1, Span- 
iards-0 and Japanese-0. The indios were of course 
more often than not corralled into one side or an- 
other or both and invariably in between. One might 
add, however, that the indios were in fact absent 
participants in the second Battle of Intramuros. The 
Americans managed things such as to leave Aguinal- 
do and his troops far behind while the Spaniards 
yielded by the Baluarte. The Spanish white flag of 
surrender was hoisted both times (1762 and 1898) 
from San Diego and the American flag first flew 
over Intramuros at the same place. 

The British breached the walls, as did the 
Americans, at the curtain wall toward Puerta Real. 
The staging point of the British was from Ermita 
and Malate churches and from two churches located 
at Bagumbayan, serving the ancient Filipino resettle- 
ment area (at Luneta's amphitheater, more or less). 

There were three small churches right outside 
the Intramuros walls, one of which was at Bagum- 
bayan and the other at the Paridn (its site at Liwa- 
sang Bonifacio is commemorated by a historical 
marker). The military had long wanted to have these 
churches demolished, recognizing the threat they 
posed if fallen into enemy hands. It seems that 



Viii FOREWORD 



Church and State relationships were not at their 
most felicitous, and the proposal got nowhere until 
1762, when the British themselves demolished the 
churches of Santiago and San Juan. The British de- 
cision spared the Governor-General from stormy 
scenes with the Archbishop. Great must have been 
the ordeal of Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuerra (1635- 
44), Sabiano Manrique de Lara ( 1 653-63) and Pedro 
Manuel de Arandia de Santisteban (1754-59), who 
all proposed the demolition of churches, convents 
and houses near Intramuros. 

The Spaniards put up a foundry inside the city, 
by the main entrance going up to the Bastion, for 
which reason the Baluarte was also called Baluarte 
de la Fundicion and the street paralleling the south 
curtain wall, still called Calle de la Fundicion. 

Over its four hundred years of existence, the 
structure has been built, enlarged, remodeled, re- 
paired, truncated and used in various ways. In the 
end the Americans covered it all up with sand 
dredged from the beaches of Manila, one of the ear- 
ly projects of today's giant Atlantic Gulf and Pacific 
Company. 

The Americans made the Intramuros walls part 
ot their own military headquarters, and during the 

haTrr'.' P''^^^ ^^"^^^1 Douglas MacArthur 
had his headquarters at Bastion de San Jose, at the 
end of Victoria Street. There were small cottages 
bui t on top of Baluarte de San Diego and nearby 
areas apparently intended as homes of senior offi- 
ers ihe view from those cottages must have been 
spectacular, with the greenery of Luneta Park on 
one side and the Manila Bay sunset on the other, 



before the highrise wing of the Manila Hotel blocked 
off the sunset once and for all in 1975. 

The Japanese must have taken over those cot- 
tages, and at the end of the Second World War they 
made their last stand nearby, at the Revellin of 
Puerta Real, then and now the Manila Aquarium. A 
part of the wall was excavated and a large cannon 
installed, pointed at the Rizal Monument, apparent- 
ly in readiness for an American assault yet again 
from across Bagumbayan field. 

The final bombardment at the end of the Sec- 
ond World War pulverized a good part of the south- 
ern flank of the Bastion and covered in rubble the 
Japanese cannon. After that, the stronghold went 
into slumber for more than 30 years, punctuated 
only by the excitement of a miniature Statue of 
Liberty being erected on top, which seems to have 
been relocated to some inconspicuous place, sporad- 
ic invasions by Boy Scout troops wishing to do a 
good deed by pulling up weeds and cogon by the 
roots, until 1979, when the First Lady directed the 
members of the military to initiate restoration work. 
This was assumed shortly after by the newly created 
Intramuros Administration, bringing us to the pres- 
ent, in the story narrated by Mrs. Esperanza B. 
Gatbonton and professional archaeologists who have 
delved into the stone structure and thus into the 
history of this most interesting remnant of the 
country's past. 

JAIME C. LAYA 
Action Officer 
Intramuros Administration 
November 26, 1984 



Introduction 



Restoration of the Basti6n de San Diego began 
on March 17, 1979, as part of a civic project to 
beautify Manila in time for the fifth UNCTAD of 
1979. It went on to become a full-blown archaeo- 
logical excavation that took some two years to com- 
plete and document. And it continues as a major 
challenge to the entire Intramuros restoration proj- 
ect, since this southern bulwark of Spanish Manila's 
fortified walls had proved to be its most enigmatic 
section. For one, we do not know for certain what 
the bastion was actually used for. Its triad of circular 
structures and many levels of flooring defy all the 
conventional answers already brought up. 

The initial effort to clear the structure of vege- 
tation and waste— and what seemed like excessive 
earthfill— led to the discovery of interesting architec- 
tural features, among them the top of a circular 
structure and a spiral staircase. The clearing opera- 
tion was done by some 50 volunteers from the Phil- 
ippine Navy "Seabees," organized into a task force 
by the Armed Forces Ladies' Committee with help 
from the National Museum and the National Histor- 
ical Institute. 

Clearing of the Bastion was going on when a 
Presidential Decree created the Intramuros Admin- 
istration on April 10, 1979. P.D. 1616 declared the 
site a historic zone and entrusted the Intramuros 
Administration with its management and mainte- 
nance. This mandate included the actual restoration 
of the Walls and rehabilitation of the "inner city." 
Several National Museum researchers and techni- 
cians in archaeology, under the supervision of Dr. 
Jesus Peralta, were detailed to supervise and docu- 
ment the site. The National Museum lent expertise 
in other fields-chemical and physical analysis, de- 
foliation and conservation of specific areas. 

As an archaeological site, however, a good part 
of the walls was already "disturbed." There had 
been previous excavations or disturbance to the soil 



layer, caused by generations of Manilans using the 
structure and building on it. Thus, the soil layers 
and these deposits of material culture were hopeless- 
ly mixed up, destroying whatever archaeological 
clues had been left there by previous inhabitants. 

Bastion de San Diego was exceptional because 
it had remained relatively undisturbed from the start 
of the twentieth century. The site had been back- 
filled to the top of the structure. Judging from its 
deposit— in parts, clayey, in others sandy— the earth- 
fiill must have come from dredgings of the Pasig River 
and the Manila Bay area. This backfilling, contracted 
to Atlantic, Gulf and Pacific around the first decade 
of the twentieth century, actually protected the re- 
maining structures from being disturbed. We do not 
know why the Americans decided to cover up the 
entire bastion. Aerial surveys before the destruction 
of Intramuros in 1945 show that low buildings oc- 
cupied the moxmd. They might have been used as 
offices of the American armed forces. General 
Douglas MacArthur had his headquarters at 1 Vic- 
toria Street, which is atop Bastion de San Jose; only 
a stretch of curtain wall separates it from Basti6n 
de San Diego. 

Parts of the Bastion east of the spiral staircase 
were dug up sometime in the 1960s by treasure 
hunters looking for gold bars supposedly buried 
there by Japanese soldiers who holed up in the Walled 
City in 1945. At a depth below five to six meters 
from the top of the structure, five empty tins iden- 
tified as sardine containers were found-waste mate- 
rial obviously alien to the general deposits excavated 
from this level. That specific treasure hunt ended 
without result. Still, rumors of buried gold bars per- 
sisted at San Diego up to 1981. By this time, those 
of us who worked at the San Diego diggings had 
learned to take such rumors skeptically. Reality was 
the dust and grit from the excavation that hurt the 
eyes and the lungs. In the simimer glare, the heat and 



JC INTRODUCTION 



dust became so nearly unbearable that San Diego 
became reputed as a hardship post among Intramu- 
ros Administration workers. It also became the train- 
ing ground for ordinary workers who there learned 
the archaeological skills of accessioning stones and 
documenting sites. 

Though difficult, work in San Diego was pro- 
fessionally fulfilling. It uncovered many previously 
unrecorded and unphotographed structures. It pro- 
vided us with data sufficient to debunk certam long- 
standing claims as myths, and to clear up other is- 
sues. The Basti6n did not yield cannon molds or 
even enough traces of ash or lead slugs in significant 
amounts to give archaeological support to the claim 
tiiat it was the site of Panday Pira's foundry-which 
^an de la Concepcion makes in his 1788 Historia 
ll^'Zl I^^^^ Spanish archives are more 

helpfu m this regard. A plan submitted by Engineer 

ftoT'?^?'^^"^^^ 

tIZZ i ' ^""^ submitted by Engineer 

founX ^^"^"^'^^^ locate where the 

a kttt? .HH ' P^^P^^- Moreover, 

LbLn T'""'^ Philip IV by Govemo; 

wfv S^^^^ Lara in August 1663 clarifies 

^bL.nc T "^^^ i^fonnaUy called the Fundicidn 
whiViT proximity to the foundry, from 

men a passageway apparently connected to the 
interior of the bulwark. 

r«va J^^^l « another problem the archaeological ex- 
it?t?f S^ Diego hoped to solve: the nature of 
was wh?^^^ Unquestionably, this site 

de Pnfo ^"^^ '^""^^ ^^^^^ of Nuestra Senora 

to built between 1585 and 1587. But 

1980 St acknowledge this fact (Gatbonton 
are the n.'' ""fJ ^^^^^ ^^^^^lar structures 
excaJatrr 

cLeT^^^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^he first layer of 

^ emates belongmg to the third circle. Both the cor> 

Whf and the project architect felt that 

S ' ^''T^^'^''^ ^^^^^ ^P^^il the structures. 
What IS certain is that the structures are the oldest 

Zr^L F^""^ ^"^^ ^^^o^d ^i^^^lar struc- 
Tl^^if^!^ \^^^ ^o^'^d the time 

that the Basti6n was being used as a cistern. 

THIS MONOGRAPH is meant to help document the 
archaeological excavation in Bastion de San Diego- 
to trace and analyze the various elements which 
come to Ught; and to offer physical and historical 
data for the conclusions the writer offers. On behalf^ 
of the Intramuros Administration, t wish to acknowl- 



edge the help of the researchers and technicians of 
the National Museum who worked on the project. 
Miguel Accion Jr. and Ernesto Maloles, technicians, 
and Helen Hosillos, artist-illustrator, stayed with the 
project from June 1979 to December 1982. Accion 
devised the special vertical grid system for recording 
the stones in situ. Hosillos improved the method of 
recording and Maloles invariably worked Saturdays 
to supervise the excavation. 

Armando Buenaventura Jr., stone technician 
of the Intramuros Administration, took charge of 
accessioning and logging dismantled stones; he also 
did some of the illustrations used in this mono- 
graph. Messrs. Fernando Alborque, Carlito Duatin, 
Geoffrey Garcia, Jaime de Leon and Eugenic Pana- 
ligan measured and plotted this part of the wall. The 
work of the Philippine Navy Seabees unit under 
Lieutenant Tomas Baino and that of the laborers of 
the Intramuros Administration should also be ac- 
knowledged. And thanks are due Ms. Asunci6n 
Albert, Ms. Celestina Boncan, Ms. Imelda Obusan, 
Ms. Rosalinda Aguilar and Mr. Carlos G. Manabat, 
all from the Research and Publication Division, In- 
tramuros Administration, who helped in collating 
and translating materials, compiled pictures and data 
needed for the archaeological research and writing 
of this monograph. 

I wish to acknowledge the work of the archi- 
tects assigned to restore Basti6n de San Diego, Mr. 
Felix N. Imperial Jr. of the Intramuros Administra- 
tion and Mr. Oscar Villaruz of the National Museum; 
also, Mr. Emilio Morales, M.S.C.E., for the recon- 
struction drawing of the roofing of Bastion de San 
Diego based on the archaeological documentation 
and the patient explanations given this writer regard- 
ing cisterns, and Mr. Octavio Barranco for his help 
in translating some of the original Spanish texts. 

I wish to record our debt to Minister Jaime C. 
Laya, Action Officer of the Intramuros Administra- 
tion, who indulged us (in both time and money) in 
our collective wish to carry the work through; to 
Dr. Jesus Peralta, who supervised the entire archaeo- 
logical operation and sat with us for technical discus- 
sions; to Mr. Alfredo Evangelista, officer-in-charge 
of the National Museum; and to Ileta Catedral 
Buenaventura, who supervised the production of 
this monograph. 



ESPERANZA BUNAG GATBONTON 
September 1984 
Intramuros, Manila 



Parti 

Historical Background 



During the governorship (1571-72) of Miguel 
Lopez de Legazpi, the founder of Spanijh Manila, 
the only fortification in the city enclosed what had 
been Rajah Sulayman's palisade of palm logs and 
banked earth— though even then the city limits ex- 
tended well beyond the Malay settlement to encom- 
pass what is today the Manila Cathedral site and ad- 
joining land up to where San Agustin Church still 
stands. 

In September 1 574 an impending attack by the 
Chinese Limahong spurred the Spaniards to work on 
the city's defenses. They hastily extended their bar- 
ricade from the main Fort Santiago at the mouth 
of the Pasig River southward along the seashore— 
• ending roughly where the Bastion de San Diego was 
later to be built. This makeshift wall was made of 
"boards, stakes and boxes and barrels filled with 
sand" (BR IV:32). After the successful defense of 
the city against the Chinese marauders, Spanish car- 
penters and Filipino laborers built a more sturdy 
wooden fort in its place (BR IV:37). How far this 
wooden fort ran, the archives do not tell us. How- 
ever, we may safely surmise it did not yet run the 
full extent of the walled settlement we know, for 
Francisco de Sande (1575-80) writes in 1576 that 
"he would not leave the friars [Augustinians] out- 
side." At this time the fort was described as "a pali- 
sade with joined keys, all along the shore and across 
the river; and a cavalier for defense— where some 
artillery is to be mounted . . ." (BR IV:79-«0). A 
cavalier is a raised earth platform intended for look- 
out purposes or gun emplacements. 

The following year, Sande gives us a complete 
description of the fortification: 

I have all the river staked in, as also the point by 
the sea; and have had the latter filled in with earth un- 
til it is all level I have had the fort of this city re- 



paired, building ramparts where they were lacking, so 
that one may walk around it on the rampart. I have 
covered the cavaliers, although communication may 
be had between them at a pike's length. . . . The floors 
[have] been covered with wood, so that the pieces of 
artillery may be dragged about more easily (BR IV:116). 

The cavalier on the southern seafront built by Sande 
antedates both Nuestra Senora de Gula and Bastion 
de San Diego, which was to be familiarly called Ba- 
luarte de la Fundicion, or simply, Fundicion, The 
other cavalier was located farther up to the east, 
near Bastion de San Andres. Its history proper be- 
gins with Santiago de Vera (1585-90), the governor- 
general who collaborated with the Jesuit Fray Anto- 
nio Sedeiio in building the first stone tower of Ma- 
nila. 

THE DEFENSES built up during Sande's time had 
been allowed to fall apart by the time of Vera's ar- 
rival. The new Governor found the main fort run- 
down; there were no defense positions in any other 
place, not even on the seacoast. Presumably, even 
the embankments stretching from the river to the 
sea that Sande had built had not been maintained; 
for Sande had been confident they would "always 
be stable, if repaired from time to time" (BR IV: 
116). The Spaniards may have found the work both 
tedious and costly. In an undated letter to King 
Philip, Vera writes of the daily repairs the old wood- 
en fort needed; stone and lime-much better mate- 
rials for fortifieation-are available. Fortunately for 
the new governor-general, he was not alone in so 
thinking. The builder Fray Sedefto and Domingo de 
Salazar, O.P., Manila's first bishop, thought similar- 
ly and supported Vera's new building policy. Bishop 
Salazar himself is recorded to have taken many banca 
rides up and down the Pasig River, looking for quar- 



2 BASTION DE SAN DIEGO 




.,f^" ^^^^ ^^^^^^^ ^'i- 

dias, Seville, presumed to be that of Fort 

Nuestra Sefiora de Gula, circa 1587, 

ly Sites (BR VII:205). Fray Sedefio is credited with 
having taught the FiUpinos and the Manila Chinese 
how to make bricks and roofing tiles. The plan for 
the Nuestra Sefiora de Guia, referred to as torreon 
or fortaleza in the Spanish texts, is also attributed 
to SedefLo (br xii:198). 

In an undated report to Madrid, Santiago de 
Vera describes this stone tower and attaches a plan, 
which presumably is that of Fort Nuestra Sefiora 
de Guia (Figure 1). The date tentatively attributed 
to the plan by the Spanish scholar LourdesTrechue- 
lo is 1585 (Trechuelo 1955:40). DeGuia has certain 
features that relate it to the present ruins of Bastion 
de San Diego-notably, the three circular structures. 
However, available letters of Vera and Gomez Perez 
Dasmariilas (1590-93), who succeeded him as Gov- 
ernor-General, quaUfy the extent of the plan's in- 
fluence on the present structure, and allow a more 
accurate dating of the stone tower. 

Besides the undated letter, two letters of Vera 
to King FeUpe ll--dated June 26, 1587 (BR V 1:299- 
300), and July 13, 1589 (BR VII:90^l)- touch on the 
building of the stone tower. The first of these letters 
indicates the project had already begun: "I have 
constructed a stone tower on the said beach . . In 
ordinary circumstances, the phrase "have construct- 
ed,'' amplified further on as "already built,'' would 



have meant the fort was finished or completed. But 
his letter of 1589 qualifies its meaning. 

The fort, which as I had written to your Majesty 
was being built, was shaken when about completed, in 

three places I am constmcting cavaliers which are 

to serve as buttresses for it. The principal part, that 
toward the sea, is finished (BR VII:90-9l). 

In the first letter, the Blair and Robertson transla- 
tion uses the term "stone tower" in obvious refer- 
ence to Fort Nuestra Senora de Quia; and "hand- 
some fort," which Vera distinctly locates down- 
stream by the river, is used in reference to Fort San- 
tiago. In the second letter, in which Vera writes of 
the fort that "was being built," the reference clearly 
points to Fort Nuestra Senora de Quia, since Vera 
qualifies it as the fort damaged in three parts, and 
needing additional cavaliers to support it. Thus, we 
know for certain that in the letter of 1587 the phrase 
"have constructed" does not mean the stone tower 
had been completed, since at the time of its partial 
destruction the project was only nearing completion. 
It becomes reasonably certain that the cavaliers were 
built after the tower had been damaged— "shaken"— 
they were a remedy called for by the situation and 
not by the original plan. 

A letter to King Felipe II by Caspar de Ayala 
on July 5, 1589 (BR VII:125), confirms the above 
conclusion: "The fort which is being built of stone 
has been fractured in some places. . . . It seemed as if 
it could be made secure by building three buttresses 
with cavaliers and this work is now being done." 
That both repairs and revision to the fort were car- 
ried out is confirmed by a letter of Gomez P6rez 
Dasmarinas in 1592, also addressed to the King: 

. . . Although that already built was called a fort 
it is not one, nor can it be of use; for it is but a large 
tower, badly cemented, and was falling in four places. 
It was braced by four cavaliers, and cost your Majesty 
a large sum, as I have written (br vill: 239). 

Apparently, more damage had been caused than orig- 
inally estimated, for a fourth cavalier was added to 
the three first discussed. 

The issue whether or not to build the type of 
stone tower Fray Antonio Sedeno designed had pre- 
cipitated a controversy among the Spanish residents 
of Manila. For while the stone fort was advanced by 
Manila's standards, it was not in keeping with the 
state-of-the-art of fortification then current in Eu- 



Historical Background 3 




Figure 2. The plan of Manila as drafted by Fray Ignacio Munoz, O.P., 
dated 1671, It shows the Bastion de San Diego in the familiar shape of 
the ace of spades. The first outwork of the fortification by the seaside 
is recorded here on the very site where the Fortin de San Pedro stands. 



rope. Juan Bautista Roman, provisioner of the Real 
Hacienda, expresses such an opinion in a letter to 
the King dated 1588, where he argues that a more 
modern building supported by three cavaliers could 
have been built, instead of the antiquated round for- 
tress (BR XXXIV :401). 

Thus I am inclined to think Vera's report was 
written in defense of such criticisms. Trechuelo her- 
self suggests the last paragraph of Vera's letter could 
have been a direct reaction to that of Roman's 
(Trechuelo 1955:43). It appears fairly certain Vera 
wrote the undated letter after 1587 and before July 
13, 1589. Both letters give explicit account of the 
events that had taken place-the building of the 
stone tower and then the damage to it even before 
it could be finished. In the light of these two letters, 
Trechuelo's tentative date for the undated plan 
(1585) is I think much too early, since the plan al- 



ready shows where the fissures or cracks-marked 
hendendura-aie located in the structure (Trechuelo 
1955:40). Then also, the plan already contains the 
drawings of the buttresses mentioned in the accom- 
panying account which prior to 1589 had not been 
built, as Vera himself attests (Trechuelo 1955:388). 
The omission of the cavaliers was precisely the root 
of the problem; as Ay ala points out, "if the cavalier 
had been built at first, much money could have been 
saved" (BR VII:125). Thus we may assume that even 
before its completion, inherent defects in the struc- 
ture had already posed certain problems. 

The stone tower's location near the waterfront 
was partly blamed. The boggy terrain could not have 
provided a stable foundation for such a heavy struc- 
ture. Even in the eighteenth century, when extensive 
backfilling near Bastion de San Gabriel had been 
completed, engineers would still be alarmed at the 



4 BASTION DE SAN DIEGO 



^ & Shi © S cJlo J? f?c.H 

pTi CASTILLO 6 CI u t>\vi:l\dk sAXriAoa<iuT estAAlA 




PECLARACIO 

', delos nombrcs. 
i to 

A njnt^vtrp ^CficrJu Purutfc! 

nOi ^JXi^Jtfcuihta las ktar^JntJ^ji!si k^tK 
TLlj^mni JtL mt£a tmanja . 
TLi^omik S l^h. pteama aid iarrj 
SiatuLiftstLfcamtmiaamt^LuJmrtfcMnones 

Ld^^uJUncubutti^uiritc efctrfa 

ESPLICACIOnT>EL 

J _ Pldi.o jufCTiot Jcht ju^ttJtf 
7 Pat^rrto y 
5 HI tam^ttr o muralla 



^ Q 



ittrUr hajj.jfalto 



Figure 3. Plan of Fort Santiago showing the outer moat and beachhead 
dated 17U ^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^^ Manila Bay. Juan de Ziscarra 



speed with which their stakes sunk in the ground 
(Trechuelo 1955:1 32). What had "shaken" the struo 
ture might have been its weak foundation. Vera's 
own account attributes th^ damage to earthquakes. 
But there are no supporting accounts that refer to 
any ''great earthquakes" having occurred during 
that period. 

Its round form was another defective factor. It 
was not specifically stated why its shape had caused 
damage, but one can perhaps infer that its heavy 
weight and round form caused rapid sinkage. The 
use of too little cement compounded the problem. 

The plan appears to have incorporated changes 
and additions to the original structure. For instance, 
the cavaliers and ramparts were clear additions to 
the original structure, while the two circular struc- 
tures could not have been part of the original plan, 
at any rate could not have been the same structures 
standing now. Vera refers to another round wall sur- 



rounding the patio. But even if this v^allhad existed, 
it definitely had nothing to do with the present sec- 
ond and first cylindrical structures. For their mode 
of construction and finish— even their floor levels- 
do not match those of the oldest structure. Accounts 
on the fortification available to us do not mention 
the inner circular structures. While archaeological 
excavation of the bastion exposed three circular 
structures, the two inner circles appear to belong to 
another period, of a later construction, having no 
relevance to the third outer circle. 

Historical documents, including maps and v^ork- 
ing plans, locate Fort Nuestra Senora de Guia exact- 
ly where Bastion de San Diego now stands. However, 
Robert Reed, who in 1978 wrote an intensive and 
masterly study of how colonial Manila developed 
organically in the context of Hispanic urbanization, 
locates Vera's stone tower where the Fortin de San 



Historical Background 5 



Pedro stands, and another stone fortress where Bas- 
tion de San Diego now is. This is clearly shown in 
the map re-created by Reed, which traces the devel- 
opment of the walled fortification from 1576 to 
1650 (Reed 1978:46). Reed also locates the stone 
breastworks from the Almac6nes up to Puerta Isabel. 
But as we shall see in Dasmarifias' letter of 1593, 
the breastworks extended only along the riverside 
frontage of the fort itself up to the moat. The river 
frontage further down stretching to Bastion de San 
Gabriel was left open, for it was considered secure 
enough (BR IX :6 1-62). 

Having relied on the same sources as Reed, par- 
ticularly Vera's letter of 1587 (see Appendix 1), I 
find it necessary to comment on his maps. In locat- 
ing the stone tower outside the wall and the stone 
fortress where San Diego actually stands. Reed may 
have been misled by the ambiguous use of the words 
"bulwark," "fort" and "fortress." The word "bul- 
wark" is used twice in Vera's letter, both times in 
relation to the wooden fortress the stone fortress is 
replacing: 

In place of the wooden fortress I am going to 
build a bulwark to defend the entrance to the river and 
the beach. . . . Along the riverbank, I have ordered 
stone breastworks to be built extending from the old 
wooden fortress on one side where the stone bulwark 
is to be built 

The translation makes no distinction in the use 
of "fort" and "fortress" (the latter, normally, is 
more than just a stronghold: it encloses a small town 
as well). The "old wooden fort," the "handsome 
fort," "fort," "wooden fortress" and "new fortress" 
—all these invariably mean the location of the old 
Malay stronghold of Sulayman. The orJy instance 
usage becomes defined is when "bulwark" is used 
specifically to refer to the structure that will defend 
the entrance to the river and the ditch. This usage 
also indicates that the bulwark and the fortress are 
contiguous: the bulwark being the frontage of the 
fortress on the promontory, while the fortress con- 
tains the bulwark between its peripheral walls. Thus, 
the "wooden fortress" of old was replaced by a 
strong fort with a bulwark; while the stone tower is 
none other than Fort Nuestra Seflora de Guia, built 
on the site of the southern cavalier constructed by 
Sande. 

It is important to note that outworks like rave- 
lins or tenaille and fortins did not appear in Plaza 
de Manila until the middle of the seventeenth cen- 



tury. Dasmarinas' report bears this out, when he 
narrates to the King that he had "reduced it [Fort 
Nuestra Seflora de Gufa] to such a shape that it will 
be of use, by joining to it a defense of cut stone about 
as high as the fort [Fort Santiago] and a rampart 
that commands all the country and part of the sea" 
(BR IX:61-62). Thus, it would beinaccurate to locate 
the stone tower outside the demarcated line of the 
fortification—that is, to locate it on the site of Fortm 
de San Pedro as Reed had done. By 1593 the only 
completed projects along the seacoast were the re- 
built fortress of Santiago with its stone bulwark and 
traverses; the curtain wall and the remodeled tower. 

Similarly, it is unlikely the ditch Vera had ex- 
cavated began from the beach close to Fort Nuestra 
Seflora de Guia and ran eastward,^ inland, to join 
what appears as a natural inlet from the Pasig River 
around the point where Puente de Espafia would be 
built, to the comer of Basti6n de San Andres, as in 
Reed's map. The distinguished Jesuit scholar and his- 
torian, Horacio de la Costa, interprets Vera's letter 
as does Robert Reed. This is evident in this paragraph 
from de la Costa's The Jesuits in the Philippines, 
1581-1 768, 

The system devised by De Vera and Sedefio was 
based on a tower at the southwest corner of the city 
from which light artillery could command both the 
beach and the southern approach. This was construct- 
ed first; wings with covered platforms for heavy artil- 
lery were added later. From this point a ditch was com- . 
menced to run east along the city line and then north 
between the city and the marsh to the Pasig River. It 
measured 34 feet across and was being dug deep enough 
so that even at low tide it floated the barges that 
brought in the materials for construction. It was not 
yet finished when De Vera reported to Philip II in June 
1597 (de la Costa 1967:109). 

However, Vera's letter appears to merit another 
reading in view of other data that come to light 
when we evaluate what had actually been accom- 
plished during that time, and in relation to other 
documents of the period. 

For one thing, the system of moats was not in- 
troduced until the first quarter of the seventeenth 
century, when ^RealCedula (1620) commanded its 
construction, in the face of the constant threat of 

^The general orientation of Intramuios locates the riverside as 
pointing northwards; Bastidn de San Diego or the tower points to the 
south while Fort Santiago faces west and Bastion de San Andres, 
eastward. 



6 BASTION DE SAN DIEGO 




Dutch invasion (Trechuelo 1955:55). Roman's com- 
plaint to the Kmg in 1 5 88 precisely laments the lack 
of "moat and platform" (traverses) to protect the 
settlement (br XXXIV:402). The first moats built 
outside the city were done during the administration 
of Alonso Fajardo (1618-24). They were meant to 
provide alternative waterways for the Walled City, 
should an enemy occupy the river mouth and suc- 
ceed in blocking communication and deliveries 
(Trechuelo 1955:55). 

Thus the building of the ditch-if it was ever 
begun-was never completed. (De la Costa himself 
notes the project had not yet been completed in 
1587.) We are left to conclude its finish was merely 
anticipated in Vera's report.The unexpected collapse 
of the tower may have reordered priorities in the use 
of both manpower and budget, necessitating post- 
ponement of the ditch- digging. 

Ineidentally, Governor-General Gomez Perez 
Dasmariflas never once referred to such a moat. His 
letter of 1 593 describes the fortification thus: 



And now this city is enclosed by sea and land, 
so that one small portion fronting the river is open be- 
tween that and the fibrt of the point. This has not been 
enclosed, because the open space is so small, and it 
fronts on the river between the fort of the point and 
another cavalier named Sanct Gabriel Which has been 
built there (BR IX : 62). 

The city, therefore, did not form an island as Vera's 
report in 1588 (BR VII: 58) claims. But that he had 
actually started construction of a ditch may be 
gleaned from another letter written by Dasmarifias 
in 1592. 4^ 

The creek of the sea stretches up to the fort, in 
all about one thousand brazas in length; and while it 
would not do more, it will serve as a very good trench 
(BRVIII:271). 

Dasmarifias was definite about the fort he was writ- 
ing about— "the fort at the point, where a fort was 
being built"— meaning to s^y. Fort Santiago, Thl3 



Historical Background 7 



"creek of the sea" may not have been a natural 
rivulet but one manmade; the one begun by Santia- 
go de Vera, which the new Governor-General finds 
sufficient for a trench. And whether the excavation 
began at FortNuestra Senora de Guia or at the pro- 
montory is immaterial, since it would serve no other 
purpose than to reinforce a reading of which fort is 
being identified; but to interpret it as located along 
the coastline would partly substantiate Vera's state- 
ment that "the ditch extends from the sea to the 
river." 

Could such a wide canal be built along this 
coastline? And why build a canal here when the sea 
offered natural protection? To the first question, the 
answer is that it would seem so. This opinion can 
be supported by the maps of Juan de Ziscarra dated 
1714 (Figure 3), of Antonio Fernandez de Rojas, 
1729 (Figure 4), and of Buzeta and Bravo, 1850 
(Figure 13); the first in fact already shows a moat 
around Fort Santiago. It is true that the earlier 



map of Fray Ignacio Mufioz, 1671 (Figure 2), fails 
to do so. His map sketches a narrow coastline and 
places the bulwark of Fort Santiago right on the 
tip of the promontory. Nevertheless, I think the 
evidence present in the succeeding maps is author- 
itative enough. The total span from San Diego to 
Fort Santiago's inner perimeter wall and moat equals 
approximately 5,500 feet— give or take, it covers 
Dasmarifias' "1,000 brazas'' The second question 
may be answered by the fact that in the sixteenth 
and the early part of the seventeenth century, the 
Spanish feared most invasion from the sea, and the 
purpose of an additional trench on this shoreline 
was to prevent the enemy from decamping as close 
to the walls as possible. The construction of moats 
along this very same shoreline in the seventeenth 
century was based on this same principle. Similarly, 
building a canal along the inner perimeter wall of 
Fort Santiago served as a deterrent to the enemy, 
denying them easy access to the walls. 




nj Cturpc ite (puartVa i dc jueco f9S76,pie4 cuhieM,^Mta e/naeim'eaffi i^/a .^vM/. 

\C\ ^mk ' • / . . . 



n\y.utrj)cat ijiianua i oejuta ,7a/i^fiiri auim,auna tinui,n-,t„n 



) i»ftt^r ,*eptu*' una it:.>mr 

Figure 5, The plan of 1 734 submitted by ValdSs Tamon illustrating the 
garita and two other structures on its rampart. The plazas baxas recorded 
in the O 'Kelly plan of 1770 already appear here. 



8 BASTION DE SAN DIEGO 



Having cleared up the physical location of Fort 
Nuestra Senora de Gula and the circumstances at- 
tending its construction, we have another historical 
aspect to discuss- the exact nature of the renovation 
or changes Dasmarinas introduced into the structure. 
There is need for such an evaluation, because of the 
different impressions given by written accounts con- 
cerning this single renovation. 

The Blair and Robertson translation of the 
Morga chronicles of 1609 sxmimarizes Dasmarifias' 
activities in this manner: "His first labor was the 
walling. ... He razed to the ground the fort of Nues- 
tra Senora de Gula" (BR XV:66). Morga's own text 
in the Retaiia edition reads: arraso de los altos la for- 
taleza de Guia, que hauia su antecessor. . . . (Morga 
1910:22). In 1 698 Fray Caspar de San Agustin, S.J., 
gives this account: Fundo Santiago de Vera una her- 
mosa Fuerga de piedra a la parte de tierra . que 
puso por nombre N, Senora de Guia, sitio muy im^ 
portante de fortiflcar ...en que la Oudad estaba 
sm murdlas; las quales edifico su sucesor el ano de 
^^'^'^^ Fuerga. . . (San Agustm 



The meaning of "razed to the ground" appears 
consistent with the usage of the word arraso (to de- 
moUsh, to raze, to level), and also with San Agustln's 
demoliendo. The ambiguity exists in Morga's phrase 
arraso de los altos, which could mean demolished 
either from the top or at the top. Blair and Robert- 
son chose the first meaning, but Dasmarinas' own 
account (also translated by Blair and Robertson) 
causes some doubts about the accuracy of this trans- 
lation. Excerpts from his letters of 1592 and 1593 
give the following accounts: 

Although that already built was called a fort, it 
is not one, nor can it be of use; for it is but a large 
tower, badly cemented, and was falling in four places. 
It was braced by four buttresses which were called 
cavaliers . . . Everything is now being rebuilt in order 
to put the fort in good condition (BR VIII:239). 

and 

This fort having fallen, not having been proper- 
ly constructed and so that it was of little or no use, I 
have reduced it to such shape that it will be of use, by 




■ • -^^.-JfeL,^ .M Ue^.i*' 

Figure 6. Plan submitted by Tomds de Castro y Andrade showing the 
f^/f*^^y>f^»rlngthe British Occupation. indicmng se^^Vaf- 
fected by BHtish bombardment. Presumably submitted after the British 
Occupation. 



Historical Background 9 




Figure 7. Plan submitted by Feliciano Mdrquez dated 1767 showing the 
state of the fortification after the British invasion. 



joining to it a defense of cut stone, about as high as 
the fort and a rampart that commands all the country 
and part of the sea^iX:6l-62). 

Despite the word **rebuilt" m the first letter, 
flie second one makes explicit the fact that the fort 
was not completely demolished: it was only "re- 
duced" to a more convenient shape and joined to 
the curtain wall. Thus, it would seem the free-stand- 
ing remodeled fort was, in Dasmarifias' time, joined 
to the encirchng fortification and had its heiglit re- 
duced to that of 2-1/2 estados, or 4.37 meters.^ 
Santiago de Vera gives the height of the embrasure 
as 2-1/2 estados and that of its wall as more than 5 
brazas, or 9.15 meters^ (Trechuelo 1955:385). In 
the same relacidn, theheightof the tower is given as 
8 brazas, representing perhaps, the combined meas- 
urement of the embrasure and the wall— the differ- 
ences in the given measurements might be explained 
by Vera's vague estimate as indicated by his use of 
"o mas, " or more. 

Juan Bautista Romin calculates the height of 
the stone tower as 7 brazas, or 12.81 meters. This 
more or less fits the measurements given by Vera, if 
the height of the embrasure is added to that of the 

1 estado is equivalent to 2.7 yards. 
^ 1 braza is equivalent to 6 feet. 



wall. It indicates that Dasmarifias knocked down a 
good nine meters of the tower. 

Santiago de Vera describes the stone tower as 
having two stories. The upper floor was used as quar- 
ters for its garrison and storage for provisions and 
ammunition; the lower portion with its adjoining 
courtyard was useless for either lodging or storage 
despite its roominess, because of the hot and humid 
cUmate. He mentions the vaulted casemate and the 
thick beams used on the first floor that gives ade- 
quate support to the walls even in case of artillery 
attacks. There was supposed to have been another 
circular wall surrounding the patio within the tower. 
To Vera's account, Romdn adds a depreciatory de- 
scription of the tower, referring to it as a "a round- 
ed pile of stones in the old style, having seven arms 
on top, covered with tUing" (BR XXXIV:401). Morga, 
more helpfully, names the facilities it contains-a 
well, a court, quarters, magazines and workrooms. 
He also adds, "It has a traverse extending to the 
beach, on which are mounted a dozen large and 
moderate-sized pieces, which command the bay and 
sweep the wall, which extends along the shore to 
the gate and to the fort of Santiago" (BR XV1:138). 

Though these accounts do not pve us a clear 
picture of the tower, Roman's comment regarding 
the "loopholes" suggests these were some of the 
features corrected by Dasmarifias, adding instead 



10 BASTION DE SAN DIEGO 



ramparts from which artillery fire could be maneu- 
vered to the enemy position. That such corrective 
measures had been carried out may be gleaned from 
Morga's mention of the traverse from which posi- 
tioned artillery commanded a sweep of the bay up 
to Fort Santiago and the Gate of Puerta Real. What 
remained then of Vera's handiwork would be some 
2.62 meters of the round fortification. Possibly the 
four buttresses were in time removed, since the new- 
ly built curtain wall would have made them super- 
fluous: the curtain wall by itself was able to pinion 
the structure to the rest of the wall. 

The third circular structure is positioned well 
within the present bastion; practically three-fourths 
of the quadrant remain outside the curtain wall. 
Proceeding on the premise that today's walls follow- 
ed the original (inner) peripheries defined by Das- 
mannas, It would then foUow that the curtain ex- 
tending from Fort Santiago to Bastion de San Diego 
onto Puerta Real affected the northwestern and 
northeastern cavaliers. It becomes possible to think 
that Dasmannas further modified the Fort of Nues- 
tra benora de Guia by removing the four protruding 
cavaliers while keeping the retaining ramparts, so 

gular ^"^^ ^""'^ ''''^ ''''''''^ ^""^ quadran- 
A panoramic view of Manila painted on the Ud 
ot a chest kept in theMuseo de Arte Jose Luis Bello 

Ni^ct^'t" ^ ^^^i^^' shows the Fort of 

mestra Senora de Guia-not with rounded sides but 
with a rather rectangular flattened exterior. If this 
rendering can be credited with historical accuracy 

Dasm^rT. ''^ '''^ ^^PP^^^ the idea that 

^eZT^l '"'^''"'^ protruding cavaliers but 
S t 'TT^ converting them to traverses. 
rounH^H . ^^"^^^f«^i^ntly changed the original 
ounded shape of the tower. The Puebla vista pos- 
sibly depicts Manila after the fire of 1603 , the period 
followmg Governor Dasmarinas, when no major 
changes were done in Bastion de San Diego itself.^ 
Governor-General Francisco Tello ( 1596-1602) and 
Governor-General Pedro Bravo de Acuna (1602-06) 
did no more than raise the height of the walls of the 
entire fortification. Succeeding officials attended 
to the repairs and general improvements of the walls 



^pe Puebla panorama shows the city already rebuilt with fh. 
stone churches of San Agustm (1607), San FraSo O 6n9\T^^^ ^ 
cathedral (1614)^ identifiable. The moat betwJ^n B s'^^ T ITn 
Gabriel and Bastion de San Andres appears operational. It may have 
extended farther up. No outer defenses are recorded -which olnZ- 
ly dates this earher than Sabiano Manrique de Lara (1653-63) The 
pamting also records the location of the Parian across the Pasig River. 



but concentrated on rebuilding other parts of the 
walls, especially Fort Santiago. 

During the administration of Don Diego Fajar- 
do (1644-53), many changes were introduced into 
the bastion; by which time it had lost its formal 
name of Fort Nuestra Senora de Guia. Being acute- 
ly aware of impending Dutch attacks, the new gov- 
ernor-general commanded his sargen to-major and 
commander of the garrison to exert every effort and 
spare no expense in making the walls of the city im- 
pregnable (BR XXXV: 253). 

The letter of Fajardo's successor, Sabiano Man- 
rique de Lara (1653-63), to the reigning monarch 
on August 3, 1663, informs us of Fajardo's contri- 
butions. The stretch of walls running between the 
bulwarks of San Diego and San Nicolas de Carranza 
(Bastion de San Andres) was considerably broaden- 
ed; but Fajardo left the old walls intact, embedded 
between new adobe facings of equal thickness. This 
reconstruction left the bulwarks on opposite ends 
much recessed. To integrate them into the new cur- 
tain, these bulwarks were also extended outward, 
so that they jutted out of the main wall. San Diego's 
shoulder and ear facing the open terrain to the east 
measured 421 feet, or 126 meters, after its exten- 
sion, while its seafront dimension reached 339 feet, 
or 101.7 meters, much less than its opposite side 
(Trechuelo 1955:391). 

But, apparently, Fajardo for all the improve- 
ments he made, still left much to be desired— having 
failed to provide facilities for lodging the troops and 
the artillery. The Bastion was, nevertheless, impres- 
sive for its time-"a regal work, and the largest of 
its kind seen in these parts" (BR XXXV: 253). The 
new works were badly affected by the earthquake 
of 1645, whose shocks reduced Manila to a pile of 
rubble and dust. 

Thus, Manrique de Lara faced ten years of re- 
building ahead of him. So dedicated was he that de- 
spite debilitating attacks of rheumatism, he would 
help in the physical labor of actual construction. 
Manrique de Lara had the entire structure of Basti6n 
de San Diego raised to 25 feet, or 7.5 meters. He also 
built a gala, or gorge, within the interior of the bas- 
tion. It measured 18 feet wide, or 6 meters; on top 
of it, looking over the casemates, the open terrain 
and the Plaza's interior, a watch tower, or garita, 
was erected. 

The map drawn by Antonio Fernandez de Rojas 
(1729) shows San Diego in its familiar shape of the 
ace of spades— with a long unbroken parapet and 
several structures, representing perhaps, the lodging 



Historical Background 1 1 




Figure 8. Plan submitted by Dionisio O 'Kelly showing important features 
of Bastion de San Diego, acknowledging the existence of two subterra- 
nean courtyards described as "tombUke md airless, " 




Figure 9. One of the submerged courtyards 
that coincide more or less with the bobeda 
illustrated in the O 'Kelly plan of 1770, It 
faces to the north and probably connects 
through an underground tunnel to the exit- 
way along the curtain wall toward Bastion 
de San Jose, 

Figure 10. This opening is located on the 
wall contiguous to that shown in the pre- 
vious picture. It is oriented to the south 
and is connected to a narrow passageway 
with an archway at the end. 



12 BASTION DE SAN BIEGO 



quarters of its troops. The ruins of Sedeno's tower— 
the circular structure— is shown integrated into the 
new bulwark; half of it juts outward from the in- 
terior curtain like half an orange or half-moon. A 
bird's-eye view of the circula^r tower is given so that 
only the northeastern view is seen. It shows three 
separately roofed buildings, entrance to one being 
on the left. The middle ground cannot be read clear- 
ly. Still, we are reminded of Morga's description: 
"It has its own courtyard, water supply and lodging 
quarters; there are also a magazine and workshops 
inside" (Cummins, trans. 1971:282). 

On the same plane as the terreplein, one sees 
a spiral staircase leading into the yawning chasm, an 
arched opening meeting it at the base of the stair- 
way. Along its eastern flank by the curtain wall, a 
stair leads down into the grounds of the Fundicion. 
At the base of the stair, slightly flushed to the left, 
is a building abutting a series of structures all roofed 
under the stretch of wall that encloses the Fundi- 
ci6n's courtyard. All face the interior Plaza. 

Two subterranean courtyards are located close 
to the orilUons; atop the bulwark, two squarish 
buildings are at the beginning of each oriUion. The 
roundish garita is somewhat flushed away from the 
pomt of the bulwark. But right at the tip, one sees 



a cannon pointed toward the sea, one of the 16 
mounted on its parapet. 

The shape of the bastion introduced in the 
mid-seventeenth century was greatly influenced by 
the design of Errard de Bar-le-Duc, engineer to Hen- 
ry Navarre, and the modifications of its flank, made 
perpendicular to the line of the curtain wall, were 
an influence derived from the works of Count de 
Pagan of France (Bush 1903:436). 

Basti6n de San Diego remained in this condi- 
tion until the British invasion of 1762. Finding the 
moat in front of the bastion quite dry and the Bat- 
tery of San Gregorio in disrepair and unmanned (it 
stood where the Legazpi monument now stands), 
the British launched their attack from the church 
of Santiago, some 230 yards southeast of the bas- 
tion. For several days, 24-pounders battered the 
southeast face of the bastion and the curtain wall; 
they breached it on the twelfth day of the siege, Oc- 
tober 6. Some 400 British soldiers stormed through 
the breach straight on to Calle Real, virtually un- 
opposed (Bush 1903:441). 

Gomez reports that the British repaired San 
Diego. Because of their short sojourn in Manila, these 
repairs may have been limited to repairing the crum- 
bled walls. They also demolished the churches of 




Figure 11, Plan of the fortification showing profects already implemented 
including the recomtructed^ntdi of BasH6n de San IM 



\ 



Historical Background 13 



San Juan and Santiago, long a subject of controver- 
sy between the religious and the military govern- 
ment. They also razed several hotises built dose to 
the walls. 

The plan by Tomds de Castro y Andrade (Figure 
6) indicates the areas affected by the bombardment 
It only emphasizes the structure of the bulwarit it- 
self, showing it simply terraced with no indication of 
the old tower. Tliis is also the case in the maps of 
Mufioz and of Buzeta and Bravo. The final stages in 
the rehabilitation and completion of Bastion de San 
Diego are limited within the years 1767 and 1785, 
as borne out by the maps drawn during this period. 
These are maps drafted by military engineers, who 
would take charge of repairing the walls: Feliciano 
Marquez, 1767; Dionisio O'Kelly, 1770 and 1771; 
Thomas Sanz, 1778, AprU and November 1779, 
1784 and 1785. 

The map of 1 767 (Figure 7) signed by Marquez 
is important to this study because it records no 
change in the bastion since the immediate post-Brit- 
ish period. The maps submitted by O'Kelly (Figures 
8 and 35) show the circular ruins of the old tower 
marked "F" in the first plan. Another structure, 
marked "D,'' indicates the location of a vault de- 
clared useless for being tomblike and airless. It also 
includes two other structures, which also appear in 
the plan of 1731 of Tonifisde Castro y Andrade. La- 
belled plazas baxas, they would approximate the 
interior courtyards of the Basti6n de San Andres. 
The latter, however, though submerged below the 
terreplein, is elevated from the present street level. 
San Diego's low courtyard located on the southwest, 
parallel to its flank, is on the same level as the pres- 
ent street. Archaeological excavation confirms the 
existence of one such plaza baxa \ that supposed to 
exist on the east side has not been verified, as this 
part has caved in. The existence of the old tower's 
ruins is confirmed in the maps submitted by O'Kelly 
and Sanz (Figures 8 and 11). Nowhere in the suc- 
ceeding maps of the walled fortification would ap- 
pear the cistern excavated in the archaeological ex- 
ploration, represented by the inner circular struc- 
tures. A microfikned document on the fortification 
at the Ateneo deManfla Library gives a cliie to what 
may have happened. 

This document is dated \1 6A-Plan formado 
en virtud de provideficia gubernativa del estado que 
tenia la Plaza cuando la tomaron los Yngleses acom- 
pana otro plan del nueva fortificationes (Plan com- 
missioned by the government on the condition of 





Figure 12. Plan of Bastion de San Diego 
detailing its parapets submitted by Thomas 
Sanz dated 1778, 



the Plaza when the English captured it; it is accom- 
panied by another plan of the new fortifications). 
Copia sacada del Archive de la Cap.^ GenJ de Ma- 
nila en Febo de 1842, (Copy was taken from the 
Archives of the Captain General of ManUa in Febru- 
ary of 1842.) The document largely deals with the 
changes proposed by Engineer Miguel Antonio Go- 
mez to the military authorities for approval of His 
Royal Majesty. The passage that is of interest to this 
study reads as follows: 

En el baluarte demarcado con la letra Fmepa- 
rece muy util se practique un cahallero alto con varios 
subterrdneos aprueba de bomba para los fines ya ex- 
presados en los senalados con la letra H sepuedenprac- 
ticar dos grandes aljibes o sistemas lo que traera gran^ 
des beneficio a laguamicion en la plataforma circular, 

^ In the bulwark marked with the letter F, it seems to me very 
useful to execute ahigh cavalier with various bombproof underground 
passages for the ends aheady expressed ; in those noted with the letter 
H, two big water tenders or cisterns can be built which should bring 
great benefits to the garrison in the circular platform. [Translation 
mine.] 



14 BASTION DE SAN DIEGO 




Figure 13, The map of Manila according to Manuel Buzeta and Felipe 
Bravo, dated 1850, It shows the seashore with its moat and esplamdes. 



The archaeological excavation in Basti6n de 
San Diego confirms the existence of several under- 
ground passages and the three circular structures. 
The third outer circle, the oldest, presumed to hold 
the ruins of Sedeno's tower,^ may have been the cir- 
cular platform discussed by Gomez in his Memoria. 
The site designated by the letter **H" may have been 
the two inner circular structures, which, in the anal- 
ysis of the National Museum team responsible for 
the excavation, functioned as cisterns. Unfortunate- 
ly, the actual site of the letter "H" in the Gomez 
plan cannot be categorically pinpointed, because the 
accompanying location plan had been irretrievably 
lost. 

A note at the end of the Gomez manuscript 
recovered from the Archives of the Governor Gen- 
eral reads: "Se ha omMdo poner cajutla explicmidn 

^Because of structural constraints, the tfctual excavation did 
not rea<* the lower level of the third circle. 



del plan que se fi&bkt en esta memoria y esta cogido 

en el expedient e, por haberse colocado en pap el vo- 
lante en el mismo piano que va suelto, " The note, 
signed by Antonio delglesSas Oft February 14, 1842, 
says that the plan, drafted on loose flysheet, was 
no longer attached to the job description when the 
papers were found. (It is significant to note that the 
National Museum team reached their conclusion— 
that the circular structure represented a cistern— 
before the discovery of this microfihned data.) 

The subsequent plans mn Mle fortification of 
the Walled City of Manila give no information about 
the cistern. Its importance to any fortification dur- 
ing any siege is pafamouftf . Although Intramuros 
is surrounded by bodies of water, these were hardly 
the source of potable water. Individual water wells 
in private homes could not be counted on to give 
adequate supply in an emergency. Only Fort San- 
tiago was equipped With its own cistem. This fact is 



Historical Background 15 



documented in the Ziscarra map and indicated in 
the 1 771 map of Dionisio O'Kelly as aljibe arruina- 
do, or cistern in ruins. We know for a fact that in 
the early period of American occupation, the new 
colonizers depended on the well of San Agustin 
Church for drinking water, as old-time residents had 
depended on it for water supply during a dry spell. 
The Americans estimated that the well had a capac- 
ity of 65,000 gallons (Lyons 1923:8). The activities 
assigned to the proximate vicinity of the bastion 
were such that a great deal of watersupply was need- 
ed. There were large retinues of soldiers billeted in 
the cuarteles, or garrisons, nearby. It was only logical 
that engineers would realize the need for a cistern in 
this area; the old well that had been dug here during 
Sedeno's and Vera's time would have become ob- 
solete. The round form of the inner bulwark lent 
itself to the thought of converting this into a cistern 
by which rainwater could be stored during the wet 
months. 

The plans of 1778 and April 1779 submi^ 

ted by Thomas Sanz (Figures 11 and 12) confirm 
O'Kelly's works, providing the additional details of 



the parapets on the bastion's topmost elevation and 
the reconstruction of the garita, which had been 
felled by the British. The plan of 1779 is specially 
useful, as it gives the exact location of the foundry 
and the refining plant, both outside the bulwark it- 
self. What appears to be a ramp is indicated at the 
point where the curtain wall begins. In the 1729 
plan of Valdes Tamon, the same space is shown a 
darker shade, practically sandwiched between the 
walls of the Fundicion and the adjacent building. 
Thus, we cannot be certain if the shading was meant 
to indicate a ramp or the shadow of the building 
beside it. That there was once a ramp here would 
have only been logical, because it would have made 
the delivery of artillery to the top of the bastion 
much easier. Except for the spiral staircase imme- 
diately to the left of the main entrance, there was 
no other way to reach the top of the bastion from 
the interior. Artillery must have been hauled up 
through a ramp on the north end, or an improvised 
one constructed over the eastern stairway. At any 
rate, the casemates on the ground floor of the bas- 
tion built during an eariier period were akeady ob- 




Figure 14: Mrial photograph of prewar Manila showing 

with th^Mmm Hotel and the BasttSn de San Diego occupied ^ymih^^^^^^^ 

structures. The headquarters of General Douglas MacArthur arejwwn 

squatting on top of Bastion de San Jose, The <^^^'l^^'J'i^''%^^^ 

Lourdes, the Recoletos, San Francisco, the Venerable Orden Terce^^ 

San Francisco (vot), and the dome of the San Juan de Dios chapel are 

visible. 



16 BASTION DE SAN DIEGO 




Vi 



r.r/)^\/ L ofBasUon de San Diego and the surrounding 

bar^^^^^^^ ^^f'^' ^"^^^^^ bore the brunt of the bom- 

oaramuu. From among the ruins, one fails to identify the north garita. 

solete and were walled in from the outside by blocks 
01 adobe. The main entrance to the interior of the 
bu wark must have been on the ground facing Mu- 
raua Street, an opening which exists to this day. 



Summary. Basti6n de San Diego had its beginnings 
in the old tower of Nuestra Senora de Guia. The 
tower was renovated and lowered by Governor-Gen- 
eral G6mez P6rez Dasmarifias, who connected it to 
a newly built curtain wall. Diego Fajardo had it en- 
larged, pushing its configuration out of the enceinte 
Mannque de Lara completed its transformation into 
the shape of the ace of spades, adding a watchtower 
and a gorge. The structure was once again raised to 
a height of 25 feet, or 7.5 meters, stiU almost half 
the tower's original height during Vera's and Sede- 
fio's time. 

The archaeological excavation of the Basti6n 
de San Diego, covering the period from 1979 to De- 
cember 1982, established the following facts: 

1 The unexcavated portion below the exposed level 
of the outer circular structure and the casemates on 
its street level may have been part of the original 
Vera-SedeSo tower, with possible improvements in- 
troduced during Manrique de Lara's time. 

2 The construction of the secoiid and fiirst eireiilar 
stmetSi^es is not Gojiti^poraieous with the older 



structure, being differentiated from the third circle 
by its finish and mode of construction. 

3 The terra-cotta finish of the masonry of the sec- 
ond and first circles appears to have been applied for 

waterproofing. 

4 Brick tiles were introduced in the flooring of the 
innermost circle so that it may act as filter from un- 
derground impurities. 

5 No trace was left of the circular wall that had 
supposedly surrounded the patio of Vera's time. The 
present inner circular structures have floor elevations 
that fall at 3.65 meters below the present street level. 
The latter coincides with the flooring of the third 
outer circle. 

Thus, the history of the Bastion de San Diego 
is brought to our present time. What decisions the 
restorers of this bulwark, the most enigmatic so far, 
make are crucial. It is hoped that they will be able 
to come to terms with the various, and sometimes 
conflicting, features of the structures. It would be 
most regrettable if in the reconstruction, present- 
day restorers overbuilt in order to meet the new funo- 
tioTls assigned to the structure. And it would be 
equally regrettable if the old cistern were reactivat- 
ed, since it would serve no useful purpose now, and 
in the end would erode the structure. It should be 
enough that it exists to illiistrate a point of history. 



17 






Figure 16 Top view of the stairwell built 
within the wall of the third circular struc- 
ture. 



Figure 17. the original structure, this 
narrow archway led to the patio. When 
the outer patio was backfilled with some 
1 56 meters of sand, part of this doorway 
was blocked. Marks on the doorframe in- 
dicate that U was fitted with a door. 

Figure 18. ^ view of the stairwell. Acro- 
posts support some of the loose stones of 
the structiire. Numbers ofie and two in- 
dicate missing stone members of the orig- 
inal winding staircase. 



/ 4- 






Figure 19. This straight stair v^as added to 
the structure at a much later period (see 
reconstructed documentation of the spiral 
staircase early and later period, below^. It 
led to a ledge and a low open^g Mat leads 
to the staircase by the manhole. 



EARLY 





LATER 



Figure 20. The reconstmeted Srm^ of 
the spiral staircase, showing its two stages 
of development. In the early period, the 
winding staircase goes all the way to tke 
ground floor to a doorway leading out to 
the patio. In the later period, the mid-sec- 
tion of the winding staircase was removed 
and a straigh t stair consisting o f eigh t steps 
led to a ledge with a low opening toward 
the staircase by the manhole. 



Figure 21. Casemate No, 1 falls within 
the north quadrant It is the onfy casemate 
that still looks out to the open field, un- 
obstrmted by the confining wall of the 
bulwark. 




Center station: S 87* 
5 E Depth 3,65 m. 
Distance 26.50 from 
D.P. 

Sealed with adobe 
blocks 

Sealed with adobe 
blocks with traces of 
iron bars 

Basis a fall measure- 
ments. 



Figure 23. Casemate No. 2 has a deep 
crack running through its ceiling. It is simi- 
lar in construction to casemates 1,3, 7, 8, 
9 and 12. They are characterized by a wide 
opening that narrows down in the interior. 
All have lookout windows, though most 
of them are now sealed with adobe. Their 
floorings are paved and leveled. 



20 



Figiire 24. Casemate No, 3, 




Figures 25, 26, 27. Casemates Nos. 4, 5 
and 6, all located on the southwest quid- 
rant, are simply arched chambers. AH have 
the narrow apertures mentioned in Ro- 
man's description of the old tower. They 
have tatkt arches but narrower width. 



Casemate No. 5 has a gradually sloping 
floor, which could have been used for push- 
ing the cannon up the ramp. It appears to 
have all the features of the older construc- 
tion, even the paving outside its chamber. 




Casemate No. 6 appears in a 
"disturbed condition. " Its 
opening has been partly seal- 
ed by adobe blocks from floor- 
ing till midway of the arch. 
Soil fills its inner cavity, in an 
attempt, perhaps, to raise the 
flooring. On the other hand, 
the flooring of casemate No. 4 
follows the style or manner 
of the newer casemates. 



Figure 28. Casemate No. 7 has 
been totally obstructed by the 
spoke built right through its 
center. Like casemate No. 3, 
grooves on the outer wall by 
the entrance may be seen. 



24)8 



Figure 29. Casemate No. 8 
manifests the same deep cleav- 
age that has marred its other- 
wise perfect condition. The 
wall of one of the spokes part- 
ly encroaches on its opening. 




22 



Figure 30. Casemate No. 9. 

Figure 3 1 . Casemate No. 1 0, which appears 
to belong to the same period as 4, 5 and 6, 
has a split-level flooring. The outer cham- 
ber is on the same level as the ground floor 
but its inner chamber has a deep trough 
several meters deep. Its arch is also semi- 
detached from the wall, revealing a tiny 
archway leading upward toward the spiral 
staircase. The entrance of the outer cham- 
ber has deep grooves which might have 
held some kind of door. 





0 




SECOND CIRCLE 
THIRD CIRCLE 
DIVIDING WALL 




Figure 33. Bastidn de San Diego shown at the ena on 

1982. Besides the parapet and the lone garita on t"f "" emplacements 

other structures appeared as the soil fill '^f'^'l^Z-rkand the three cir- 

on the east orilUon, stairs facing the ^'P^f'^'^fZ horseshoe staircase 

cular structures. Below the '''''Pi""* .''ZZJici^M^^ 

the spiral staircase, the three sets ^/_f ™f ,7/^,.^^ courtyard 

of the thirdandsecondcircle.eat^ua^^^^^^ „orth 

to the west and the archway and stairs oy 

comer. 



GARITA 




CRENELLATED PARAPETS 




Figure 34 The 1778 plan of Thomas Sanz illustrating the crenellated 
parapets, a touch of modernity introduced after the British Occupation. 




^ . r 1770 confirms the exis' 

Figure 35. Engineer Dionisio 0*Kelly's plan // rf ^^on in 1731; the 
tence of the plazas baxas documented by Valdes torreon an- 

ramp appears for the first time on the north circle denotes 

tiguo is defined by the circular structure. Area beiow 
the location of the old foundry. 



SEA 



CASAMATA (?) 



GARITA 




PLAZA BAXA 
CASAMATA (PJ 





OR WELL 

jHp OPi'^iNAL TOWER 



Figure 36. The plan of Valdes Tamon ignores ^^^^^^^^ I^I^I^hT^^ 
Fort Nuestra Seflora de Guia but documents the plazas oaxab, 
and two other structures on its rampart, 
the cistern. 



SEA 




SUPPORTING BUTTRESSES 
(INTRODUCED SOMETIME 
IN 1589) 



POZO OR WELL 
THE ORIGINAL TOWER 




Figure 37. The plan of Nuestra Sefiora de Gida showing the four sup- 
porting buttresses and cavaliers. The two inner cylindrical structures in- 
dicated here have no relation whatsoever to the circular structures of 
the cistern. 



Part II 

Methodology and 
Excavation of the Structure 



The national museum normally uses the grid 
method for mapping and documenting its archae- 
ological sites. The grid is a device by which an area 
to be dug up is divided into equal compartments in 
a checkerboard manner with balks separating each 
segment. The method gives archaeologists a com- 
plete longitudinal and transverse view of the hole. 
In the excavation of the Basti6n de San Diego, how- 
ever, this method proved impractical: the soil was 
very sandy and therefore erosive; so there was much 
shifting and movement of position. Stakes and poly- 
ethylene cords marking the squares were continuous- 
ly displaced, making it impossible to get an accurate 
readmg for location or depth. 

Because the grid proved impractical for the San 
Diego excavation, the archaeologists used another 
method. The "dog-leash" method proved workable; 
this involved measuring the location of artifacts and 
to distances from a single control point, and 

Z^^^'^^^^^" datum point. 

^ metiiod allowed greater mobility; workers no 

du?S>lT " ^'"^^ "^"'^^ 

dividS^St^f "'^^^^^tfdst^ctureis circular, it was 

Sl"Sr?S tTol t "^T 
tothefni,rP^«.r ^® ^^^^ was attached 

de ^^^^^^ ^^'^ ti^- cir- 

cle so that tlus partitioning device loomed over the 

entire structore all through the excavation m cord 
was onented toward thefourp 
thus forming the northeast, northwest, sout^easi 
and southwest quadrants. 

The center where thefour points met was call, 
ed the center station. To ensure its exact location 
workers tied a plumb bob on the suspended poly' 
ethylene cord so that it fell directly on the center 
station, represented by a wooden stake driven to the 
ground. This wooden stake was 2" x 2'* in size, 80 
centimeters long and pointed on one end. Only 20 
centimeters of its length protruded from the ground. 

This center station served as the secondary da- 



tum point. It was located at approximately S 75®E 
and was 26.50 meters from the datum point. The 
first datum point was identified by an iron bar pro- 
truding about 30 centimeters from the ground, di- 
rectly in front of parapet no. 1 . It was on this point 
that horizontal and vertical measurements of the 
excavation were based: about 4.95 meters above the 
present street level of the Bastion de San Diego area. 

Throughout the excavation, a K and E compass 
on a tripod remained mounted right above the cen- 
ter station. Another plumb bob was attached to the 
base of the compass, the plumb bob's tip directed at 
the center station. From this compass, the bearings 
of all excavated materials were read and recorded. 

To measure the distance of excavated materials, 
the zero point of a fifty-meter tape was placed on 
the center station, and the distance read and record- 
ed from the other end. The depth of the excavated 
materials was measured from the white-painted dot 
marked on the circular structure. This mark was 
located on the same level as the datum point. As the 
excavation deepened, the new level was added to 
the previous depth reading; repeated readings from 
the datum point could then be skipped. 

To achieve full control over the excavation it- 
self and the recording of the finds, the horizontal 
distribution of materials was visualized by depth. 
Several detailed maps of the site using a 1 :200 scale 
on a cross-section paper were drawn; on these were 
plotted all recovered materials corresponding to 
their depth. Each material was represented in the 
working maps by its assigned symbol. For example, 
working map, labelled sheet no. 1, contains the re- 
cordings of all recovered materials found from zero 
level (datum plane) to one meter below the datum 
point. This method of data gathering was applied to 
all working maps until all the artifacts were record- 
ed. The use of symbols helped make the working 
maps easily intelligible. A protractor was used in 
plotting the bearings of the specimens and a trian- 
gular scale served in plotting their depth. ' 



Methodology and Excavation of the Structure 33 




Figure 38. The compass and plumb bob are shown mounted on the cen- 
ter station located at approximately S IS'^E on top of the dividing wall. 



It became apparent in the course of the diggings 
iHhat tfie center sta^dn fell directly on top of the cen- 
tral portion of the dividing wall. Automatically, this 
became the center station. The partition halved the 
first and the second circle into a northern half and 
a southern half. The distance of the partition below 
the datum point was 3.65 meters. A three-inch nail 
marked the new center station. Black paint distin- 
guished its protruding head. 

All excavated specimens removed from the site 
were immediately placed in plastic bags with their 
corresponding data written on the bagging slips. 
Information contained in the slip included the stra- 
tigraphic position in the soil; relative position to each 
other; their association with other artifacts and from 
other archaeological features. Infonnation about the 
depth from the datum plane and Jhe distance from 
the center station was recorded on the plastic bag 
itself. Specimens of the same orientation and of 
similar type were packed in the plastic bag. 

Collected specimens were brought to the field 



station for sortmg and washing. Plain water and 
toothbrushes were used in the cleaning. Cleaned 
specimens, together with their respective bagging 
sUps, were ranged out in the sun to dry. Once dried, 
they were repacked with their bagging slips. Extra 
care was observed in cleaning fragile potsherds. Se- 
lected restorable potsherds were cleaned separately, 
the dirt gently removed from their surface. Imme- 
diate remedial treatment was done to avoid the loss 
of broken parts. Parts were joined with masking tape; 
once assembled, they were removed to the National 
Museum laboratory for final restoration. 

The accessioning of materials followed imme- 
diately; each item was given an accession code and 
number. For example, Bastion de San Diego's code 
is NCR-79R5D-1. NCR stands for the National Capital 
Region ; the second unit stands for the year in which 
the project started; the third "R5D" is the code let- 
ters for the site; and the fourth is the chronological 
order of the materials, represented by numbers, 
found within the excavated site. 



34 BASTION DE SAN DIEGO 



Documentation Symbols 
and Corresponding Equivalent 



Specimens 



Symbols 



Barbed wire 

Belt (buckle) 
Bone fragments 
Bullet shefl (blank) 

Cannon ball 

Cannon or lantaka (broken) 

Cast iron 

Chisel 

Clamp hook 
Clay mold oi lantaka 
Double-knit cloth part 
Copper stain encrusted 
Earthenware shards 
Glass fragments 
Iron slugs 

Laboratory microslide 
Nail (modem) 
Porcelain shards 
Stoneware shards 
U.S. coin 



P 

C 

B 

< 

o 

A 



CZJ 

> 

T 



W ^od^s were marked on the smooth 

bunace of the object with the use of crow quill pen 
and mdia ink. Sometimes, a narrow strip of white 
enamel pamt had to be appUed on surfaces that 



could not absorb india ink. These markings were 
normally applied on an inconspicuous part of the 
object to avoid defacement or erasure. 

During the early stages of the excavation, it 
had been necessary to remove the spiral staircase 
which provided direct access to the top of the bas- 
tion. Viewed from the top, the staircase was shaped 
like a horseshoe. It provided the only convenient 
entrance and exit way to workers hauling earthfill 
from the excavation area. It was thorouglily docu- 
mented and measured before it was dismantled: the 
stones numbered according to their original place- 
ment. Wooden platforms and gangplanks were built 
from the excavation area passing through the horse- 
shoe entrance to the portion outside the circular 
structure where the earthfill was unloaded and piled. 

Earthfill was removed with the use of shovels. 
Every 20 centimeters thick of sandy soil was sifted 
in a one-millimeter mesh wire. Extreme care was 
taken to maintain the soil in a horizontal level to 
allow the systematic collection and recording of 
archaeological data. A straight vertical soil surface 
proved impossible to maintain, because the soil easi- 
ly eroded upon exposure to the sun. However, at 
the depth of 3.39 meters below the datum plane, a 
sudden change of the soil texture from loose sand to 
compact son was observed. From hereon, ice picks, 
garden trowels, brushes and whisk brooms replaced 
the shovels. At times it had been necessary to apply 





Figure 39. 7%^ oHginal datum point is located in front of parapet 
No. 1 and U about 26.50 meters away from the center stJm 



Methodology^ 



and Excax^ation of the Structure 35 





Figure 40. Contour map of Bastion de San Diego before the archaeolog- 
ical excavation of 1979. 



a lead prober sounding to determine whether a struc- 
ture was close at hand. The recording process at this 
stage included photography, giving full coverage of 
the structure from all angles. 

As the excavation deepened, direct shoveling 
from the ground to the wheelbarrow became diffi- 
cult. Instead, soil was loaded into galvanized-iron 
buckets measuring about 27 centimeters in diameter 
and 19 centimeters in height. The bucket was tied 
to a 15-meter-long rope, then attached to a pulley 
suspended on the roofing support of the platform. 
The bucket was lowered to the excavation area, fill- 
ed with soil, then hoisted to the top of the bastion, 
where it was emptied out on a wheelbarrow. It was 
an endless process of filling up buckets and empty- 
ing barrows, which were wheeled out of the bastion 
to a deposit area. 



Plotting the walls 

From the datum point a vertical measurement was 
taken to measure the elevation of the structure to 
be plotted. This point was defined by two small nails 
embedded in the adobe block. The depth of the first 
station read at 3 meters, was marked with a piece of 
masking tape. From this station, a series of stations 
followed from left to right with an interval of one 
meter until the whole horizontal breadth of the 
fa9ade was covered. Each station had its own read- 
ing. For example: 

Station 0 Station 1 Station 2 Stations 

3 m.belowd.p. 3 m. b.d.p. Sm.b.d.p. 3 m. b.d.p. 

To ensure accurate reading in every station, a 
line level was used for each measurement. The line 
level is a plastic tube which measured 0.5 centimeter 



36 BASTION DE SAN DIEGO 



in diameter and 1 5 meters in length. The end of the 
plastic tube was placed directly on the point repre- 
senting the height of the datum point. Once the level 
of the liquid inside the tube had equalized, the point 
where the level stopped was marked. After this pro- 
cedure, the length of the nylon string (size 25) was 
attached horizontally from station to station. This 
string was subdivided into 10-centimeter intervals; 
each interval was marked with masking tape. These 
markings aided in plotting the actual size and ar- 
rangement of the blocks of stones on the wall. 

As in the recordings of archaeological finds, 
working papers were prepared first from cross-sec- 
tion papers. Data were noted down on the working 
papers drawn with fine horizontal lines, which rep- 
resented the nylon string, then subdivided into 10- 
centimeter intervals at a scale of 1 :75. Two persons 
helped plot the wall. The first one began measuring 
from the datum point to the left, then moved on to 
the right until the bottom was reached. He read the 
data aloud so that the helper could project and draw 
the information on the cross-section paper with the 
aid of a triangular scale. 

To measure, the zero point of the folding meter 
was placed on the nylon string, and every informa- 
tion obtamed in the actual plotting of the wall was 
transferred on the section paper. When all infoima- 
tion had been gathered and plotted on the working 
papers, all measurements and recordings were thor- 
oughly rechecked before the records were trans- 



ferred to tracing paper for finalization. This manner 
of plotting was used on all three circular structures 
and the nine spokes. 

All data included the lateral distribution of the 
adobe blocks, the cracks on the parts of the spokes 
and the chambers found below the third circle. The 
datum plane was always noted on every cross-section 
paper to ensure the accurate and exact depth of 
every excavated structure and materials. Eventually, 
these data helped determine how one structure re- 
lated to another and explain the chronological se- 
quence of activities which took place in this site. 

Distinctive code symbols were assigned to each 
of the nine spokes which identified a specific block. 
The code symbols consisted of letters, numbers, col- 
or schemes and geometric figures. All adobe blocks 
found within the same spoke bore their own assign- 
ed code symbols and were numbered so that the 
number of stones used in each spoke was accurately 
noted. All of these were marked down on the cross- 
section paper. 

During the documentation period, it had been 
necessary to decrease the height of each spoke by 
one meter. This was done to simplify recording time 
and to guarantee the safety of the staff. All the re- 
moved stones had been prerecorded in situ and taken 
to a storage hut. A full documentation of each adobe 
block had been entered into a logbook for reference 
and record purposes. Pictures, drawings, notations, 
condition and sizes of the stones were all recorded. 



Parapet Exterior Slope Covered Way 




Figure 41, Diagram of a typical cross section of a fort. 



Part III 

The Excavated Structures 



Within the bulwark of Basti6n de San Diego 
are three concentric structures, divided by a wall or 
traverse that runs through the first two circles, par- 
titioning them into a northern and a southern half. 
The first of these rounded constructions is circum- 
scribed within its center. Its northern half contains 
two arched windowlike openings, each one a meter 
wide with a similar but taller archway 1 .75 meters 
wide. This passage leads to the northern half of the 
second circle. Another archway and three more 
arched openings are in the southern half, approxi- 
mating the construction and dimension of those 
found on the northern divide. The inner and outer 
side of the first structure are plastered in pink terra 
cotta. 

The configuration of the first circle has an inner 
diameter of 8 meters with a wall thickness of 1.41 
meters. It lies 3.65 meters below the present street 
level of Muralla Street on the southern section. The 
top of the structure is some 2.10 meters above the 
street. It has a total height of 5.75 meters. 

The second circle has a diameter of 21 meters 
with a thickness of 0.90 meter. The top is placed at 
a distance of 2.50 meters above the street level and 
has the same floor elevation as the previous circle, 
giving it a total elevation of 6.15 meters. This time 
the terra-cotta finish is confined to its interior sur- 
face, indicating that water was stored within these 
first two structures. Found in its inner face and 
located at 27''E of the center station is a triangular 
duct, which was built at a higher level— 0.60 meter 
-from the four ducts built into the partition wall, 
elevated at 4.75 meters above the tiled flooring. At 
the bottom, to the east and west of the center sta- 
tion lay two iron pipes with a diameter of seven cen- 
timeters. Obviously intended as water conduits, they 
would have been useful during the dry months, for 
they are laid below the water table. Even now, clear 
water rises to the height of 25 centimeters within 
ten minutes after the section has been emptied of 
water. However, laboratory results obtained by the 
National Museum technicians from water samples 
show a high concentration of chloride, indicating 



contamination by sewage, other bodies of water or 
mineral deposits. Though unfit for drinking, water 
obtained from Bastion de San Diego could still be 
used for other purposes. 

The flooring of both circles is made of brick 
tiles. The wall which transects both circular struc- 
tures has a thickness of 1 .50 meters and runs off tan- 
gent from the eastern point, lying at a more wester- 
ly direction on the other end. Like the inner circles, 
its two sides are coated pink. 

The third circle circumscribed by the bulwark 
appears to have been built at a different period, 
much earlier than the other two structures. It does 
not seem to have any direct bearing on the architec- 
tural function of the two inner circles. Its adobe 
walls are not plastered with terra cotta, although 
the top of its structure bears the same timber-holes 
that the first and second circles also have. It has a 
height of 8.55 meters with a diameter of 32 meters 
and a thickness of three meters. There are 11 cham- 
bers found within its structure, evenly distributed 
into groups of threes among the northwest, south- 
west and southeast quadrants, and two more on the 
northeast where the horseshoe staircase, the main 
entrance into the Bastidn de San Diego, is located. 
The ground space sandwiched between the second 
and third circular structures is on the same level as 
the street, putting it at the considerable distance of 
3.65 meters above the tiled floorings of the first and 
second circles. 

The surface of the structure is marred by 
cracks, particularly in chambers two, five, six and 
eight. The cracks widen near the keystone and ex- 
tend upwards. The vaulted chambers have been seal- 
ed with adobe against the outside, but markings on 
the stone surface indicate that at one time, the re- 
cessed portion opened out to the surrounding marsh- 
land, the sea and the interior Plaza. Some had been 
barred with iron grates for security measure. Their 
construction suggests that they were originally in- 
tended as casemates. We note the sloping floor in 
some of the chambers, probably devised to push 
the cannon up its ramp, and the vaulted roof with 



38 



sSZibt fojo^u"" "^'''^ ^""'^^ ^i^so as it looked in 




Figure 43. The interior of the Bastion de San Diego presented a bleak 
view during the early stages of excavation. The Executive House is on 
the far right-hand corner of the picture, and to the left the concrete but- 
tresses of the Famantasan ng Lungsod ngMaynila cut through the Intra- 
mufos skyMne to HM& Mte earthqmM'daTnaged building. 



The Excavated Structures 39 



smaller openings to accommodate the muzzle of 
either artillery or musket (Figures 25-27). 

It is to be observed that chambers four, five 
and six (Figures 25-27), located within the south- 
west quadrant, appear to be of cruder construction, 
whereas the remaining chambers look better finished 
and have wider openings oriented outwards (Fig- 
ures 21, 23-24, 28-32). Again, the aforementioned 
chambers have narrow apertures that recall Romin's 
complaint: mere loopholes through which the artil- 
lery protruded. Beyond noting these differences and 
impressions, one has also to admit that there are no 
further corroborative data which could establish the 
age of the chambers. 

In view of the existing plans which identify 
the round structure as the torreon antiguo arruinor 
do, old tower in ruins (Dionisio O'Kelly, 1770, Fig- 
ure 8, and Thomas Sanz, 1779, Figure H), it has to 
be taken as fact that the round structure-the third 
circle-belongs to Vera*s and Sedefio's time. But in 
the light of Dasmarinas' and Manrique de Lara's re- 
ports, we have also to bear in mind that only the 
lower configuration remains as Vera's and Sedefio's 
handiwork. Dasmarinas reduced its height consider- 
ably and Manrique de Lara in his time, once again, 
raised its height, improving the bulwark of Fajardo 
that already circumscribed the old tower at that 
time. Rojas' plan of 1729 may possibly contain the 
innovations carried out by Manrique de Lara, for 
no intervening governors-general between 1663 and 
1729 worked on San Diego, excepting its routine 
maintenance. The 1734 plan submitted by Valdes 
Tam6n states clearly that his reconstruction efforts 
were spent more on Basti6n de San Andres and Puer- 
ta Real and its ravelin. For these reasons, I would 
include the spiral staircase and the subterranean 
courtyards as part of Manrique de Lara's accom- 
plishments, together with at least one watchtower 
mentioned in his own report and the gola, or pos- 
terior opening of the bastion, which to my mind 
represents the natural connection or outlet to and 
from the courtyards. He had also built lodging quar- 
ters for the soldiers within the encirclement of Se- 
defio's old tower (Trechuelo 1959:61). The total 
span of ground space from one wall of the third 
structure to its opposite side is 3 1 .5 meters, large 
enough to contain a small garrison. 

Thus, on the basis of such data, what we shall 
consider as the original structure will be limited to 
the lower portion of the third structure, specifical- 
ly the casemates. We have to consider that once the 
retaining walls and cavaliers were constructed on 



the outside for the tower's support, the casemates 
became obsolete as the retaining walls covered them. 
Dasmariiias, faced with this reality, concentrated his 
improvements on the top of the structure. The prob- 
lem of artillery range previously confined to the 
view of the casemates and the improbable height of 
the tower could now be solved with the adjustment 
of its height and the installation of ramparts. 

At the height of 4.37 meters, protected by 
solid ramparts, the Spanish defenders were given an 
advantage over the enemy. Indications are that Fa- 
jardo and Manrique de Lara followed suit, since 
most of their improvements affected the top of the 
structure and its exterior. Thus, whatever adaptive 
uses were assigned to the casemates were no longer 
in keeping with their original function. Structurally, 
they supported the upper story. Possibly, they were 
used for storage, shed or sleeping quarters. There 
had been an obvious attempt to keep the damp out. 
Timberholes found on the structure suggest that 
wood flooring had been laid down. These were 
found right below the flooring of the casemates, 
some feet above the buried arches, which in our 
opinion fonn the tower's foundation. 

These underground arches were found beneath 
casemates one and two, the horseshoe stairs and 
chambers 10 and 1 1. Only a thin layer of soil had 
been removed from this portion, leaving the crowns 
of the arches exposed. Only one of the five cham- 
bers was found opened: the rest are sealed with 
adobe, its vault probably filled with rubble (Figure 
45B). The frequent use of arches and rubble com- 
bination in many parts of the walls was a standard 
construction method adopted by the Spaniards that 
proved economic as well as time-saving. Adobe fac- 
ings on the walls were obviously employed to pre- 
vent erosion that could undermine its foundation. 

It would not be inconsistent to think of the 
underground arches as part of the foundation, even 
against the fact that some amount df sinking had 
already occurred, and that the present street level 
is up by at least a foot and a half. The foundation 
of the west curtain wall in the Paridn has the top 
segment of its arches above the street level, while 
the connecting piers and footings lay far below, 
which may account for the structure's stability de- 
spite the boggy location. It would be the same case 
for Bastion de San Diego, whose original tower was 
high; we can reasonably expect that footings for its 
underground arches went deeper than the present 
water table. Dasmarinas, while building Fort San- 
tiago, wrote to the King that he had provided a 



40 



^ AM U ABOVE ST. tEVEL Of SAN DIEGO AREA 




PBBSfsNT &T. UEVCL OF SAN DIE&O AREA 



Figure 44. This documentation of Bastion de San Diego shows its actual 
state at the start of the restoration program in 1979. 




Figure 45 B 



Figure 45, A and B. The 
documentation of the in- 
terior portion of the third 
circular structure showing 
the condition of the walls 
and casemates and the posi- 
tion of the buried chambers 
below the street level 



^r-taouL ISWC THE ST. LEVEL 

fH M. AMVaTHB ST. L&Veu 

/-S30I* ABOVE THE ST. LEVEL 



^^^^^ 





n Llvf I or MM MUO 



«Oe«k fOUMOAItON 



L...J L. 



I «66u 
4—— -—MO 



SIAkID m I 




- (tto emocmi* ploowno or 
TK« ctMTCR emeu 

\ 



The Excavated Structures 41 

foundation of one-and-a-half estado deep, a depth 
equal to its height (BR VIII: 271); the rest of the cur- 
tain wall all the way to the fortress of de Guia would 
have an elevation of two-and-a-half estados (BR VIII: 
239). The depth of its foundation is not given, but 
possibly the same depth provided for Fort Santiago 
was followed; the wall, after all, was not intended 
to support heavy structures. Dasmarinas, we know, 
had not . touched the lower section of the tower, 
why then had he chosen to lower it down to the 
height of two-and-a-half estados 1 Had he correctly 
computed that the tower's foundation was equal to 
that in depth, and such would be sufficient to hold 
the tower steady? 

The archaeological excavation shows that the 
flooring outside the casemate is 3.45 meters above 
the water table. It is estimated that the underground 
arches that provide structural support to the tower 
would be at least 1 .75 meters high, the average size 
of the casemates (Figure 45B). An adobe footing of 
at least another meter would be necessary to anchor 
its structure, adding up to almost the exact height 
of the lowered tower! Dasmarifias had shown him- 
self an astute planner and builder and it is likely 
that it was in consideration of the foundation— how 
much weight it could have supported-which influ- 
enced his decision to limit the tower's heighti:o 4.37 
' meters. The lessened height allowed the structure to 

settie evenly. 

Manrique de Lara's decision to raise San Diego 
some more does not conflict with the wisdom of 
Dasmarifias' earligr action, since by 1644 San Diego 
had become a full-fledged bulwark. Additional 
foundation and additional breadth have been added 
to its configuration. One is, therefore, speaking of 
a more solid structure, the circular tower embedded 
within the bulwark. Of necessity, the additional im- 
provements to the old structure were concentrated 
on the outer side of the rounded tower. For one, 
the shape of the bastion determined its outward 
thrust. The thick walls of the old torreon offered a 
ready-made wall for the earthfiU necessary to form 
the interior of the bulwark. 

ENTRANCE TO THE BULWARK, now, is through 
the opening leading directly up the horseshoe-shaped 
staircase, which in the beginning of the structure's 
history may not have been there at all, nor existed in 
the form seen today. There must have been another 
staircase which provided access to the top of the 
bulwark other than the spiral staircase on the east 



42 BASTION DE SAN DIEGO 





vS foI^%T 'y^'""^^'^^ structures in the early phase of the exca- 
vation. Some five meters deep of earth fill have already been removed. 



quadrant, far too narrow and constricted a structure 
to be practical in times of attack. In this respect, it 
might be worthwhile to consider that underneath 
the foundation of the present entrance exist an older 
foundation and flooring. How these relate to what 
might have existed here before, one cannot really 
ay. We note the obvious difference in the style of 
the straight stair in the main entrance now, and that 
of the wmdmg staircase mounted on its landing In 
appearance and construction, these stairs approxi- 
mate that of the spiral staircase in the east wall of 
the third circle. Did the original entrance also have 
a wmding staircase like that on the east wall? Had 
Its lower section been dismantled to install the 
straight stair more suitable for the bustle of activi- 
ties of a bastion? 

Where other access points were located may 
only be guessed at. Only Rojas' map of 1729 gives 
some indication of where this might have been: 
alongside the eastern posterior of the bastion and 
the east curtain wall. I suggest that at the time when 
the opening was introduced, it simply provided ac- 



cess into the inner patio (see Figure 53). In the map 
by Ignacio Munoz (Figure 2), the rampart of Bas- 
tion de San Andres appears to provide access to all 
the bastions by means of the connecting curtain 
wall. Fifty years later, we see in the pianos submit- 
ted by O'Kelly and Sanz (Figures 8 and 11) the ap- 
pearance of what may have been a ramp on its 
northern flank. Could there have been a similar 
structure here in earlier periods? The existence of 
the spiral stairway, the main entrance and ramp with 
the wider stairway by the east wall would have made 
a logical approach to the structure. One entered the 
interior patio through the archway. From the patio, 
one could proceed to the terreplein and parapets 
by mounting the spiral stairway. There were three 
possible ways to leave the bulwark. One could re- 
turn to the patio via the spiral stairway ; or use the 
steps by the east wall that led to the foundry ; or 
use the ramp that led directly to the street. How- 
ever, the steps along the east wall and the ramp 
parallel to it on the north side are not "archaeo- 
logical realities.'* They remain historical data but 



43 





Figure 47. Marks on the doorframe of the 
Bastion de San Diego indicate that one 
time it may have been barred with a swing- 
out metal or wooden door 




Figure 48. The main entrance of the Bas- 
tion de San Diego. On the wall of the stair- 
well, vestiges of the dismantled steps are 



Figure 49. Top view of the horseshoe- 
shaped stairwell On the landing are the re- 
maining steps, spread out like a fan. Ridges 
left on the wall show the spiral ascent of 
the missing members of the stairs, which 
lead to the top of the bulwitrk. 



44 




Figure 50. Back view of the 
staircase on whose upper land- 
ing a spiral staircase was built. 



Figure 51. The soil deposits 
surrounding the stairwell are 
being removed. The wtnding 
staircase is seemingly held 
together by a post, accenting 
its fantike spread. 




Figure 52. A makeshift wooden plank covers the stairs to facilitate removal of soil. 




Figure 53. These sketches show the differ- 
ent elevations within and without the 
structure relative to the staircase. The pres- 
ent street level is almost on the same level 
as the flooring of an earlier period, pos- 
sibly that of the 16th century. The present 
staircase appears to have been built on the 
older foundation. 

unconfirmed by archaeological findings. 

The established facts are the spiral stairway and 
the horseshoe-shaped stairs by the main entrance. 
But though these service ways complement one an- 
other, they were not built at the same time. The 
function of the spiral stairway has not changed but 
that of the main entrance had. The stairway it 
houses led directly to the top of the bulwark and 
practically blocked off access to the interior court- 
yard. This situation gives rise to the possibility that 
the cistern or the inner cylindrical structures were 
already built at this time, limiting useful giround 
space between the third and the second circle. Pre- 
sumably, the eight spokes were built soon after the 
cistern was built. It was probably found that the 
wall of the second circle was much too thin to be 
able to resist the outward push of collected water. 



The Excavated Structures 45 

The stairwell functioned like a buttress as well. It 
becomes logical to suppose that the stairwell was 
built shortly after the cistern. It is, therefore, of the 
same age as the eight spokes. The spiral staircase 
embedded in the third circular structure is much 
older, probably dating back to Manrique de Lara. I 
believe that the Rojas plan of 1729 already docu- 
ments it as well as the stairway on the east wall of 
the foundry. We lack hard evidence, though, on the 
basis of the plan alone, that a ramp existed here, 
but consideration of its importance to any military 
stronghold equipped with cannons makes it a prob- 
able certainty. The same plan already documents 
the bastions of San Andres, Dilao, San Gabriel and 
the Revellin del Paridn with ramps. 

THE EIGHT SPOKES, excluding "spoke D," built 
around the ground between the third and the second 
circles were constructed at a later time than the cis- 
tern. Their construction may have been a remedial 
measure that was resorted to in a hurry. We notice 
its crude finish in contrast with the smooth surface 
of the cistern. Later modifications may have proved 
unnecessary, since the buttresses served their pur- 
pose well. Again, the spokes were incorporated into 
the structure without regard for the casemates' de- 
sign and former function. In some instances, but- 
tresses cut into the vaults. Four casemates, six and 
seven in the southern quadrant and numbers eight 
and nine in the east quadrant, were affected. It is 
clear that by this time, the casemates had become 
moribund in so far as the renovation of the bastion 
went. 

It is the opinion of the National Museum team 
which excavated Bastion de San Diego that "spoke 
D" was not constructed together with the eight 
spokes. This opinion will seem tenable when the re- 
lationship of each of the various structures within 
this circle is analyzed. The spokes are evenly dis- 
tributed among the northwest, southwest and south- 
east quadrants, but except for "spoke D,'* none ap- 
pears within the northeast quadrant. The horseshoe 
staircase located in this section, of course, already 
provides adequate support, explaining in part why 
more buttresses were unnecessary. Then again, the 
function of the spiral staircase, which was to pro- 
vide access to the ground floor of the third circle 
from the top of the bastion and from the ground 
to the top, would have been negated had a buttress 
been added here. As shown in the illustration (Fig- 
ure 59), "spoke D" prevents access to the ground 
floor. This fact raises the possibility that the ground 



Figure 54. The interior wall of the 
first circle with a diameter of 8 me- 
ters. Picture shows the south section 
with the archway and two of its 
three windowlike apertures. A sup- 
position has been advanced that a 
water gate reaching up to the ledge 
of the aperture seals the archway. 



SPIRAL STAIR 





Figure 55. The exterior wall of the 
first circle showing the water mark 
indicating how high the water rises. 



Figure 56. This water duct is built into the dividing wall. 
Water from this duqt travels to the manhole by ''spoke D. " 



The Excavated Structures 47 



floor of the eastern quadrant was still being used 
when the eight spokes were built. It is to be noticed 
that even when the ground floor of this section was 
elevated with backfill, the hanging steps built led 
to an opening of the spiral staircase. And whereas 
O'Kelly's plan of 1770 records the bobeda useless- 
inutil-for being airless and tomblike, the structure 
was obviously retained. Perhaps, budget constraints 
or time pressure made its retention necessary, or per- 
haps, the vault and the adjoining courtyard offered 
a reasonable subterranean refuge and escape during 
intense enemy attack. 

I am incUned to believe that the spiral staircase 
led to the underground courtyard of the east quad- 
rant, which may have been connected to the bobeda 
and the adjoining courtyard. The present archaeo- 
logical excavation has exposed a nicely built court- 
yard with openings leading out of a tunnel-like pas- 
sage facing south, the other facing north. Both open- 
ings appear to have swing-out doors at one time, as 
evidenced by the holes made on the door frames for 
such a purpose (Figures 9-10). 

The position of the doorways of the courtyard 
are such that one faces south and flushed to the 
right, the other faces east. Though the archaeolog- 
ical team has not been able to penetrate this under- 
ground level, it appears logical to suppose that this 
opening leads to the archway excavated beneath the 
curtain wall leading to Bastion de San Jose. Along- 
side the archway is a short flight of steps leading to 
the bulwark and the curtain wall (see Figures 60 and 
6 1 ). At the mouth of the passageway facing south is 
another archway which could have led to the other 
courtyard that is documented in the piano of Valdes 
Tamon of 1734. The entire area behind the tower's 
old wall is now backfilled; we are unable, therefore, 
to prove that the courtyards are interconnected by 
means of this passageway. 

What, then, precipitated the construction of 
"spoke D"? The reason appears related to the draw- 
ing of water from the cistern. However, there are 
no evidences that can sustain any hypothetical 
reconstruction of the type of hydraulic mechanism 
installed in San Diego. But presumably, there had 
been such a device. It could have been as simple as 
a hydraulic screw or a type of water wheel-dnven 
chain of buckets (Camp 1963:151/157). The hy- 
draulic screw, also known as the "Archimedean 
screw" after its inventor, was a cylindrical device 
with a spiral line cut in its inside wall. By the prm- 
ciple of helical action, water rises from its immersed 



end as the cylinder is turned, bringing the liquid to 
the top end, where it spills out for collection. The 
manhole, the makeshift staircases and "spoke D" 
seem part of a larger riddle that, were all its parts 
present, could tell us how the v/ater was drawn and 
distributed to a collection point. 

The manhole in my opinion, is integral to the 
cistern (Figure 57). Its method of construction close- 
ly approximates that of the cistern; it is well laid and 
plastered with the same type of terra-cotta finish. 
Had it been any ordinary drainage outlet, then there 
would not have been any need to plaster its interior 
wall. The mouth of the manhole is also slightly tilt- 
ed to one side and not flatly laid out on the ground. 
It seems as though they were trying to prevent any 
build-up of water in its vicinity. It is a suspended 
construction, or so it seems, anchored only by the 
packed sand to the wall of "spoke D." 

The drain, approximately 2.40 meters long, 
burrows downward below the ground. The mouth 
of this arch is sealed. It measures approximately 
1.85 meters high, its length about 3.50 meters. A 
smaller arched opening is on the other end, scarce- 
ly measuring 1.52 meters or about five feet. Both 
chambers have floorings of fine sand. The smaller 
chamber is partly filled with sand. The chamber is 
oriented toward the spiral staircase and heads to- 
ward the direction of the east orillion. (This level 
below the ground has not been excavated. Data 
given here are a result of a cursory inspection made 
by an intrepid Intramuros Administration techni- 
cian Mr. Bernardo Baunillo, who essayed into the 
manhole to provide us with some information. Thus 
all the measurements are free estimates.) 

If we are to relate these underground vaults to 
the water distribution system, certain facts must be 
looked into that would substantiate such a conclu- 
sion. How significant is the plastering of the under- 
ground chamber to the idea that it was part of the 
water distribution system? What is the height of the 
chambers' flooring in relation to the old street level? 
Was sand purposely put there, possibly for filtration 
requirements, or was it simply part of the filling ma- 
terial which had caved into the chamber? Analysis 
of the sand should help solve the questions raised. 

There are three makeshift staircases near "spoke 
D." All three are built on packed sand (Figures 58 
and 59). Two of the stairs interface; one, consisting 
of two tiled steps, leads up to the wall of the cis- 
tern; the one opposite is located by the drainage 
hole and is propped by wooden stilts. The soil un- 



48 




Figure 57. Aperture of the manhole or tunnel located 
on the northeast portion of the circular structure. It 
has a vertical entrance, three meters deep, sealed off by 
a large stone slab. The tunnel runs northeast for only 
two meters, stopping where a cave-in has occurred. It 
is assumed that this opening had been pried loose in 
the last decade because of the presence of contem- 
porary materials like rubber slippers, plastic comb, tin 
cans and Garand clip. 



Figure 58 . The two sets of stairs facing each other with 
the "manhole'' between them. On the foreground, ex- 
treme right, is the doorway of the spiral staircase. The 
stone flooring belongs to an older period which is pos- 
sibly related to the spiral staircase. 




The Excavated structures 49 



O O P. 




KEY LOCAmON 




GOLF LINK ARE/^ 



Scale : \ : eoo 



Figure 60. Cross-section of chamber 12, 



Figure 61 . Curtain wall 



demeath was removed during the archaeological 
excavation in order to check if more architectural 
features were covered by the soil fill. Each step 
matches the height of the step on the other side of 
the wall, which leaves the impression that it used 
to be one continuous structure until "spoke D*' par- 
titioned it. 

It is to be noted that the foundation of "spoke 
D" only consists of well-packed soil fill; only its 
upper portion is walled by masonry. The steps lead 
to an opening of the spiral staircase which had been 
partly covered with adobe (Figure 59).. This was a 
doorway, stepping out to the ground of the third cir- 
cle, which before the advent of the cistern and other 
related structures brought one to the patio and the 
casemates. 

"Spoke D,'' on the other hand, may have been 
built as a retaining wall to dam the backfill holding 
the manhole and, the stairs. What is not readily dis- 
cernible is the logic behind the decision to build 
these structures on a hanging or floating founda- 
tion. As to the age of these structures, I am inclined 
to suppose that the underground vaults, the "man- 
hole" and the cistern are contemporaneous. There 
is no reason why the structure referred to here as a 
"manhole'* may not have been a free-standing shaft. 
The three separate stairs may have been hasty at- 
tempts at repairs when the original mechanism re- 
lated to the cistern was destroyed. It is noticeable 



50 BASTION DE SAN DIEGO 



that, progressively, work on the bastion had become 
sloppy. Thus, the steps, the backfill and "spoke D" 
are, in my personal view, of the same age. 

The spiral staircase, which I have freely attrib- 
uted to Manrique de Lara, may have been roofed in 
at one time. The top steps of the stair are tiled, 
while the midsection and lower steps are of adobe. 
Were they trying to keep the steps free from moss 
and lichen? This assumption makes sense only if 
the spiral staircase had been roofed in, which would 
mean that it was protected only from the occasional 
spray of rain that a strong gust of wind brings. On 
top of the structures, there are canal-like grooves 
that lead water away from the stairwell; although a 
short stretch of tiled drain actually leads to the 
structure (Figure 16). But we cannot ascertain the 
age and the function of this drain. The top of the 
bulwark had been used as an actual habitation site 
over the years, so that many of its original features 
may have been removed. I beUeve, however, that 
the staircase was roofed in, probably in the manner 
of the twm domes of Puerta Real, on a smaller scale, 
of course, or the garita, even. As I have also stated 
earher, it is possible that the spiral staircase may 
'L*'' ""^^^^ courtyards behind the wall of 
the third circle. In casemate No. 10, we note that 
Its arched structure is separated from the outer wall 
and below its floor level is a deep trough. Immediate- 
ly above this to the right, recessed behind the pier 
of the arch, is a low archway that leads somewhere 
beyond the structure, possibly down the courtyard 
below the east orillion. Unfortunately, because of 
the precarious condition of certain sections of the 
structure, the archaeological team could not exca- 
vate further on, much less enter some of the many 
crevices built into the third circular waU 



The cistern. The National Museum research 
team had advanced the theory that the inner cylin- 
drical structures of the Bastion de San Diego were 
used as a water reservoir at the end of the eighteenth 
century. The team reached this conclusion after ob- 
serving the nature and behavior of the cylindrical 
structures during the rainy season within the period 
of excavation. Toward this end, we worked collec- 
tively with Mr. Emilio Morales, consultant engineer 
formerly with O.A. Kalalo, Inc., the engmeering 
firm which undertook the soil boring tests on the 
site, to reconstruct from the various elements which 
emerged during the excavation, the hypothetical 
roofline of the cistern. 



The only texts from history we could draw 
support from are the 1764 memorandum of Miguel 
Antonio Gomez and the statement by Manuel Bu- 
zeta and Felipe Bravo ascribing the durability and 
strength of the fortress to certain amenities like 
"wells, cisterns permanently full of water, the abil- 
ity to maintain abundant stores at provision . . 
(Buzeta and Bravo 1850:215). Unfortunately, nei- 
ther historical record locates where these cisterns 
stood. Thus, we now have a reverse situation where 
a structure exists but is without a supporting his- 
torical account to explain its origin. The problem 
lies not in believing its existence or its function but 
in puzzling out when the cistern was introduced into 
the bulwark of San Diego. 

The early centuries of Spanish rule are disre- 
garded for dating the cistern. Had it been construct- 
ed in those early years, the cistern would have been 
given some passing mention in the early accounts 
of the Spanish settlers and certainly could not have 
escaped the documentary records supplied by the 
professional engineers who worked on the walls af- 
ter the British occupation. In all likelihood Gomez's 
proposal to build a cistern was deferred until a later 
period. In the post-British period the immediate 
concern was the repairs and upgrading of the facil- 
ities of the walled fortification. Up to the late eight- 
eenth century, the time of Gregorio Clavero, the last 
of the Spanish engineers to work on the walls, the 
main preoccupation was in building its defense 
and getting it ready for another possible breakout 
of hostilities among the European maritime powers. 
Not only the English but the Portuguese and the 
Dutch had long been interested in Manila. Moats 
were thus dredged and made fully operational from 
Bastion de San Gabriel to Fort Santiago. New out- 
works appeared-the remodeled Revellm del Paridn 
and the Revellm de los Recoletos; all the smaller 
bulwarks by the seaside were improved and new de- 
fenses added along the riverside, which was former- 
ly left virtually unarmed. For until the British came 
and conquered, the Spaniards may have thought 
of themselves as invincible and, therefore, never 
considered the possibility that the enemy could get 
farther than the seafront. 

As the Peace Pact held, the colonial govern- 
ment's thought must have shifted away from the 
walls circumvallating its capital city to dwell on 
civic improvements. With the increase of population 
within the Walled City and the variability of rainfall 
in that century, concern for water supply may have 
entered into its priority projects. Without enough 



The Excavated Structures 51 



SCALE: 1:75 METERS 
BEAMS. SOCKETS, POSSIBLE TIMBER HOLES llllU 



ENTRANCE AND EXIT 



FOUNDATION 
["OF THE 
2N0 CIRCLE 



w- _ 




Figure 62. Top view of circular 
structure. 



financial resources for complete replanning of the 
city, the conversion of any suitable structure for 
such a purpose must have seemed appealing. G6- 
mez's proposal apparently struck a sound note, for 
a cistern, or cisterns, were built. In the final years 
of the eighteenth century or within the first decades 
of the nineteenth century before the introduction 
of the Carriedo water system, cylindrical structures 
were added into the bulwark of San Diego. 

In the three years I worked with the Intramu- 
ros Administration, I had come across four sites 
where such deep wells or cisterns could have been 
built. These are the inner portion of Fort Santiago 
indicated in the 1714 plan of Ziscarra and the 1771 
plan of O'Kelly, as aljibe arruinado: that portion of 
the Maestranza beside the tennis court where the 
Intramuros Administration workmen, led by Mr. 
Jaime Reyes of the National Museum, excavated a 
circular structure which may have served as a cis- 
tern, and within the same Navy compound, where 
an alcantarilla still flows with cool and fairly clean 
water. Then, there is Bastion de San Diego itself, 
whose big circular structure's estimated capacity is 
1,938.636 M^. Bastion de San Diego may have been 



the ideal site for locating a cistern, for around ^ts 
peripheries were lodged the main garrisons ot tne 
artillery and the infantry. It was also farthest away 
from the riverside or source of potable water. Tfte 
weU within its original patio may have dned up oy 
this time; it certainly could not have provided or 
the need of large contingents of soldiers and c ti- 
zenry. Though we have no data on the average ram- 
fall of the eighteenth century and early nineteenth 
centuries, the records of the Manila Observato^ 
give readings of average rainfaU from 1865 to 18^8. 
It shows a marked variable pattern withm the Manila 
area. The year 1 867 yielded the highest ramfall with 
a total of 2,978.8 millimeters, with 1885 register- 
ing an all-time low in the 34-year span, with a read- 
ing of 906.5 millimeters. There were 198 rainy days 
in 1867 but only 89 rainy days in 1885 {Algunos 
Padres de laMision de la Compank 1900:82). Simi- 
lar droughts in earlier times may have affected the 
various waterholes of Intramuros and may have led 
to the construction of a large cistern. 

How do the inner cylindrical structures collect 
and store water? Three underground waterpipes 
have been built into the wall of the second circular 



52 BASTlbN DE SAN DIEGO 




Figure 63. This water pipe with a diameter 
of seven centimeters is found on the floor- 
ing of the second circle on its dividing wall 
in the west quadrant. 

Figure 64. These two tube pipes are located at the bot- 
tom of the second circle spaced at a distance of 20 

centimeters from the other. 

Figure 65. These two holes, also measuring seven cen- 
timeters, are located on the eastern comer of the sec- 
ond circular structure. No visible casing can be seen 
so that the actual purpose of the holes cannot be pre- 
sumed to be that of water conduits. Perhaps, they 
were clean-out holes plugged when not used for such 
a purpose. 




structure (Figures 63-64). Two are on the east side, 
one positioned at 20 centimeters above the other* 
another is on the ground floor of the west wall. The 
brick flooring is 25 centimeters below the water 
table, hence ground water can be expected to fill 
up to that level, at least. At high tide, sea water also 
invades the cistern, a factor which actually contrib- 
utes to its effectivity as a water reservoir. Since 
saline water is naturally heavier than fresh water, it 
settles below, while perched fresh water stays atop 
the salt water, thus rising high. But this clearly was 
not enough to fill the huge structures. The apparent 
source was rainfall. 

It can be observed that the upper part of each 
eylindrical structure has uniform holes, which, be- 
cause of their characteristics, have been interpreted 
as timber holes. Significantly, one notes that the 
elevation of each structure varies in height from the 
third to the 'first circle: 8.55 meters, 6.25 meters 
and 5.75 meters. The rather steep inclination that 
the timber holes project in relation to one another 
suggests that the holes probably held rafters or 
trusses to support a roofing structure with a pro- 
H0UBced pitch, then less sloping over the second 



structure. In this reconstruction, we visualize two 
separate roofing structures: one over the third outer 
structure with partial overhang extending ovef the 
second roof covering the middle structure at a lower 
elevation (Figures 66 and 67). 

The clue to this reconstruction comes from the 
placement of the timberholes of the second struc- 
ture, which are placed on the inner face, indicating 
that despite their alignment, the roofing structure 
was not intended to meet on the same plane. This 
solution appears tenable, as it gives plausible ex- 
planation to the existence of the pillars. We surmise 
from the remaining bases and four wholly extant 
pillars distributed around the top of the second 
structure that there were 22 pillars in all (Figure 69). 
The four extant ones have hole^ Measuring 30 cen- 
timeters wide and 90 centimeters deep (Figures 70, 
72-74). Holes are also found on either side of the 
pillars. Such findings suggest that imposts may have 
been planted on the pillars, while beams were laid 
along its side to interconnect one to the other (Fig- 
ure 70). 

The surviving pillars have a uniform height of 
1 .05 meters. It is safe to assume that the rest of the 



OBSERVATION end WORK PLATFORM 




-err 




f 




-trr 



Figure 67. Section drawing. 




Figure 68. The top section of the outer bulwark and the cistern showing 
the timberholes, pillars and dividing wall Roofing structure of the third 
circle rests on a post implanted on the pillar or colujmk 



TIMBER HOLES 




Figure 70. Drawing illustrates how the pillars and connecting beam - 
would look if they were reconstructed. This drawing is ^amim m^ 
ing evidences on the structure. 




Figure 71. Timber was laid along the timberholes to reconstruct the roof- 
ing structure of the second circle. In the first circle, beams were laid out 
only along the west and east corners^^f the strmtm^^ 
Hon platform, consisting of MfOO(Mm0^ ^J^^fe%p|^ w^rnn^ 
strueted. 





Figure 73. The height of this cohimn is 
1.08 meters and the entire body measures 
60 centimeters. Top of the colurfin has a 
circular hole measuring 30 centimeters in 
diameter extending downward for ad&ut 
P# eentimeters (see drawing}. 



Figure 74. This square hole is one of two 
located on either side of the column. This 
feature accompanies all the columns ex- 
cavated on top of the structure. Each hole 
measures about 10 cemim%t4m* 



Figure 72. The front 
V. side of the top portion 
of the column slants 
doy^nward ^^^ith a 
depth of 4 centimeters. 



9 



56 




Fipire 75. One of the four ducts found on the dividing wall 
Only one side of these ducts has spouts; the reason for th^ 
ZterattZ "I""'; ''"f ' """'''"^ ^«""'''« ^O ^ 




Figure 76. A triangular water duct located at N 27''e of the 




Figure 78. Waterway found on top of the 
third circle. The canal may have originally 
been covered with adobe. It may have been 
built to prevent build-up of water oh the 
top of the structure. 




Figure 77. A system of drainage found 
within the third circle's top wall Water 
drains out to the terreplein. The system 
may have belonged to the old tower. 



broken or missing pillars would have the same height. 
Thus, if such posts were added to the pillars, there 
would be a considerable clearance between this roof- 
ing structure and that of the next circle, leaving the 
space from the connecting beams to the base of the 
pillars open. If so, this was a practical ventilation 
de^ee, to minimize the build-up of moisture within 
the third circle by allowing air circulation. 

From the second circular structure to the first, 
the roof dant diminishes, leaving only a clearance 
of about 0.50 meter from the timber holes of the 
second structure to the top of the first circle. The 
gradual reduction of the roof pitch may have served 
to slacken the cascading water, hence curbing its 
tendency to create turbulence within the structure. 
The dividing wall may have helped diffuse such an 
activity, breaking the splash against its wall. 

The roof of the first circle rests on top of the 
structure or may have extended slightly on its edge. 
The outer edge of the inner circle, west and east of 
the dividing wall, has beams running through the 
structure. It is our collective opinion that these were 
no longer related to the roofing structure, but were 
used as observation plattfbrms with floorboards laid 
on its eastern and western corners running toward 
the point where the dividing wall declines by 44 
centiitieters from its height. To each side of the plat- 
forms, the supporting beams were left exposed (Fig- 
ures 66/71) to aUow water to fall into the cistern. 
The wooden beams may have also served as support 
for pulleys which may have been used for hauling 
iiccessive sediments during cleanout. 

The cistern complex consists of the first and 
second circles, with the first serving as its sedimenta- 
tion chamber. In this respect, the archways may 
have been fitted with doors that reached up to the 
ledge of the smaller apertures. Thus, there would 
be two additional windowlike openings when the 
water gates were closed, through which water spilled 
out to the second circle, which mainly stores the 
ground water conveyed by the underground water- 
pipes. The spoutlike ducts (Figures 75-76) on the 
upper part of the dividing wall may have served the 
purpose of equalizing water distribution. When the 
amount of collected rain water and underground 
water was higher in any one section, the excess spill- 
ed out to the other side, thus equalizing its load, and 
undue expansion of the wall on any one particular 
section was avoided. It is also possible that when 
excessive sediment collected, the water gates were 
opened to release the water, allowing the hauling of 
the sandy deposits by means of pulleys suspended 



The Excavated Structures 57 

from the beams overhead. 

Surrounding the third circular structure on the 

terreplein is a canal-like groove. The portion on the 
northeast section is still fairly complete, and here 
the stone arrangement on the outer edge is tipped 
toward the groove. Indications also show that the 
canal was previously covered with adobe stones 
(Figure 78). Simple tests were conducted to deter- 
mine the passage of water into the structure. Large 
quantities of water were poured into the canal which 
invariably traveled to the duct on the dividing wall. 
GurgUng sounds were heard around the "manhole." 
It was then supposed that water passing through the 
duct on the dividing wall inevitably ended in the 
"manhole." But it was not evident how the water 
reached there. That water was kept clean by a cover 
of adobe stones seems to represent an intention to 
conserve this water as well. Of course, one obvious 
reason for lining the top of the canal was to make 
it a more convenient walkway. 

On the interior wall of the third circle on the 
west quadrant, there is a series of grooves that leads 
to a duct, which we assume to be a drainage outlet 
(Figure 77). We could only listen to the sound of 
water trickhng down the structure. How its system 
operates is another matter that for now must remain 
a mystery. For to learn of its function and its value, 
one has to dismantle it. This would require such 
careful documentation and study and the supervi- 
sion of an archaeologist in removing and restoring 
the stones. Only in this manner could one guarantee 
its faithful restoration, and unless this was ensured, 
it would be best to leave it well alone. It had sur- 
vived several centuries of oblivion and neglect; it 
would be a pity to see it destroyed now by good 
intentions. 

CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS. The 
archaeological excavation in the Basti6n de San 
Diego formally ended in December 1982. Though 
many nooks and crannies still needed to be dug up 
and explored, the Bastion's precarious condition 
prevented us from further activities. The coordi- 
nated excavation and research have been able to 
define a probable time sequence in the development 
of the bulwark. The structure has been a veritable 
time capsule encompassing the years from 1576, 
when Francisco de Sande, third governor-general, 
first conceived of building a cavalier on the very 
same spot, to the present time. As we cleared away 
debris and sand, we were confronted with the struc- 
ture and we watched history unfold before us. By 



58 BASTION DE SAN DIEGO 



piecing together the historical evidences we encoun- 
tered, we were able to establish the following data. 
1 The lower portion of the third circle holds within 
its structure features which can be regarded as the 
oldest within the complex: 

a The casemates below may have all been con- 
structed during the Vera-Sedeno period. Further, 
casemates four, five and six of the southwest 
quadrant exhibit a different and cruder method 
of construction thought to be older. The rest of 
the casemates, including No. 10, which has the 
same shape as the aforementioned vaults, were 
remodeled and repaired from time to time. The 
first facelifting of the casemates may have been 
done during the administration of Sabiano Man- 
rique de Lara (1653-63). 

h The spiral staircase on the east quadrant and 
the spiral staircase mounted on the landing of the 
straight stairs in the main entrance exhibit the 
same mode of construction and may have been 
built at approximately the same period. Both 
were renovated; the staircase by the main en- 
trance may have been dismantled, but its upper 
segment was incorporated into the new staircase 
when this was built about the end of the eight- 
eenth century. 

c The subterranean courtyards documented in 
the pianos submitted by Fernando ValdesTamon 
m 1731 and 1734 are to be found by the north- 
west quadrant; the subterranean courtyard on the 
southeastern quadrant remains to be confirmed. 
d The subterranean passage documented by Engi- 
neer Dionisio O'Kelly as hoheda inutil exists and 
is located on the west quadrant. 
e Another passageway leading to the north cur- 
tain wall toward Bastion de San Jose has been 
excavated and may have been built at the same 
time as the bobeda. 

f The two inner cyhndrical structures were built 
late in the eighteenth century or about the turn of 
the nineteenth century. Contemporaneous with 
these structures are the "manhole" or water shaft, 
the underground chambers below, the horseshoe- 
shaped stairwell and stairs and the buttresses or 
spokes. 

g The crenellated parapets and the garita on its 
tip were from the period of reconstruction by 
Thomas Sanz, 1779-84. 

h The lone existing garita on the north flank may 
have been constructed either before or after 1 779. 
No plan documents the construction of three 
watchtowers on Bastion de San Diego. Accord- 



ing to the record of 1779 only one garita was 
reconstructed, that on the tip, leading us to pre- 
sume that the other watchtower left extant is 
from another period. 

/ The steps leading down to the reconstructed 
garita appear old. It is difficult, however, to de- 
termine its exact age, since they were found on 
top of the structure where many changes took 
place. 

Now that the difficult period of excavation has 
ended, the more difficult phase begins-that of res- 
toration. The Intramuros Administration has wisely 
concentrated on the outer walls to arrest the further 
erosion of the structure. The top of the bulwark 
approximates closely the plans of Thomas Sanz; 
therefore, it was his plan of 1779 which was follow- 
ed in the restoration of the crenellated parapets and 
the reconstruction of the watchtower at the tip. The 
decision to reconstruct this watchtower may be jus- 
tified in a way, since its existence can be supported 
by historical documents. When exactly had it dis- 
appeared from the bulwark after its 1779 reconstruc- 
tion, we do not know. Perhaps, it fell during one of 
the major earthquakes that hit Manila in 1863 and 
1880. Buzeta and Bravo bear out its existence in 
the configuration of their documented map printed 
in 1850— a protuberance at the tip of the bulwark. 
We know for certain, however, that it was no longer 
there when the aerial photograph of prewar Manila 
(Figure 14) was taken. 

The desire to follow various pianos of the for- 
tification and to reconstruct structures based on 
mere traces of ruins can trap the unwary restorer 
into historical fallacies. Such is the case of the new- 
ly built garita on the junction of the curtain wall 
and the east flank of the bastion. The decision to 
build a garita here seems to have been motivated 
solely by the archaeological discovery of a round 
slab of adobe planted in this section of the wall. 
No other evidence shows this slab to be the base of 
a garita. There are no pianos on hand to relate that 
round base to a watchtower. For one, its location- 
well within the curtain wall and away from the edge 
of the wall-seems inconsistent with the function 
of a watchtower. Neither do available photographs 
of this part of prewar Manila and after its destruc- 
tion by bombardment (Figures 14-15) show the 
structure. To decide on such scanty evidence that 
the round adobe slab represented the remains of a 
garita seems precipitate. Its reconstruction seems 
to have little basis in fact or history. For even the 
details of available plans must be confirmed by 



archaeological evidence. Without such evidence, 
any restoration may be faulted, its authenticity 
doubted. Such a kind of "restoration" would re- 
main, at best, an intelligent conjecture. 

The term restoration implies that something 
is put back into its original state. However, if the 
original state recorded in historical accounts has no 
ruins to speak of, then there is nothing to restore. 
What we have to consider is the structure qua struc- 
ture as it confronts us now. Therefore, one can say 
that no part of the wall can be absolutely dated to 
a specific period. Rather, it would be a composite 
of many features added on, altered, renovated, re- 
paired through the years and centuries. But the life 
of a structure ends as soon as it is declared a monu- 
ment. It becomes for all practical purposes "dead," 
in the sense that it ceases to relate to daily Ufe and 
activities— therefore no longer subject to further 
changes, excepting environmental ones. Thus, no 
other features may be added, unless made necessary 
by structural defects. 

A structure being "rehabilitated" for modern 
use may admit the minimal addition of modem 
conveniences, such as lighting fixtures or a ventila- 



The Excavated Structures 59 

tion system. In the case of Bastion de San Diego, 
conservation measures might necessitate the con- 
struction of a completely modem roof to protect 
the inner circular structures and/or a drainage sys- 
tem that would prevent flooding. A few of the 
spokes impinging on the casemates may even have 
to go, to show the architectural history of the struc- 
ture and to allow access to various structures— pro- 
vided the structural stability of the circular cistern 
is not affected. But obviously, either the indiscrimi- 
nate removal of architectural features or the addi- 
tion of new construction would violate the integrity 
of the stmcture. 

It is therefore imperative for the Intramuros 
Administration to formulate definite policies on re- 
storing the walls, to distinguish between "restora- 
tion" and "reconstruction" and to give particular 
thought to assigning new uses to a restored site. 
The new function would influence to a large extent 
the rehabilitation measures which will be needed. 
The role of archaeology in the overall restoration 
should be defined; its findings pursued with intent 
and purpose. For in the end, it alone provides the 
key to the past. 



i 



\ 

I 



I 



1 



Appendices 



APPENDIX 1 

Excerpt from "Letter from Santiago de Vera 
to Felipe II," dated June 26, 1587 

This city is located on a narrow piece of land, between 
the sea on one side and a river of considerable size, which 
flows through part of the city, on the other; while on another 
side is a swamp or morass. On the side fronting the sea is a 
handsome beach, extending two leagues to the port of Cavite, 
where lie the vessels of the Nueva Espafia line. Where the river 
enters the sea, the land forms a point, upon which is built a 
very small and dilapidated wooden fort. Neither on the sea- 
coast nor in any other part was there any defense. On this 
account, in view of our danger, I resolved to set about for- 
tifying the city, although the poverty of the city and your 
royal treasury could not assist me. I have constructed a stone 
tower on the said beach, near the city; and lower down, 
where it seemed more necessary, I am constructing a very 
strong and handsome fort, the plan of which accompanies 
this letter. In the three months while we have worked on it, 
I have the first story, where the heaviest artillery is to be 
placed, ready for flooring. God helping, I shall, I believe, 
finish it in a little more than one year from now. From this 
fort and beach near the sea I have dug a deep ditch, thirty- 
' four feet wide, which fills with the incoming tide, and even 
at low tide has sufficient water to float several vessels, which 
are used in carrying materials to this ditch to the said work, 
and for other important things. This ditch extends from the 
sea to the river, and at that side around the entire city, in 
such wise that the latter is an island formed by the sea, river, 
and ditch. In place of the wooden fortress, I am going to 
build a bulwark to defend the entrance to the river and the 
beach, which can correspond to the tower already built; and 
the new fortress will defend both sides, the ditch and the 
sea. Along the riverbank I have ordered stone breastworks 
to be built, extending from the old wooden fortress on one 
side, where the stone bulwark is to be built, to the ditch on 
the other side. With this, I think that this city will be well 
fortified; and it would be more so, if your Majesty were 
pleased to have us provided with a garrison of two hundred 
soldiers, already paid-as could be done, by the plan about 
which I have written to your Majesty, without spending any- 
thing from your royal estate, and without harm to natives 
(BR VI: 299-300). 



APPENDIX 2 

Excerpt from "Letter from Santiago de Vera 
to FeUpe II," dated June 26, 1588 

As I have advised your Majesty, I have, in anticipation 
of future contingencies, commenced a good stone fort in this 
city, which will be entirely completed within a year. I have 
levied taxes therefor upon the citizens and encomenderos; 
the Indian tributarios have each paid one real, while one per- 
cent has been collected for two years on the coin brought 
from Nueva Espana. I am sending to your Majesty the sketch 
and model of this fort; it is the strongest which has been 
built in the Yndias, although it is not of modem style. It was 
necessary to build according to the condition of the country; 
it is round in shape, high, and covered over so as to be more 
capacious. The climate is so hot, the sun so fierce, and the 
rains so heavy, that if the soldiers who must defend the place 
were not under cover they would perish from the heat, as 
would likewise those who should undertake to erect the fort . 
The stone for the most part of the rampart is so suitable in 
quality that, wherever a ball strikes, the wall remains unhur^, 
nor is any other injury inflicted. Thei. is no fear t^t an a^ 
tack by a battery can do as much damage as if the stone 
were h'ard and resisting. Hie baUs cannot be ^f^rTZ 
strike, without great difriculty,as the fort is on shor^^^^ 
the country is perfectly level. Within there is fresh running 
water in aiundLe; and in addition to that, whei^ve^^^^^^^^ 
digs, excellent drinking water is found. It is i^ipossible to 
und;miine the fort, because there is water around it at a 
distance of one or two varus* or even less m some places. 
The city is surrounded by water-the sea on one side; on 
another the moat, which extends to the river; and on stiU 
another side, the river itself Thus the city is on an i^and; 
and, with the other bulwarks and the wooden fort, which I 
have had repaired, this city is well defended, pro^dded we 
had sufficient troops and ammunition (BR VII: 57-5 8). 

APPENDIX 3 

Exceipt from "Letter from Santiago de Vera 
to Felipe II," dated July 13, 1589 

The fort which, as I had written to your Majesty was 
being built, was shaken, when about completed, in three 

*A vara measuies 33 inches. 



62 APPENDICES 



places by great earthquakes. It opened in one place more 
than a finger's breadth, although less in the others. To assure 
its safety and construct it in the modem style, although it 
was quite sufficiently strong before, I am constructing cava- 
liers which are to serve as buttresses for it. The principal part, 
that toward the sea, is finished; the other parts are com- 
menced and, God helping, will soon be completed. These 
will make it so capacious and strong that it can withstand 
any attack. I am sending the model, report, and account here- 
with to your Majesty (BR VII:90-91). 

APPENDIX 4 

Excerpt from "Two Letters from G6mez Perez 
Dasmarinas to Felipe II," June 20, 1593 

Your Majesty will have learned from my letters of the 
satisfactory completion of the enclosure and fortification 
of this city, since it was already walled from the new fort 
on the'point along the whole stretch of seacoast to the.round 
fort of Nuestra Senora de Guia. This fort having fallen, not 
having been properly constructed, and so that it was of little 
or no use, I have reduced it to such shape that it will be of 
use, by joining to it a defense of cut stone, about as high as 
the fort and a rampart that commands all the country and 
part of the sea. On the other side, I have built another ram- 
part, smaU and low, for the defense of the principal gate of 
the city, which has been built there under the shelter and de- 
fense of the protection of the high fortification; so that fort 
is now safe and useful. Afterward the work will be completed 
on the other side. I am sending an account of this. From this 
gate, the wall is being continued along the land side toward 
the river as far as its entrance, with the same thickness, height 
and shape as the other wall, and each with its traverses 

And now this city is enclosed by sea and land, so that 
one small portion fronting the river is open between that and 
the fort of the point. This has not been enclosed, because the 
open space is so small, and it fronts on the river between the 
fort of the point and another cavalier named Sanct Gabriel 
which has been built there. As these two are opposite each 
other and within easy distance, it is evident that no danger 
will enter by that place, for it is the best guarded and most 
secure. And, too, as this wall and fort have been built so little 
or no cost (BR IX:61-62). 

APPENDIX 5 

Exceipt from "Three Letters from Gomez 
Perez Dasmariilas to the King," June 20, 1592 

I began the fort at the point, where a fort was being 
built. I have made it with its curtains and traverses, placing 
the traverses symmetrically as regards one another. It is one 
and one-half estados from the ground and the foundation is 
of the same depth. It is from sixteen to twelve and eight feet 
wide on top, according to the plan. The creek of the sea 
stretched up to the fort, in all about one thousand brazas in 
length; and while it would not do more, it will serve as a very 
good trench. On account of this fort and wall I have increased 
the import duty here on all articles from China, such as pep- 



per and other things. Likewise, playing-cards were seized in 
your Majesty's name . . . (BR vill:27l). 

APPENDIX 6 

Excerpt from "Account of the Fort 
of Manila and plan that was sent by 
Doctor Santiago de Vera," undated 

"Relacidn del fuerte [de Manila] y planta del que em- 
bia el doctor Santiago de Vera, " Sin fecha, (A, G, /., Filipi- 
nas, 27), 

Hauiendo en esta Ciudad una fortaleza hecha de ma- 
dera que ultra de ser poco fuerte era menester repararla cada 
dia con mucha costa y trabajo de los ydios sic viendo La co- 
modidad que hauia de materiales de piedra y cal y la piedra 
ser la mejor que ay en el mundo para cosas de fortificacion, 
se trat6 de hazer una de piedra y juntos todos los capitanes 
para uer qu6 fomia se la daria uuo pareceres diuersos porque 
a unos parecio que se hiziese una fortaleza muy capaz y de 
quatro caualleros y si [se] supiera lo que agora se sabe, o se 
temiera lo que agora se teme assi se hauia de hazer pefro] 
como no se temia de enemigos de Europa, y que para los que 
ay aqui ahededor [no] era necessario fuerzas como las de 
alia, ni era bien obligar a S. M. a tener tanta gente o presidio 
en partes tan remotas adonde con tanta difficultad se trahe, 
parecio a los mas, y despues todos conuenieron en ello, que 
se hiziesse un torreon que con treinta o quarenta hombres se 
pudiesse defender y aunque no se sospechaua que pudiesse 
hauer bateria se le hiziesse la muralla, para todo lo que se 
pudiesse offrecer de doze pies en ancho y todo terraplenado 
hasta las primeras troneras que estaran dos brazas y medio 
de alto y desde alii para arriba subiesse la muralla del mismo 
grossor y fuesse La viuienda roto la gente y para las muni- 
ciones, que aunque en el medio del torreon quedauahar[to]/ 
espacio en lo de abaxo por ser la tierra humeda y calida se 
conseruan mal las cosas, y con esto quedaua harto espacio 
para la gente y segura de bateria aunque La uuiesse, por la 
muralla tan gruessa y de materiales, que dando La bala en 
ellos es ni mas ni menos [que] como si diesse en un terra- 
pleno que no haze mas que un agugero sin atormentar la mu- 
ralla y por esta causa y por escusar La mucha gente que una 
fuerza con gran plaza pedia, no se hizieron traueses; pero 
como aqui no hauia Arquitectos ni aluaniles que supiessen 
obrar y assentar La piedra y hazer bien la mezcla, sino indios 
(que aunque agora son ya mis maestros) entonces no lo 
sabian hazer por no hauerlo visto ni apprendido en su vida, 
fueron desplomando La muralla de suerte que aunque ella 
era muy ancha en lo alto vino a serlo mds, de lo que hauia 
de ser al contrario, y ansi hendi6 por quatro partes como en 
cruz para remedio desto se le hizieron quatro estribos que 
siruen de traueses como en la planta que va con esta relacion 
se vera y con esto y con descargar la muraUa hasta el piano 
de la habitacion ha quedado muy fuerte y segura y sube la 
muralla de doze pies de ancho y de cinco bragas o mas en 
alto porque tiene dos suelos uno es donde esta la artilleria 
y hasta 2M sube el terrapleno el otro es donde ha de ser la 
viuienda, y aunque es verdad que de cinco bra9as para arriba 



APPENDICES 63 



la muralla no es mas que de grosser de quatro pies per razon 
de no cargar mucho supuesto el sentimiento que hauia roto 
y parece que hauiendo cerco y plantando artilleria para batir 
podfa ser de mucho dano para los de dentro porque siendo 
tan flaco con la bateria lo podian arrasar; pero hay algunas 
razones con las quales se prueua que aunque de nueuo no 
se haga fuerza puede bastaresta.(Trechuelo 1959:385-386). 

APPENDIX 7 

Excerpts from a Letter of Governor Sabiano Manri- 
que de Lara to the King, dated August 4, 1663 

7 D. Don Diego faxardo mi antecesor por ser la frente 
de la campana la parte mas peligrossa por donde esta ciudad 
puede Reciuir bateria fortific6 su lien9o y baluartes San 
Diego y San Nicolas de carranga haciendolos mui capaces 
estendiendolos todo lo posible sacandomas afuera la cortina 
dejaiido embeuida en el extreme interior la Vieja que leuan- 
to al peso de la nueua cerrandola con sus contrafortes y te- 
rraplen dejando de cortina franca 1,316 pies con macisso en 
el piano y parapeto de 40 pies que en toda ella se puede jugar 
artilleria sacando de nueuo el baluarte San Nicolas que la es- 
palda y orejon que mira a la campana tiene 443 pies, y la es- 
palda con su orejon que mira al Rfootros443; Y el baluarte 
San Diego le estendio acia la parte de la mar todo lo que 
pudo que la espalda y orejon que haze frente a la campana 
tiene 421 pies y la espalda con su orejon que mira a la mar 
tiene 399 = Yen solos estos dos baluartes y cortina dejando 

APPENDIX 8 

The physical documentation 
of Bastidn de San Diego 



el de San Nicolas por terraplenar y acauar y ambos sin aloja- 
mientos ni forma para poder jugar la artilleria gasto mas de 
300,000 pesos. 

9 Con la obra deste lienzo y baluartes dejo mi antecesor 
embeuidos en lo yntemo los antiguos y apartada la boca del 
trauez de la cassa mata que mira a la plaia de la cortina an- 
tigua, mas de quarenta pies y comenzada vn peda90 de cor- 
tina para correr por la plaia al peso de su planta con que la 
media naranja que se le seguia y barria el orejon del baluarte 
antiguo enbeuido San Diego no podia descubrir la espalda 
nueuamente hecha por cuia Razon estaua la espalda de la 
mar deste baluarte sin trauez que le defendiese en conocida 
flaqueza y para enmendar sus difectos Por ser este traues y 
el otro su correspondiente y sus casas matas bajas y abiertas 
a la campana las subi cubriendolas hasta Ygualar los 25 pies 
de altura del baluarte sacandole desde sus cimientos al trauez 
que mira a la playa vn cesgo en proporcion con sus caxones 
y terraplen vniendole con la cortina que tiene 71 pies y la 
casa mata en el Rostro 50 y de gueco en el cuerpo del baluar- 
te 49 pies; haciendole en el mismo lugar en la parte interna 
vna gola espaciosa de 18 pies de ancho y en lo alto della vna 
garita capaz que la descubre y sefiorea la casa mata con el 
maciso de la cortina y en la otra casamatta que mira al baluar- 
te San Nicolas que tiene 46 pies y de gueco 49 con sus para- 
petosy anditos a su defensa y en la pla9a de armas del baluar- 
te vn espacioso alojamiento con camarines para ahnacenar 
el tren de la artilleria (Trechuelo 1959:391-392). 




65 




The fagade of the Bastion de San Diego facing the Pamantasan ng Lung- 
sod ngMaynila. The tvfo casemates on the right side of the picture prob- 
ably belong to the period of Vera and Sedeno or to the period of reno- 
vation instituted by Manrique de Lara, The eroded portion indicates the 
location of the ramp documented in the plans ofDionisio O 'Kelly and 
Thomas Sanz, 1 770 and 1 779. The extreme left marks the location of 
the ramp, stair and wall documented in Sanz's plan of 1 779. Tfiough 
these projects are classified under obras executadas, there are no archaeo- 
logical evidences of these structures. 



WALL PROHLE 




T;he condition of the wall on the northeast portion of Bastion de San 
Diego facing Mumlla Street. 



66 




The west orillion. 




The status of the wall on the northeast portion and, below, the status 
and elevation of the wall on the southeast curtain wall. 





The condition of the eastern orillion and its elevation before reconstruc- 
tion. 



OUTQIHICI 
QFTNE 





Bibliography 



Algunos Padres de laMision de la Compania de Jesus. 
El Archipielago Filipino, Coleccion de Datos: 
Geogrdficos, Estadisticos, Cronologicos, y Gen- 
tificos. Relatives al Mismo Entresacados de 
Anteriores Obras u Obtenidos con la Propia 
Observacion y Estudio, 2 volumes. Washing- 
ton: Imprenta del Gobiemo, 1900. 
Ateneo de Manila Libraries, Microform Reading Cen- 
ter, Quezon City. Plan formado en virtud de 
providencia gubemativa del estado que tenia 
la Plaza cuando la tomaron los Yngleses acorn- 
pana otro plan del nueva fortificaciones, 1 764. 
Baumer, William H. "Fortification." Encyclopaedia 

Britannica. London: William Benton, 1964. 
Blair, Emma Helen, and Robertson, Alexander 
James, gen. ed. The Philippine Islands 1493- 
1898. 55 volumes. Mandaluyong, Rizal: Cacho 
Hermanos, Inc., 1973. Vol. 7: "Letter from 
Caspar de Ayala to Felipe IL" 

Vol. 8: "Letter from Gomez Perez Dasmari- 

nas to Felipe ll. May 31,1 592." 

Vol. 8: "Three Letters from Gomez Perez 

Dasmarinas to Felipe II, June 20, 1592." 
Vol. 9: "Two Letters from Gomez Perez Das- 
marinas to Felipe ll, June 20, 1593." 

Vol. 35: "Affairs in the Filipinas, 1644-47" 

by Joseph Fayol. 

Vol. 15: Events in the Filipinas Islands by 

Antonio de Morga. 

Vol. 34: "Letter from Juan Bautista Romfin 

to Felipe ll." 

Vol. 4: "Relation of the Filipinas Islands, 

June 7, 1576" by Francisco de Sande. 

Vol. 4: "Relation and Description of the Phe- 

lipinas Islands, June 8, 1577" by Francisco de 
Sande. 

Vol. 6: "Letter from Santiago de Vera to Fe- 
lipe II, June 26, 1587. 

Vol 7: "Letter from Santiago de Vera to Fe- 
lipe ll, June 26, 1588. 

Vol, 7: "Letter from Santiago de Vera to Fe- 
lipe ll, July 13, 1589." 

Bush, James C. "An Historical Sketch of the Walls 



of Manila, P.I., and the Siege and Capture of 
Manila by the English in 1762," in U.S. Army 
Philippine Division Report of Major General 
George W, Davis. Manila: 1903. 

Buzeta, Manuel and Bravo, Felipe. Diccionario 
Geogrdfico-Estadistico-Historico de las Mas 
Filipinas. 2 vols. Madrid: 1850. 

Camp, L. Sprague de. The Ancient Engineers. New 
York: Ballantine Books, 1980. 

Concepci6n, Juan de la. Historia General de Philipi- 
nas Conquistas Espirituales y Temporales de 
Estos Espanoles Dominios, Establecimientos 
Progresos y Decadencias. Tomo II. Manila: Im- 
prenta del Seminar Concillar y Real de San 
Carlos por Agustin de la Rosa y Balagtas, Afio 
1788. 

Costa, Horacio de la, S. J. The Jesuits in the Philip- 
pines, 1581-1768. Cambridge, Massachusetts: 
Harvard University Press, 1967. 

Dlaz-Trechuelo Spinola, Ma. Lourdes. Arquitectura 
Espanola en Filipinas (1565-1800). Sevilla: 
Publicaciones de las Escuela de Estudios His- 
pano Americanos de Sevillas, 1 959. 

Gatbonton, Esperanza B. Intramuros: A Historical 
Guide. Manila: The Intramuros Administra- 
tion, 1980. 

Lyons, Norbert. "ManUa, the City of Churches. 
American Chamber of Commerce (January 
1923). 

Morga, Antonio de. Sucesos de las Islas Filipinas. 
Translated and edited by J.S. Cummins. Great 
Britain: Cambridge University Press, 1971. 

Sucesos de las Islas Filipinas. Nueva Edicidn. 

Enrequecida con los Escritos Ineditos del Mis- 
mo Autor Hustrada con Numerosas Notas que 
Amplidn el Texto y Prologada Extensamente 
por W. E. Retana. Madrid: Libi;eria General de 
Victoriano Suarez, editor, 1910. 

Reed, Robert R. Colonial Manila, The Context of 
Hispanic Urbanism arid Process of Morpho- 
genesis. Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: The 
University of California Press, 1978. 

San Agustin, Caspar, Conquistas de las Islas Philipi- 



70 PICTURE AND ILLUSTRATION CREDITS AND SOURCES 

nas: La Temporal, por las Armas del Senor 
Don Phelipe Segundo el Prudente, y la Espiri- 
tual, por los Religiosos del Orden de Nuestro 
Padre de San Agustin, Fundacion y Progressos 



de Su Provincia del Santissimo Nombre de 
Jesus, Parte Primera, Madrid: Imprenta de 
Manuel Ruiz de Murga, 1698. 



Picture and Illustration Credits and Sources 



PART I 

Figure 1: Arquitectura Espanola en Filipinos (1565- 
1800) by Ma. Lourdes Diaz-Trechuelo Spinola, pp. 
40-41. Photograph, George Gascon. 2: Archive 
General de Indias (A.G.IJ, FUipinas, 10. Intramuros 
Administration. 3: A.G.l, FUipinas, 19(1). Intra- 
muros Administration. 4: British Museum. Intramu- 
ros Administration. 5: A.G.L, Filipinas, 151. Intra- 
muros Administration. 6: Arquitectura Espanola en 
Filipinas by Ma. Lourdes Diaz-Trechuelo Spinola, 
pp. 104-105. Photograph, George Gascon. 7: A. G.I , 
FiUpmas, 5 1 . Intramuros Administration. 8: Arqui- 
tectura Espanola en Filipinos by Ma. Lourdes Diaz- 
Trechuelo Spinola, pp. 128-129. Photograph. George 
Gascon. 9-10: Photographs and illustration. The 
Nationa^ Museum. U: A.G.l, FiUpinas, 95. Intra- 
muros Administration. 12: A.G.l, Filipinas, 172. 

riTl""^' ""'"^'^'^t^^"- i^'Diccionario Geogrd- 
flco-Estadistico-Historico de los Islos Filipinos. Vol. 
2 by Manuel Buzeta and Felipe Bravo, pp. 296-297. 

18-AA yR?.^'*t'"^"^'*''*^°"- National Archives 
DesW,Tt.,H T^"^°' Administration. 15: We^^ 
Snf^Jl m' Photographs and illustra- 

docu Jnta^^^^^^^ Archaeological 

Buenaventnro ^c^' ^^"S. Illustration, Armando 
buenaventura. 35: Drawing after Dionisio O'Kelly, 



1770. Illustration, Armando Buenaventura. 36: 
Drawing after Valdes Tamon, 1734. Illustration, 
Armando Buenaventura. 37: Drawing after Ma. 
Lourdes Diaz-Trechuelo Spinola. Illustration, Ar- 
mando Buenaventura. 

PART 11 

Figure 38: Photograph, George Gascon. 39: Photo- 
graph and illustration, The National Museum. 40: 
Topographical documentation. The National Mu- 
seum. 41: Drawing after William H. Baumer, Ency- 
clopaedia Britannica. Illustration, Ramon Figueroa. 

PART III 

Figures 42-43: Photographs, George Gascon. 44- 
45: Documentation, The National Museum. 46: 
Photograph, George Gascon. 47: Photograph, The 
National Museum. 48-49: Photographs, George 
Gascon. 50-51: Photographs, The National Museum. 
52: Photograph, George Gascon. 53-65: Photo- 
graphs and illustrations. The National Museum. 66- 
67: Dlustrations, Emilio Morales. 68-78: Photo- 
graphs and illustrations, The National Museum. 

APPENDICES 

Appendix 8: Photographs and documentation, The 
National Museum. 




It 1 1 



•I. 








of gold treasures persisted. To 
those who labored in San Diego, 
however, reality was the dust 
and grit from the excavation that 
hurt the eyes and the lungs. In 
the summer glare, the heat and 
dust became so nearly unbearable 
that San Diego became reputed 
as a hardship post among the In- 
tramuros Administration workers. 

Though difficult, work in San 
Diego was professionally fulfilling. 
It yielded data sufficient to de- - 
bunk certain long-standing claims 
as myths, and to clear up other 
issues. This monograph is meant 
to help document this archaeo- 
logical excavation. It aims to trace 
and analyze the various elements 
which came to light and to offer 
physical and historical data for 
the conclusions expressed in 
the text. 

Cover: Map of Intramuros by Antonio 
Fernandez de Rojas dated 1 729. British 
Museum. 

Endpaper: Plaza de Manila during the 
British invasion of 1762; a fleet of 
ships ready to attack the fortified city 
of Intramuros.^. a/., Filipinas, 153. 
Intramuros Administration. 



Other Intramuros Administration titles: 

Intramuros: A Historical Guide by 

EM. Gatbonton 
Sanctuary Silver by Martin Tinio Jr, 
Philippine Religious Imagery in Ivory 

by E.B. Gatbonton 
Venerated Virgins of Intramuros and 

Suburbs by Carlos G. Manabat 
Lolo Jos^: An Intimate Portrait of 

Rizal by Astmcidn Ldpez Bantug 
Philippine Religious Carvings in Ivory 

by E.B. Gatbonton 
Cabildo Secular by Fr. Luis Merino, 

Damidn Domingo by Stephen Ongpin 
Intramuros of Memory by Jaime C. 
Lay a and E.B. Gatbonton with Intro- 
duction by Nick Joaquin 



