

II August 1945 



MEMBERS OF THE GRiiDUATING- GLASS: 

I am happy to he with you on this occasion, not only because 
I can share in your happiness on this, your graduation day, but 
particularly because from the very beginning, I have followed 
closely and with great interest the magnificent work performed 
since Leyte by Major Lambert and the members of his staff in the 
creation of a dependable Censorship Detachment which would work 
.very closely with the Military Censorship Detachment of the U. S. 
Army in the Philippines. 

Allow me to congratulate you upon the completion of your 
studies, I desire to warn you, however, that your work in the 
future will not be entirely devoid of difficulties and tempta- 
tions. Try to do your work to the very best of your ability and 
make an effort always to surpass the expectations of your supe- 
dors, Your responsibility will be great and you must never 
violate the confidence Major Lambert and your other officers 
have placed upon you. Bear in mind that the Philippines to-day 
is a strategic center in which spies roam and are ready to pass 
information on to the enemy. Your duty will be to prevent that 
this information be given either willingly or unwillingly. Your 
work wall be one of trust and you should maintain it unblemished 
and beyond reproach at all times. 

Many of you have lost your husbands, your children, rela- 
tives, and others held dear to your hearts. You have also suf- 
fered not only from hunger but from the very cruel and brutal 

hands of the invader. You have seen your dear ones thrown into 

/ 



- 2 - '-J^w 

Fort Santiago and subjected to inhuman torture for days, weeks, 
and months, kept with insufficient food, only to be beheaded or 
shot in the end* You paid dearly for your loyalty to the United 
States and to the Commonwealth of the Philippines, I share your 
sorrows with you. I myself have suffered too. My brother and 
my nephew and many of my officers who were close to me have been 
killed by the Japanese after a period of torture and sacrifice. 

They were soldiers in uniform performing their duties, Y»>u were 
soldiers too, but in civilian clothes performing y£>ur solemn 
duty of maintaining inviolate your great faith in America. You 
waited patiently for three seemingly endless years, but your 
faith never faltered. You knew that at the end victory would 
be ours and you stood fast suffering untold privations with 
patience and abnegation. May God ever bless you.’ 

I have been informed that you have organized among your- 
selves, an Employees Welfare Association already consisting of 
almost eight hundred members. Keep it up for that spirit of 
comradeship that permeates your Association serves as a strong 
tie that will bind you all into a big family of which you can 
always be proud. Remember that in unity there is strength and 
only by being together will you be able to accomplish great things. 
Keep solidly united and continue to do with honesty and honor the 
w r ork you are expected to do, and maintain untarnished your loyalty 
to your superiors and to those two flags that constitute the sym- 
bol of democracy and the protection of our rights to live in 
peace, in liberty, and in the pursuit of happiness. 

basilic j. Valdes 
M ajor-General, PA 
Chief of Staff 



