PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL 



Manila, June 20, 1944 




Excellency; 

I have taken the liberty of writing to Your Excellency 
at some length and with complete frankness on a subject which, 

I am sure, is as close to your heart as it is to mine: the 

question of improving further the relations between the Fili- 
pinos and the Japanese ; enhancing Filipino faith in the 
Republic, and strengthening Filipino loyalty to our common 
cause. The matter, as you can see, is a delicate one, and 
were I minded to follow a simple rule of prudence, it would be 
sufficient for me only to maintain a discreet silence. But the 
importance of the subject is such that continued silence and 
inaction would constitute a virtual betrayal of my people's 
highest interests as well as the common interests of your coun- 
try and mine, a culpable omission to do a necessary though pain- 
ful duty. Furthermore, my confidence in your good judgment, sense 
of fairness, and affectionate concern for the welfare of the 
Filipino people is such that I feel absolutely certain you will 
consider what I have to say in the same spirit in which I am 
going to say them - in a spirit, that is to say, of helpfulness 
and cooperation. 

Permit me to go into the core of the matter at once. 

I think you will agree with me that in spite of the best efforts 
of the Philippine Government, a considerable portion of the 
Filipino people have not rallied as they should to the common 
cause. It is deeply to be regretted that, notwithstanding the 
liberal policies laid down by the Tokyo Government and carried 
out in their larger aspects by its able representatives here, 
little has been accomplished, as a matter of fact, to eliminate 
the feeling of distrust and hostility which a considerable por- 
tion of our people continue to entertain towards the present 
regime. This fact requires a word of explanation lest the Jap- 
anese Government, unaware of the real reasons behind the present 
attitude of this portion of the Filipino people, should come 
to regard all of them, in general, as ungrateful, unwilling or 
unable to appreciate Tokyo's liberal policies towards the Phil- 
ippines. For the Filipinos are an innately grateful people, and 
it would be unjust to accuse them of ingratitude simply because 
they have so far not shown the degree of cooperation which Japan 
expected of them. 

The explanation seems to be simple enough. It may be 
found, in the first place, in the psychology of the common people, 
not only in this country but everywhere. Here as elsewhere the 
common man is less concerned with high policies, 

His Excellency Syozo Murata 

Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Japan 
Manila 



- 2 - 

great issues or abstract principles than with matters that 
intimately affect him: his livelihood* his individual rights, 
the welfare of his family and of the small community to which 
he belongs. If he is treated with discrimination, arrogance 
and cruelty, if he is thrown out of his house without any other 
place, of his own where to go, if his property is confiscated with- 
out what he believes to be just compensation, or if he is driven 
to desperation as a result of the present situation, he finds 
himself losing faith in the Republic and feeling aggrieved 
against Japan. It is then quite difficult to -impress him with 
the display of his country’s flag, with generous donations of 
clothing and medicines, or with such liberal policies as con- 
donation of Army loands to the Republic, the restoration of 
public properties to his government, the establishment of a new 
Philippine currency replacing the military scrip now in use 
on a bsis of parity with the yen, etc. These high matters of 
government policy interest the man in the street or the barrio 
folk but little if at all. The real determinants of his atti- 
tude and conduct towards Japan and the Japanese continue to 
be the incidents of everyday life, the things that happen to 
him, to his family, to his friends, and to his neighbors. For 
the Filipino is both simple and v/ordly-wise. He bases his 
judgment the things he sees around him however seemingly un- 
important these may be. A little act of kindness and consider- 
ation is worth to him incalculably more than a thousand words, 
of propaganda, 

For is the situation among the more enlightened classes 
any better. One would think that being more reasonable and less 
sentimental than the common masses, they would be more inclined 
to judge matters solely on a plane of abstract issues and prin- 
ciples, The truth, however, is that while the educated Filipino 
who sees the kind of treatment that is meted out to him and his 
neighbors may be less anotional and violent in his reactions, 
he is nonetheless deeply affected. With him the violent emotional 
reaction of the common man becomes a coolly reasoned conviction. 
Predisely because he is educated, . his sensibilities are more 
easily violated by acts of injustice, cbfcelty, discrimination, 
offensive behavior, and lack of consideration. Moreover, he is 
better able to distinguish between truth and propaganda, sincerity 
and pretense. He knows what independence means and what an in- 
dependent country should be, if it were truly independent. He 
knows the intimate relationship between political sovereignty 
and economic independence. He understands much better the 
difference between word and deed, between promise and realiza- 
tion, between principle and action. 

In vi ew of these facts, we cannot but admit that one of the 
most important and pressing problems which confront the Fili- 
pino leaders today is how to convince the people of the reality 
of Philippine independence in order that they may all support 
the Government of the Republic and cooperate with the Japanese 
Forces by living in peace, and engaging in useful and productive 
activities. 



- 3 - 



P 

/ 



* 



When independence was proclaimed in October, 194-3, a 
great many of those who doubted Japan’s trpe intentions towards 
th® Philippines showed a willingness to change their attitude,. 
They had high hopes for the newly established Republic, and 
expected to see a material improvement in the conditions then 
existing, particularly in the relations between Japanese and 
Filipinos, and between the Japanese and the Philippine author- 
ities, There was, nevertheless, a good porition of the Filipino 
people who feared that Philippine independence would not be 
real but was being declared merely for propaganda purposes. 

From the time the Republic was established, therefore, 
it has been the constant endeavor of the Filipino leaders to 
promote and maintain its prestige in the eyes of their own 
people, and to have it exercise as much as possible the powers 
and prerogatives to which the government of a sovereign state 
is entitled, saving only the limitations arising from the 
exigencies of the war situation as defined in the Pact of 
Alliwance between the Philippines and Japan. To this end, 
we have appealed to our people, trying to convince them that 
the independence of our country is real, that Japan’s inten- 
tion in sponsoring and recognizing it were sincere, and that 
therefore they should have fiath in their Government, assisting 
it in the work: that it is doing, and cooperating to the fullest 
extent with the Japanese authorities in the Philippines for the 
accomplishment of the noble purposes envisaged in the said Pact 
of Alliance, 

If the Filipino leaders have not thus far been as suc- 
cessful in their efforts as might be desired, their failure is 
due to a number of causes, many of them traceable to cer- 
tain practices which should have been discontinued after our 
independence was declared. Foremost among these is the kind 
of treatment to which, from the very beginning of the occupa- 
tion of the Philippines, a great number of our people have been 
subjected. In order to better appreciate the harm that has been 
done as a result of such treatment, an understanding of the Fili 
pino character and psychology is necessary. One of the distin- 
guishing traits of the Filipino is his deep sense of gratitude 
and obligation. He is very eager to make friends and would even 
sacrifice principle in the name friendship. But he is an ex- 
tremely sensitive individual, sensitive to an act of kindness 
and generosity as well as to slight, insult or injury. A kind 
act touches both his sense of gratitude and of loyalty and he 
will not feel at ease until he has reciprocated it in even 
greater measure than he has received. This was shown by the at- 
titude of the Filipinos upon the outbreak of the Greater East 
Asia War. Believing that America had been kind and generous to 
them and that therefore they had a debt of gratitude towards 
that country, and that in fighting by her side they were fight- 
ing for the independence of the Philippines, the Filipinos did 
not hesitate to throw their lot with the Americans in the first 
stages of the war. Irrespective of what one may say as to 
whether or not the virtue in this case was misplaced, the 



~ 4 - ~ 



* 



virtue itself remains a sound and admirable trait. As a mat- 
ter of fact, it can or should become the basis for the estab- 
lishment of enduring friendly relations between the Japanese 
and Filipino peoples. For to the extent that Japan will treat 
the Filipinos with justice and understanding, to that extent 
also will she receive the full measure of Filipino gratitude and 
loyalty. Needless to say, a contrary policy is bound to pro- 
duce a contrary, result, for the Filipinos are, as I have al- 
ready stated, a sensitive people. An injury done to him, to 
his family, to his friends or to his countrymen will breed in 
him a feeling of bitterness and hostility that will not be 
easy to eradicate. 

Another basic trait of the Filipinos is their pride of 
race and nationality. They resent an affront to their dignity 
as a people and as individuals. In this respect they are not 
unlike the Japanese, Japan’s appeal to the Filipinos on the 
ground of racial affinity and equality touches a responsive 
chord in their hearts, and a concrete manifestation of the avo- 
wals to this effect, both in act and in deed, would prove to 
be one of the most potent factors making for enduring, friend- 
ship betv/een the two peoples. Thus acts of discrimination 
should be avoided, and if a Japanese treats a Filipino with 
arrogance, or if a Japanese goes unpunished for a wrong done 
to a Filipino, or if more severe punishment is imposed upon 
a Filipino wrongdoer than is imposed upon a Japanese who com- 
mits a similar offense, or if when a Filipino is unjustly maltreat- 
ed by Japanese civilians he can neither retaliate nor act in sim- 
ple self-defense and therefore must nurse in his heart a sense 
of helpless resehtment and anger; and if the Filipinos see 
that Japanese subjects not in tjie Armed Forces nor in the ser- 
vice of the Embassy act as if they are completely exempt from 
the operation of Philippine laws and under an authority over and 
above* that of the Republic, or if they see that the military 
authorities exercise unlimited jurisdiction oyer the lives and 
properties of Filipino citizens in total disregard of the pres- 
tige and authority of the Government of the Republic, - all these 
make the Filipinos doubt the sense of fairness of the Japanese 
and breed in them the belief that the principles of state sov- 
reignty and of racial equality and reciprocity do not apply to the 
relations between Japanese and Filipinos in the Philippines. 

It is regrettable that the basic psychological traits of 
our people have not been appreciated. Knowledge of them might 
have* avoided the use of methods which, while perhaps effective 
in dealing with the peoples of other countries, are not suited 
to the nature, education, and character of the Filipinos, 

The practice, for instance, of slapping Filipinos in the 
face, of tying them to posts or making them kneel in public, 
at times in the heat of the sun, or beating them - this upon 
the slightest fault, mistake or provocation, or without any 
other reason than failure to understand each other’s language, - 

is certain to create resentment on the part notonly.of the 
victim but also of the members of his family, his friends, 



- 5 - 






and the general public. Sven more serious is the practice of 
inflicting cruel, unusual and excessive punishment upon per- 
sons arrested on mere suspicion, during their investigation 
and before their guilt has been . established. There have even 
been cases wherein, because of overcrowding in public places, 
such as street-cars, some Japanese, military or civilian, who 
were inadvertently jostled or pushed, immediately slapped or 
beat the persons they thought guilty of pushing them. 

Thousands of cases have been reported of people being 
either burned alive, killed at the point of bayonet, beheaded, 
beaten without mercy, or otherwise subjected to various methods 
of physical torture, without distinction as to age and sex. 

Women and children below fifteen years are known to have been 
among those who were the victims of such punishment. On many 
occasions, these killings and ptinishpments were purposely 
done in public. In my home-town alone, Tiaong, Tayabas, 
over one hundred were summarily executed during the "zoni- 
fication" of the people there shortly before the inauguration 
of the Republic. The same thing was done in Lopez, Tayabas, 
where not less than this number of people were put to death 
as recently as March, 1944> upon no evidence but the identi- 
fication by a secret informer. The cases of these municipal- 
ities are merely cited as typical instances of what are com- 
mon occurrences in other municipalities all over the Islands. 

The unfortunate thing about all this is that in many cases 
the victims are really innocent of any crime but are punished 
merely upon suspicion or upon false denunciation by informers 
who harbor some pry/Late or personal grudge against them, or 
if they are guilty at all, do not deserve the excessive penal- 
ties inflicted upon them. Many have no fault at all except 
the fact that they have sons or brothers who are members of 
"guerrilla” bands, or that they have given food or temporary 
shelter to the. latter, under threat of death or physical in- 
juries, If they do not die as a result of the punishment - 
many do - they are released maimed, crippled, sick and naturally 
with a feeling of bitter resentment against the injustice done 
to them, a feeling that is shared by their families and friends 
and by those who have knowledge of such things. 

Many also are the cases wherein people have been arrested, 
taken for questioning, and then disappear completely. No in- 
formation is ever given to their relatives as to their where- 
abouts and the nature of the charges against them. While the 
Philippine Government justifiably feels that it has a right to 
intervene and ought to intervene in matters which involve the 
lives and welfare of its citizens, it has not even gone to that 
extent but has merely tried to help the people who come to it 
for assistance in securing information concerning those whose 
disappearnance has been reported after having been arrested by 
the Japanese authorities. In many cases, however, no inform- 
ation whatever concerning their whereabouts or the nature of 
the charges against them could be obtained. 






- 6 - 



Tiie proclamation of the independence of the Philippines 
and the establishment of the Government of the Republic have 
not minimized these occurrences. They used to be done-\ before 
and they have continued and continue to be done now. Most of 
the towns in the provinces are still actually governed by the 
commanders of the local Japanese garrisons , who treat the munic- 
ipal mayors as their subordinates even to the extent of beating- 
them publicly, and who continue to arrest and punish people with- 
out advising either the local civil authorities or the national 
government, and naturally without turning over the accused. per- 
sons to the authorities of the Republic, The only sign of in- 
dependence is the display of the Filipino flag. Sven Japanese 
civilians consider themselves above Philippine laws, and Fili- 
pinos working in Japanese companies are punished summarily by 
their employers ihstead of being turned over to the appropriate 
Philippine authorities. 

Because of all these, a considerable number of Filipinos 
believe that the basic principles underlying the Joint Declara- 
tion of Greater Fast Asia and the Pact of Alliwance have been 
nullified in actual practice. For they know that in both these 
documents, the basic condition of the collboration between the 
Philippines and Japan is the mutual respect of sovereignty. And 
to the extent that such respect has not been observed, to that 
extent also do these Filipinos feel that these documents have 
lost intrinsic force and value. 

Another matter that ne'eds to be mentioned is the practice 
of exacting collective responsibility for individual acts. If 
a "guerrilla” happens, for instance, to ride in a carretela with 
other peace-loving and law-abiding citizens who are completely 
unaware of the former’s identiTy, and that "guerrilla" is ar- 
rested, all those, v/ho by pure accident, are riding with him, 
are also arrested and punished in the same way. Or, when a 
"guerrilla" is discovered and arrested in one of the small 
roadside eating places ( Caridfieria ) in the provinces, the owner 
of the place and all those who happen to be eating there at the 
time are also arrested and punished. Similarly, entire bar- 
rios and municipalities have been placed in concentration, or 
their inhabitants exterminated, because they have been unable 
to prevent "guerrillas" from ambushing and attacking Japanese 
soldiers passing there, or because some "guerrillas" happened 
to repair to the place and exacted food or other commodities 
of the innocent fol, who found themselves helpless because of 
the tteceats or coercion employed. Oftentimes there is no distinc- 
tion between innocent and guilty, between old and young, or between 
strong or weak, to such an extent that there have been instances 
where women and children below fifteen have died as a result of 
the concentration, excessive punishments and outright execu- 
tions, In fact, the innocents are usually the only ones v/ho 
suffer, because the culrprits manage to get out or otherwise 
escape punishment. While in other countries the exaction of 
collective responsibility may be justified, in the Philippines 
it is hardly so, because for hundreds of years the Filipinos 



have been an individualistic people. Besides the fact that 
they are Malays who are by nature individualistic, their contact 
with the highly individualistic Spaniards and Americans has fur- 
ther developed this racial trait. The Filipino does not usually 
concern himself with the affairs of his neighbor and consequent- 
ly does not feel that he should be held to account for them. 
Admitting that there is need to change this Filipino trait, 
it seems unreasonable to expect that this change can be effected 
in a day or year by forcible and violent methods. It will 
take a long time and a great deal of training before the Fili- 
pinos can learn to live and think and act collectively, and 
thus to them the punishment of the group for a misdeed of some 
of them is hard to understand and constitutes a grave form of 
injustice. The Filipinos must be treated with understanding and 
patient indulgence if their efforts at re-orientation are to 
succeed. 

One other thing which constitutes a source of mounting dis- 
satisfaction among the people, particularly in the City of Manila, 
is the fact that many of them have been and are being. ordered 
to evacuate their homes so that the same may be occupied by per- 
sonnel of the Imperial Japanese Army and Navy. While in the" be- 
ginning the needs of the Army and Navy for accommodation were 
attended to with dispatch and with as little inconvenience as 
possible to the house owhers and tenants, the situation has 
come to such a point that it • is no longer possible to do so 
without actually driving them out into the streets, with no 
place where they could be sheltered. It is not a question of 
unwillingness but of physical impossibility for the people to 
vacate their homes and transfer to others. It is of common 
knowledge that the housing situation in Manila is already very 
acute, and hence further demands for evacuation of private re- 
sidences can only mean that great numbers of people must stay 
homeless. The Government has received numerous appeals for 
assistance in this connection, but unless the military and naval 
authorities themselves take the necessary steps to remedy the 
situation, no solution to these appeals is humanly possible. 

In various provinces, large tracts of land have been taken 
over for the planting of cotton, horai rice, or for the construct- 
ion of airfields and other military installation^ in most cases 
without compensation or even a word of explanation given to the 
owners. If the land taken over is public land or government 
property, no question can possibly arise, since the Republic is 
only too willing to provide every facility for Japanese military 
operations, and Where the property belongs to wealthy people, such 
summary procedure causes no serious injury and may be tolerated. 

In the majority of cases, however, the lands thus taken over be- 
long to small farmers who own nothing else except such lands on 
which they are completely dependent for their livelihood. It 
is believed that in such cases a more tactful policy should be 
followed by giving the necessary explanation to the small land- 
owners and making arrangements so that they may be compensated 
for the use of their property either by the Japanese Government 
or the Government of the Republic, as the case may be. 



* 



» - 8 - 

The incidents and practices which I have described are 
the cause of constant requests for assistance received by the 
Philippine Government from the people concerned, and in making 
representations in their behalf to the Japanese authorities, 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs find itself in the strange role 
of an embassy trying, none too successfully, to protect its 
nationals in the foreign country to which it is accredited* 

It is for the foregoing reasons that many Filipinos seem 
oo have but little faith in their government today. They doubt 
the reality of their country’s independence* They consider it 
as hardly anything more than the display of the Filipino flag, 
since independence has not minimized the rigors of military 
rule, particularly in the provinces. They believe that the 
sovereignty of the Republic which Japan has solemnly pledged 
to respect, both under the principles embodies in the Joint 
Declaration of Greater East Asia and the provisions of the Pact 
Ci Alliance, is not receiving the consideration it deserves from 
those who can best give it reality and substance by their own 
example. Even in Manila the people believe that independence 
has meaning only for those in' the high councils of the govern- 
ment, but none for the ordinary citizen. It becomes, therefore 
an incf easingly difficult task for the Filipino leaders to con- 
vince their people of the noble intentions of Japan in waging 
the present war and of the sincerity of the pronouncements of 
Japanese leaders that Japan came to the Philippines note as 
conqueror but as liberator. It is difficult for many Filipinos 
to conceive of Japan as it. really is - a nation with a high 
culture and advanced civilization - because not having been 
to Japan and not knowing enough of its history, literature 
or the spirit of its people, they have nothing on which to for- 
mulate their opinions except what they actually see and experience 
in the Philippines: the treatment that they receive at the^hands 
of some Japanese, the injuries that they suffer, the personal 
indignities to which they are subjected, the inability of their 
Government to accord them adequate protection and the conseouent 
embarrassment which the Republic has to suffer. It may be well 
to mention that some Filipinos vho have been to Japan ( and I 
am not referring to the members of the various missions who v/ere 
treated with exceptional courtesy in Japan) have often asked 
themselves why it is that, speaking in general terms and allov/- 
ing for exceptions, the Japanese in Japan seem to be different 
from the Japanese in the Philippines, so much so that our in- 
dependence seem to possess more substance and reality in Tokyo 
that in the Philippines itself. 

The existence of "guerrilla 1 ’ elements or of outright ban- 
ditry, particularly in the provinces, is not, generally speak- 
ing, due in the main to any fundamental political motive. It 
is doubtful wh ether those v/ho are engaged in such activities 
are pro-American by conviction. In the first place most of them, 
with the exception perhaps of some of their outstanding leaders, 
have no real understanding of the basic issues involved in the * 



- 9 - 



% 



* 



present war betwreen the United States and Japan. Nor, it is 
believed, have they developed any feeling of real attachment to 
the . Americans, not having closely mixed or associated with them, 
socially or otherwise. But many have turned ''guerrillas” be- 
cause of the said and often tragic experiences which they or 
their relatives, friends and countrymen have undergone at the 
hands of the Japanese, to the prejudice of the common efforts 
of sincere and high-minded elements on the part of both Japanese 
and Filipinos to bring about complete understanding and coopera- 
tion for the advancement of what should be their common purposes. 

The present deplorable situation, as I have said, is prin- 
cipally due to the failure on the part of many Japanese, since 
the beginning of the occupation and £ven after the Republic was 
inaugurated, to understand the character and psychology of the 
Filipinos. Had there been an effort to do so, and had a policy 
of friendship and conciliation been observed towards them, part- 
icularly in the personal relations with them of Japanese soldiers 
and civilians, much unpleasantness would have been avoided and 
a real feeling of amity and cooperation between the Filipinos 
and Japanese would have developed. The extraordinary hospitality 
of the Filipino people is of common knowledge to all foreigners 
who have come to this country, and. that sentiment of hospitality 
alone would have been sufficient for the Japanese to be wel- 
comed with open arms and to enable them to win over the entire 
population to their side. It is a very easy matter to get the 
goodwill of the Filipinos, because their inborn sense of grate- 
fulness responds quickly to the simplest act of kindness and 
generosity. 

In this connection, it may be recalled how spontaneous 
was the response of the Filipinos to the early pronouncements 
of the Japanese leaders who came to the Philippines - that 
Asia is for the Asians, that Japan entered the war for the 
liberation of the Orient, and that the purpose of the Japanese 
expedition here was to emancipate the Filipinos, to let them 
establish "the Philippines for the Filipinos" as a member of 
the Co-Prcsperity Sphere, and to have them enjoy their own pros- 
perity and cuituhe, They had high hopes for the new regime that 
was ushered in under such noble and lofty principles. Their 
enthusiasm, however, was gradually dampened, and they suffered 
disappointment after disappointment on account of the variance 
between those attractive pronouncements and the events which 
they actually saw happening and which still continue to hap- 
pen. If the "Guerrillas" have not been diminished, if indeed some*/* 
or our youth have chosen to join the ranks and shown signs lately 
of activities which are distinctly political in character, it 
.must be because of such disappointment and the doubt engendered 
in their minds as to the sincerity of the pronouncements that 
gave them so much hope before. 

Hundred of cases where Filipinos were the victims of the 
happenings to which I have referred have come to the attention 
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Needless to say, many hun- 



10 



dreds more and even thousands of similar cases have never been 
reported to the Philippine authorities either because the ag- 
grieved parties were afraid of reprisals of because they have 
come to the conclusion that this Republic is impotent to offer 
protedtion to its own citizens, and, thinking it impossible to 
obtain any redress or satisfaction, have preferred to suffer 
in silence. But they are raatters of common knowledge and are 
the subject of daily talks among the people. 

Where innocent and law-abiding private citizens are in- 
volved the prestige of the Philippine Government suffers from 
the fact that these persons, their relatives and friends are 
thereafter convinced that this Government has neither power 
nor courage to intervene in behalf of its citizens. Gases in- 
volving government officials and employees are even more sig- 
nificant because the maltreatment of government officials consti- 
tutes, in the eyes at least of our people, a serious relfection 
on the prestige and authority of the Government itself. How, 
in this circumstances, can we demand that our people respect 
and have confidence in the government of the Republic when 
they see that the duly authorized representatives of this 
Government receive such scant consideration on the part of cer- 
tain Japanese elements in the Philippines? Is it not natural 
for a great portion of our people to believe that this Govern- 
ment is only a puppet, having no independent authority of its 
own, seeing that it is often subject to dictation if not violent 
interference by the Japanese authorities? 

Cases of this nature become all the more serious when 
they involve the arrest of high ranking authorities of the 
Government, Without going to the extent of claiming that such 
officials should be exempt from the operation of military law, 
it seems reasonable to propose that the arrest of all such of- 
ficials be done only with the knowledge and consent of the 
President of the Republic of the Philippines, The arrest some- 
time ago of Dr, Jose B. L, Reyes, Assistant Solicitor-General 
and Legal Adviser to the President, is a case .in point. Re- 
gardless of the merits of this particular case, it would have 
been expedient at least to have consulted the President od the 
matter in order to find the best means of doing what was neces- 
sary to be done without bringing needless embarrassment upon 
the Government of the Republic, For, certainly, the damage that 
one such official can do to the present regime is little compared 
to the grave injury that the entire Government must suffer when- 
ever it is thus rudely i^gf«?fl.ed and humiliated before the eyes 
of its own people. 

In this connection, I wish to quote the pertinent pxortions 
of a resolution approved in the First manual Visayan Convention . 
held by Provincial Governors, city and Municipal Mayors, Treasurers, 
Senior Constabulary Inspectors, and Kalibapi Leaders in Cebu City 
on April 14.-16, 194 . 4 , a copy of which has been furnished to the 
Ministry of Foreigh Affairs, This resolution reads in part as 

follows: 



- 12 - 



% 

t 



♦ 



"Resolution recommending the adoption of various 
measures to accelerate the return of peace and 
order; to hring about the most harmonious under- 
standing between the Filipino and Japanese peoples, 
and to strengthen the Republic of the Philippines 
by surrounding it and its duly constituted author- 
ities with the greatest prestige and authority. 

X X X 

"5* In order to bring about the most harmonious 
understanding between the Japanese and Filipino 
peoples, to strengthen the new Republic by sur- 
rounding it with the greatest prestige and author- 
ity, so that it will merit the love and loyalty of 
the people as well as to disarm those who are seek- 
ing to weaken the Republic by questioning its 
validity and genuineness; and finally, to give the 
duly constituted authorities of the Republic the 
necessary prestige and authority, to enable them 
to perform the great tasks that are expected of them, 
it is recommended that: 

"(a) The Provincial Governors, Mayors, and 
officers of the Constabulary should be permitted 
to exercise the fullest authority without any more 
interference than the laws of the Republic and the 
absolute necessities of war operations may require; 

" (b) The Constitutional provision guaranteeing 
that no property rightfully belonging to the citi- 
zens of the Republic be taken without due process 
of law and just compensation, should be rigidly 
respected; 

" (c) Filipinos in the employ of companies of 
whatever nationality who commit acts contrary to 
the rules and regulations of said companies should 
not be subjected to corporal punishment, but should 
be turned over to our courts for prosecution; and 

" (d) Civilians found or captured in the mountains 
should be turned over to the authorities of the Repub- 
lic of the Philippine for such action as may be legal 
and necessary." 

In calling attention to these matters, there is no in- 
tention to ignore the generous and understanding attitude which 
the high officials of. the Imperial Japanese Army, the Imperial 
Japanese Navy, and the Japanese Embassy in the Philippines have 
consistently shown towards the Filipino people and towards their 
leaders, in particular. This attitude has ever been marked by 
the utmost sympathy and consideration expressed in many concrete 



12 





acts of encouragement and support in all that the Government has 
tried and is trying to do in order to establish the Republic upon 
a stable and enduring foundation. In particular, Your Excellency 
has been one of those most instrumental in conveying effectively 
to the Filipinos the liberal and magnanimous policies of the 
Japanese Government and in interpreting to our people the high- 
minded principles repeatedly enunciated by Premier General Hideki 
Tozyo as constituting the basis for the establishment of the 
Greater East „sia Co-Prosperity Sphere, In your relations with 
' the Filipino leaders before and since the establishment of the 
Republic, you have observed the most exemplary and statesmanlike 
conduct and have thereby won the respect and gratitude of us all 
who have had the privilege of coming in contact with you. 

On the other hand, His Excellency the President of the 
Republic of the Philippines, has been equally assiduous in 
bringing home to the Filipino people the generous purposes of 
Japan in the Philippines, He has staked his political fortune 
and even his life on the establishment of an independent Phil- 
ippines as a proud and self-respecting member of the Co-Prosperity 
Sphere, He has called upon his people to do their part in the 
establishment of the Sphere upon the enduring foundations of 
peace, reciprocity, and moral justice. He has tried by pre- 
cept and by example to imbue the young Republic of the Philip- 
pines with the prestige and dignity befitting it as a sovereign 
state. You, Your Excellency, are personally aware of the 
President’s sincere and tireless efforts in this direction, and 
if 1 mention them now, it is only to emphasize the fact that 
there is an inexhaustible fountain of generous sentiments on 
both sides to warrant an increase in mutual sympathy and under- 
standing. 

Yet precisely because there exists such an abundance of 
genuine goodwill in the high councils of the Japanese Government 
and of the Government of the Republic, one is constrained to re- 
gret very deeply the present unsatisfactory relations between the 
Filipinos and the Japanese in the Philippines, Without attempt- 
ing to relieve my own people of their share of the responsibility 
for this state of affairs, I think it only just to explain that 
the situation is partly due to the fact that the liberal poli- 
cies of the Japanese Government and the great principles enun- 
ciated in the Pacific Charter have not percolated to the rank 
and file of the Japanese soldiers and civilians in the Philip- 
pines. Y/hile the highest officials here and in j.okyo have al- 
' ways treated us with the utmost tact and consideration, the 
conduct of those in the lower ranks leaves much to be desired. 
Unfortunately, it is the day-to-day relationships between the 
Filipino masses on the one hand, and the Japanese soldiers and 
civilians on the other that, in general, determine the degree 
of Filipino- Japanese collaboration and sympathy. 



- 13 - 



4 

Tills is not to ignore the fact that the exigencies of 
military operations and the problems attendant to the handling 
of the enormous number of men required by such operations do 
not always permit smooth relations and flawless conduct. 

Breaches of discipline are bound to occur. Neither do 1 ig- 
nore the sincere efforts of the Japanese authorities to appre- 
hend and punish those elements whose misconduct has caused dis- 
affection among our people. But I believe, and I think you 
will agree with me, that there is plenty of room Efor improvement 
on the part of both sides, and that the occasions of friction 
between them could be further minimized. 

In view of the impending developments in the war situation, 
it is especially important to bring about more harmonious rela- 
tions between Filipinos and Japanese and to arouse Filipino 
loyalty to the Republic. The problem briefly stated is this: 

How are we to prepare the Filipino people, mentally and spiri- 
tually, to assume their obligations under the Philippine- Japan 
Pact of Alliwance in the event they should be called* upon to live 
up to its terms as demanded by the circumstances foreseen in 
the Pact? 

The question suggests its own remedy. Under the terms 
of the Pact of Alliwance, the Filipino people are called upon 
to render the closest possible economic, political and mili- 
tary collaboration with Japan for the purpose of safeguarding 
the territorial integrity and independence of the Republic. 

As far as the resources of the nation are concerned these have 
been placed entirely at the disposal of the Japanese Government. 

But in order to create a united and resolute attitude among 
the Filipinos in support of the Pact, it is necessary to con- 
vince and persuade them that they have a country to defend and 
an independence to safeguard, and that the basic principle of 
the Pact of Alliwance - mutual respect of sovereignty and ter- 
ritory - is fully observed and upheld. They mpst be made to 
feel that this country belongs to them, that they are masters 
in their own land, that the independence which they have proclaimed 
and which Japan has recognized is real and authentic. For Jiow, 
otherwise, would it be possible to induce the Filipino people, 
or any people for that matter, to defend a country that they 
may not call their own, or to safeguard and independence that does 
not exist? 

In other words, the Filipino must be given a real stake 
in the war. He must be given something concrete to fight for - 
his land, his home, his honor, his freedom and independence, 
the sovereignty of his Republic - something that will invest 
with living substance such high principles as Asia for the Asians 
or such large ideals as the establishment of the Go-prosperity 
Sphere, 

An invidious comparison is oft eh made between the single- 
minded and passionate determination of the Japanese people and 

the disunited and lukewarm attitude of the Filipino people, im- 
plying that there must be something fundamentally wrong with 






- 14 - 



the Filipinos, There is no truth in this, however, The Fili- 
f pinos fought for their freedom against overwhelming odds during 
four centuries of their history. And they will do so again, 
valiantly and without counting the cost, with a determination 
not less passionate than that of any other people, whenever they 
are convinced that it is their freedom and their honor they are 
fighting for. Consider the attitude and conduct of the Fili- 
pinos upon the outbreak of the war in East Asia. The Filipinos 
fought on the side of America - for what? Certainly not to 
further the interests and ambitions of America in the Orient, 
but to defend a land where they had enjoyed a measure of dig- 
nity and freedom, and to assure the independence which had been I 

promised to them at a future time. If the Filipinos willingly 
fought for a dignity and freedom which was far from complete and 
for an independence which lay far in the future, with what great- 
er readiness would they not fight to defend a dignity and freedom 
which is complete and an independence which is both actual and 
real? 



But in order to create this mental attitude in the Fili- 
pino people, they must enjoy this dignity, this freedom, and 
this independence now, saving only the limitations imposed by 
the Pact of Alliwance and by the necessities of the war situation. 
And it is possible to make them enjoy these things, given the 
goodwill and benevolence which the Japanese Government has abun- 
dantly shown in the past a s well as the readiness on the part 
of high-minded Japanese in the Philippines to treat the Fili- 
pinos, not as a conquered nation nor as an inferior race, but 
as a free people who are their equals and their allies in the 
struggle for a common cause, 

I trust, Your Excellency, that I have not imposed on your 
kindness and good nature by unbosoming myself on this important 
subject. I write this not in my official capacity but as a 
plain citizens and as one who, next only to the desire to see the 
Filipino people united and happy, has at heart the establishment 
of Japanese-Filipino relations in the Philippines on the basis 
of friendship, trust, tolerance and understanding. Most of the 
facts and considerations embodied in this letter have been, as 
you know, the subject of frank conversation between Your Excel- 
lency and myself in the course of our frequent meetings. Nor do 
I entertain the wish that Your Excellency will give official 
course to this letter, as to do so may bring it to the cognizance 
of some high officers who, not possessing your broadmindedness or 
not sharing your well-known feelings of deep sympathy for the 
Philippines and the Filipinos, might not appreciate, might even 
resent", the frankness and the spirit in which I have written. But 
it is my hope that in this addressing myself to Your Excellency 
personally and confidentially, I can be of help in creating a pro- 
per atmosphere for the strenuous tasks which your people and mine 
have to accomplish together for the furtherance of a common cause. 



Very respectfully, 

COPY • CLARO M. RECTO 

jsd/ 



