BAGUIO MILITARY INSTITUTE, INC. 
Irisan Heights, Baguio City 


4 

. .. • i 


February 11, 1959 


■ g 


I 


W . 

cc. 


7 


unTT, Rfc 9 )? SPECIAL STOCKHOLDERS MEETING , 

. x n a'd’dordance with Section 2 Ahtible 3 of the By-LdM of the 
Baguio Military Institute, Inc. NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that a 
Special Meeting of Stockholders of the said Corporation ^! be 
held at the Principal Office of thd Corporation *, 

Heights, Baguio City on Saturday, February 2i, 1959 at 4 **M. for 
the following purposes? . , 

■ , li To approve changes in the BvMVI. By^Lawb as redoramended by 
thfe Board of Trustees at their regular meeting January 26th . 8 1959» 

In case you cannot be personh'^, P^ e 2®® i 

detach and return the portion below itmeditthly* If you desire to 
wfint fomeone other && the ChiiMh Qtf<3 the Secrete^ W 
insert the name of the person you 'desire to anoint and who can come 

on the date of the stuted meeting* , 

; | i . f 

Enclosed please find copy of new By-Laws for your perousal* 


JENS FENSTAD 
Secretary 

Board of Trustees, BMI 


’ (bateT” 

The Chairman, Board of Trustees 
Baguio Military Institute, Inc. 

Irisan Heights, Baguio City 

Dear Sir: 

In connection with the Special Meeting of all stockholders of the 
Baguio Military Institute, Inc., I regret to mfonn you that I may t 
be present at said meeting on Feb. a, For the purpose of approving 
changes in the B.M.L. Bj-Laws as recorrmended by the Board oi Trustee^ 
at their regular meeting January 26th., 1959, X have the honor to cone- 
+ nnri nonnint M as ray true and lawful proxj to 

place and to^vote for all elect ive'offioiflla of the Board of Trustees* 

Said proxy shall have all the powers entitled to vote if 1 should 
personally be present. 


(Name & Signature) 


HEADQUARTERS 

BAGUIO MILITARY INSTITUTE 
Irisan, Baguio 

1 June 1958 

SUBJECT: Bill Regulations 


TO: AH Cadets 


1. Subject regulations are published for the information, guidance 
and compliance of all concerned. 

2. Students shall be held responsible for compliance with directives 
and procedures outlined herein. 

3« Questions and/or suggestions concerning any of the contents of 
this pamphlet should be made in writing to the Superintendent thru the 
Head, Department of Tactics. 

4. All directives issued previously by this School that are in 
conflict with these regulations, are hereby rescinded. 



PAGE 


$ • 

TABLE of contents 

TITLE 

General 

Public Relations , . 

Residence . 

Discharge or Separation 

Organization and Command Organization . . . 
Delinquencies, Demerits and Punishments' . . 

Reports . 

Demerits 

Punsihments 

Merits 

Lost Property 

School Property ..... 

Official Caiinunication 

Barracks ..... 

Mess Hall 

Gymnasium 

"All Is Well" ... 

Call to Quarters ..... 

Leave of Absence 

Limits 

Recreational and Social Privileges .... 

Absences and Formations , 

Sick 

Chapel . 

Fire Regulations 

Service Facilities and Supplies . 

Uniforms 

/mn 


1 

2 

3 

3 

3 

4 
6 
6 
8 
9 

10 

10 

11 

13 

15 

18 

18 

20 

21 

22 

23 

27 

29 

31 

32 
32 
34 


G^LhaL 



DISCIPLINE 


1.01 Cadets of the Baguio Military Institute are not subject to the 
Military Laws of the Philippines. The conduct of a cadet shall be bound by 
the rules and regulations (Manual of Information ) of the Bureau of Private 
Schools, Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC) Rules and Regulations, the 
by-laws of the BMI Corporation, the civil laws of the Philippines and such 
other rules and regulations that the Superintendent and the Commandant of 
Cadets shall promulgate. 

1.02 Intoxicating Liquors and Na rcotics - Cadets who shall drink, take 
or be found under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics, or cause 
the same to be brought within the Cadet Limits, or have the sane in their 
rooms or in their possession, shall be dismissed from the school or less severe- 
ly punished. 

1.03 Ungentlemanlv Conduct - Cadets are not only required to abstain 
from all vicious, immoral, or irregular conduct, but it is enjoined upon them 
to conduct themselves upon every occasion with the propriety and decorum which 
characterizes the society of gentlemen. Any cadet xdio shall be guilty of con- 
duct unbecoming a cadet and a gentleman shall be dismissed from the school or 
otherwise less severely punished. 

I. 04 . False Statement - Any cadet who shall knoxdngly or willfully make 
any false statement, or cause the same to be made shall be dismissed from the 
school or otherwise less severely punished. 

1 .05 Disorders and Neglects - All disorders and neglect to the prejudice 
of good order and discipline that wi ll bring discredit to the Bill shall be 
dealt with accordingly. 

1.06 Hazing, participating in. encouraging, or countenancing - 

Sec I a„ Hazing defined - Hazing is defined as any unauthorized 
assumption of authority by one cadet over another cadet whereby the latter 
shall or may suffer or be exposed to suffer any cruelty, indignity, h um i l iation, 
hardship or oppression or the deprivation or abridgement of any right, privi- 
lege, or advantage to which he shall be legally entitled. 

b. Enco uragi n g hazing defined - Encouraging hazing is defined 
as any act done or word spoken which directly or indirectly results to hazing 
or inclines another to haze, and any indication or approval when hazing is in 
process. 

c. Countenanci n g hazing defined — Count en;tn cing hazing is de- 
fined as the act of being present during hazing and while in a position to do 
so, or failing to make an honest effort to induce the guilty parties to desist 
therefrom. 

Sec II a. Physical hazing (boxing, kicking, socking, slapping, beat- 
ing etc) is absolutely prohibited. Upperclass cadets must not require any new 
cadet to perform things or acts which might impair their health. 


- 1 - 



b. If any cadet is charged with hazing,, participating in, en- 
couraging, or countenancing the practice of hazing, and if upon investigation, 
the Superintendent (BMI) is convinced that the cadet is guilty as charged, he 
may recommend the punishment of either suspension or dismissal from the school 
subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees. If as a result, the victim 
or victims shall be hospitalized or shall be incapacitated to perform his nor- 
mal duties, the penalty to be imposed shall be dismissal and in addition, a 
criminal case may be filed in a civil court against the erring cadet. 

1.07 Tackling defined - Tackling is defined as the privilege given to 
upperclass cadets (by virtue of their residence at the BMI) to make corrections 
or take instant remedial measures to correct the defects of new cadets. It is 
enjoined upon all upperclass cadets to refrain from tackling their own class- 
mates and new cadets of higher academic attainment. However, if an upperclass 
cadet observes any new cadet flagrantly violating regulations or breaches of 
discipline (whom he cannot tackle) he must immediately report the matter to any 
cadet officer. Officer in Charge, or to any Tactical Officer. 

1.08 Gambling - Cadets shall not gamble.. 

1.09 Absence at Night - Cadets who shall absent themselves from quarters 
between taps and reveille for a period longer than half an hour on any one oc- 
casion without proper authority, shall be dismissed from the school or other- 
wise less severely punished. Cadets shall not sleep in a room other than his. 

1.10 Passing Cadet Limits - Any cadet who shall go beyond cadet limits 
without leave shall be dealt with accordingly. 

1.11 Combination Among Cadets - All combinations or joint action among 
cadets for the purpose of violating or evading any regulation, orders, or ins- 
tructions issued by a competent authority, or for the purpose of expressing 
disapprobation or censure of any person in the S'ET shall be dealt with accor- 
dingly. 


1.12 Reparations of Wrong - If a cadet shall consider himself wronged by 
another cadet, or by an officer of the school, he may complain to the Commandant 
of Cadets, who shall take such action as he deems advisable. Should the com- 
plaining party be refused redress, he may appeal to the Board of Trustees through 
the Superintendent, BMI . 


PLi pi-jut lui-ij.ii 1 - -L I SNS 


1.16 Periodi cals . In f orm ation - a. a cadet who writes stories or articles 
for publication will submit to the Commandant of Cadets a request to publish such 
stories or articles. In each case the request will be accompanied by a copy of 
the manuscript. Same will be forwarded to the Superintendent for such action as 
deemed recommended. 

b. Cadets will not give out for publication any information about 
transactions at the BMI. News queries will be referred to the Superintendent. 

1.17 Debts or Commercial Transactions - a. Agents and salesmen may Ccinvas, 
exhibit, or sell their articles to cadets by p emission of the Superintendent 
only, and on places specifically designated for their use. No person may take 
advantage of permission to visit a cadet in barracks for the purpose of carry- 
ing on commercial transactions. 


2 



b. Cadets are prohibited from acting as agents for commercial 
houses or insurance companies, and from soliciting orders of any kind. 

c. Cadets shall not contract any debts without the permission of 
the Superintendent. All authorized debts shall be paid by the treasurer, Bl-il. 
Cadets shall not enter into any business transactions with entities in or out^»_ - 
side of the School without specific authority. 

1 — leuiiDLiviUi^ 

1.18 Address of Parents - Bach cadet will submit in duplicate a report 
of every change in the address of liis parents or guardians. This report will 
be submitted immediately upon learning of a change in address . Cadets may not 
change their own address except as a result of the actual change of residence 
of their parents or guardians. 


2 - DlSCtikRGh OR BhPAltATIOH 

2.01 The following are causes for discharge or separation from the 
Baguio Military Institute: 

a. Deficiency in conduct 

b. Undesirable habits, traits or character 

c. Drinking, taking, bringing or under the influence of intoxicat- 
ing liquor or narcotics 

d. Ungentlemanly conduct 

e. Making false statement 

f. Participating, countenancing, or encouraging hazing 

g. Disorders 

h. Unauthorized absence for one (l) month 

i. Absence between taps and reveille for more than thirty (30) 
minutes 

j. Physical disability 

2.02 Clearance - A cadet leaving the school either permanently or for a 
considerable period of time whether by discharge, resignation, dismissal, 
suspension, hospitalization, or sick leave, will report to his Tactical Officer 
for instructions regarding his clearance. 


^ _ OlUirt.l'ilk.ATlOh Ai'lD OUnnAMJ OxliKl'IlZATiOW 

3.01 Cadet Corps Baguio Military Institute (COHril) - The Cadet Corps will 
be organized as the Commandant ox Cadets may direct. 

3.02 Assignment to Companies - nvery cadet, regardless of his rank, will 
be assigned to a company- for quarters and administration. 

3 .0 3 Commandant of Cadet s - The Commandant of Cadets shall command the 
Cadet Corps, and is charged with its military instructions end discipline. 

3.04 Tactical Officers - All officers under the Commandant of Cadets 
shall be referred t o as Tactical Officers. Tactical Officers assigned by the 
Commandant of Cadets to supervise cadet companies will be referred to as 
Company Tactical Officers. 


- 3 - 



3.05 Cadets - a. General - For training purposes the Cadet Units, under 
the direct supervision of the Company Tactical Officers, shall be commanded by 
cadet officers and cadet non-commissioned officers appointed by the Superin- 
tendent upon the recommendation of the Commandant of Cadets. The chain of 
command is also found in the Mess Hall. area and table command jurisdictions. 

The responsibility for the proper administration of the Cadet Company rests 
with the cadet chain of command. 

b. Regular or acting cadet officers and non-commissioned officers 
will be responsible for maintaining discipline, for instructing those placed 
under their control, and for setting a soldiery example at all times. All 
cadets, however, will exercise their influence to maintain the discipline, 
standards and traditions of the Cadet Corps, EMI. 

c. In any situation, including groups not in formation, respon- 
sibility of command and maintenance of order, discipline, proper behavior and 
general decorum, will rest with the senior cadet present. It will be lessened 
in the presence of another cadet (such as a member of the guard ) who has con- 
current and official authority at the moment. 

d. Whenever a cadet, who would normally be in command in a situa- 
tion, is to be absent, he vri.ll notify the next in rank. Acting cadet officers 
and non-commissioned officers will have the authority and responsibilities of 
the position they are temporarily filling. 

3.06 Seniority - a. Except in academic sections, senirity will be deter- 
mined first, by order of military rank in the Cadet Corps and secondly, by 
alphabetical order among the privates of each class beginning with the highest 
class. 

b. In the academic sections, seniority will be determined by the 
order in which names appear on the "Weekly Report of Grades". Section Marchers 
will be held responsible for the conduct of their sections. 

3 .0 7 Giving orders - a. Regular or acting cadet officers and non-com- 
missioned officers have the authority to give authorized orders at any time to 
any junior cadet in class or in military rank, unless the cadet is removed from 
their control by seme special conditions. 

b. Unless acting in an official capacity, cadet priva.tes may not 
give orders to other privates. However, upperclass privates nay correct lower 
class privates. 

c. Cadets idio are detailed to special duties such as Guard, Cadet 

in Charge of Qua.rters, Section Marchers, Floor Inspectors, etc. or who by virtue 
of seniority become vested with specific responsibilities, may give any cadet 
such orders as are necessitated by their duties or responsibilities. 

d. Personal orders never tolerated. 


4 - i)LLlhb.UEwCIbJ. UJil'i bii lTo nhb PUhldlu-iiW'llQ 

4.01 Definition - Any cadet who, through design, neglect, carelessness, 
or failure to perform a duty, violates regulations, commits acts to the pre- 
judice of good order and military discipline or fails to measure up to the 


- 4 - 



standards of a cadet and a gentleman, will be adjudged to have committed a 
delinquency. Delinquencies will be punished according to the directives is- 
sued by the Commandant of Cadets and approved by the Superintendent. The to- 
tal number of demerits awarded during a demerit period determines a cadet' 3 
standing in Conduct for that period. 

4.02 Classification of Delinquencies - a. Class I (Minimum: 7 demerits , 

8 punishment tours, and 3 weekend confinement. Offenses for which awards 
will be made by the Commandant are subject to the approval of the Superinten- 
dent. Such offenses include: 

a* Deliberate neglect of or absence from a prescribed duty 

b* Improper conduct reflecting on character 

c* Improper conduct reflecting discredit on the Corps 

d. Insubordination 

e. Intentional violation of Units 

f. Use or traffic of Liquor 

g. Destroying, wasting, or damaging school property of any kind 
( intentional ) 

h. Gambling 

i. Other serious Offenses 

Awards made in Class I will be known as "Superintendents Awards". 
Punishments during demerit periods awarded for offenses of this class will be 
doubled for a second offense (regardless of nature), tripled for a third of- 
fense, etc, cumulative throughout a cadet's stay at the Institute. Maximum 
punishment: Expulsion from BMI. 

b. Class II (Mini ruin : 3 demerits, 4 punishment tours and 2 week- 
end confinement. Maximum: 15 demerits, 21 punishment tours and 1 month 

confinement during demerit periods. ) Offenses of this nature will be made 
by the Commandant of Cadets. Ouch Offenses include: 

a. Failure to obey orders, instructions, or regulations not 
amounting to insubordination 

b. Derelictions that tend to incite unfavorable comment regarding 
discipline 

c. Indifference of any kind 

d. Consistent failure to maintain Corps standards of neatness 
and deportment 

e. Discourtesy or ill manners 

f. Responsible cadet, failing to maintain order and discipline 

g. Careless performance of duty 

h. Destroying, wasting, or damaging school property through 
neglect or carelessness 


Awards in Class II will be knovm as " Common dJints Awards" . 


c. Class III (Minimum: 1 to 4 demerits, curtailment of one week- 

end privilege. Offenses of a lesser nature for which a’O.rds will be made by 
the Company Tactical Officers, ouch offenses include: 

a. Possession of unauthorized articles 

b. Failing to comply with general instructions or published 
memoranda (unintentional) 


- 5 - 


c* Lesser intentional offenses 

d* Rusty, missing, dirty, or tom articles of any kind 
e* Violations of uniform regulations 

f* Violations of prescribed standing classroom instructions 
g* Unintentional violation of limits 
h* General inattention 

Awards in Class III will be known as "Tactical Officers Awards 1 ' 
Reports 

4.03 a. A cadet may be reported for comraiting any delinquency. Reports 
may be submitted any time by any officer or civilian instructor or cadet against 
any cadet, his military junior; except that rank does not enter into cases in- 
volving honor, character, hazing or when the reporting cadet is acting in an 
official capacity* 

b. A cadet who has been reported by another cadet for any delinquency 
shall hold no discussion of the matter with the cadet who reported him unless 
specifically permitted by the Company Tactical Officer or any higher authority. 

A cadet having reported another shall likewise hold no discussion of the matter 
with the cadet reported unless with similar permission* 

4 4 04 Form for Reporting Delinquencies — Reports will be entered against 
a cadet on the prescribed HCC Form, in two copies; Both the original (white) 
and duplicate (yellow) copies will be forwarded to the Cadet Guard Room* 

4*05 Explanation of Reports — a* iixplanat ion of reports on the duplicate 
(yellow) copy of the prescribed HMI Form will consist of a straight-forward, 
clear and complete summary of the facts connected with each offense or with 
the intention of the cadet, such as may be necessary to a full understanding 
of the case* It will not contain argument, equivocation, criticism, complaint, 
opinion, or irrelevant remarks* If the explanation places responsibility on 
another cadet, he w ill be named. Should a report be in error, or in any way 
not convey the complete facts in the case, the cadet concerned should consider 
it a moral obligation and responsibility to explain the report fully in order 
that any error may be rectified or the responsibility placed xfhere it right- 
fully belongs. 


h. In all reports for failure or neglect to prepare lessons, expla- 
nations w ill be required which shall account, in detail, for the study time of 
the 24-hours preceding the recitation for which the cadet was reported. 


c. All explanations of reports wall be turned over by the cadet, pro- 
perly filled out, by dropping them in the Delinquency Box provided for this pur- 
pose in the Cadet Guard Room. These explanation of reports should be submitted 
not more than 24 hours after receipt of the yellow copy. Reports turned in after 
such time will be awarded immediately without benefit of explanation. 


DiftjKRITB 


4,06 Demerits Defined - Demerits are not punishments but are marks in 
conduct. 


4.07 Denier it Alloxvances - For the purpose ox couputation of the demerit 
allowances of cadets, the following will be made the basis in determining their 
total allowances for every demerit period of fifteen days. 


Upperclass Cadets Mew Cadets 

College 8 Demerits 13 demerits 

High School ( 2 nd to 4 th )-10 Demerits 16 demerits 

1 st Year HS 18 demerits 

4 . 0 S Grading in Conduct - The system of monthly grading in conduct shall 
be based on the following table: 



k 

B 

C 

D 

COLLEGE 

Upperclass Cadets 

Demerits 

0-3 

Demerits 
4 - 9 

Demerits 
10 - 16 

Demerits 

COLLEGE 
New Cadets 

0-1 

5-12 

13 - 26 

FOR 

EVERY 

HIGH SCHOOL 
Upperclass Cadets 

0 - 5 

6-12 

13 - 20 

El CESS 
DEMERIT 

HIGH SCHOOL 
New Cadets ( 2 nd- 1 th ) 

0-6 

7-19 

20 - 32 

AND 

SPECIAL 

HIGH SCHOOL 
First Year Cadets 

0-9 

10 - 21 

22 - 36 

AMAHDS 


4.09 Excess Demerits - a. Receipts of demerit in excess of a fixed demerit 
period allowances (Refer to par 1.07) is a basis of punishment. Punishments 
awarded for excess demerits will be served by punishment tours, one hour for 
every two excess demerits. 

b. Demerits received as a result of Superintendent or Commandant 1 s 
awards will not be included in determining excess demerits. 

c. Cadets shall be given the benifit of fractions in computing al- 
loxrance of demerits. 

d. The Commandant of Cadets may direct a periodic computation of 
demerits of cadets, once before the end of each semester, to be based on par 
4 . 07 . Cadets who are exceeding their total allowances at this computation will 
be reported to a board of officers formed by the Commandant of Cadets for this 
purpose, to be counted against the cadet concerned as a Deficiency in Conduct. 

The said Board shall act upon every cadet who has exceeded his total demerit 
allowance. Demerits in excess of the total allowance may constitute a basis 
for dismissal from the school. 

e. The investigating board will submit the corresponding results of 
their probe to the Connandant of Cadets on all cases involving Excess Demerits, 
together with their findings and recommendations. 

f. Demerits acquired from Special Awards should be included in this 
periodic computation. Demerit allox ranees for Cadets may be increased or c <. 
decreased proportionately as the Superintendent may direct. 


- 7 - 


4.10 Record of Demerit Awards - a, All records of deuerit awards of cadets 
will be filed in their respective 201 files. 

b. Parents of Cadets concerned will be furnished with a copy of ser- 
ious delinquencies together with their corresponding awards.. 

4.11 Reconsideration of Awards — If a cadet believes the award for any of- 
fense to be incorrect or unfair, he nay subnit in writing a request for recon- 
sideration of the award, bach request will be addressed to the Commandant of 
Cadets and will follow the accepted military form of correspondence. The cadet 
will state the offense, the date of the award, the award and the reasons for 
request. Such request will, except for cogent reasons, be submitted with the 
approval of the Department of Tactics to the Commandant of Cadets as soon as 
possible. If such requests are unduly lengthy or complicated, the cadet con- 
cerned may request consultation with any Tactical Officer. Late requests will 
be disapproved unless in the opinion of the Commandant of Cadets the reason 

for the delay justifies special consideration,. If the a\jard for an offense 
is changed as a result of the request for reconsideration, the cadet concerned 
will be notified. 

PU1JISHMLNTS 

4.12 Definition - Any award, other than demerits, conferred for delin- 
quencies are termed punishments. A punishment may consist of reduction of ranks, 
walking the area, or confinement to a cadet's own room. 

4.13 Punishment Tours - The following procedure in conducting Punishment 
Tcurs should be strictly observed: 

a. The Punishment List will be published in the Bulletin Board 
prior to the period that punishment are to be served. 

b. The Cadet in Charge of Quarters mil form the punishment squad 
in line at the punishment area designated and will render the report to the 
Officer of the Day. He should account for all absentees. 

c. The Cadet in Charge of Quarters mil immediately inf or mi all 
cadets who will serve punishment tours. 

d. The uniform and time for walking tours will be prescribed. No 
cadet will be allowed to tour at any time he pleases unless with the authority 
from the Commandant of Cadets or in the latter's absence, from the Officer on 
Charge. 

e. a five-minute break is given eveiy thirty ( 30 ) minutes of touring 
to allow the cadets to attend to their personal necessities. 

f. Punishment tours will be conducted on the parades ground, or in 
case of inclement weather, at the gymnasium. Cadets not serving punishment 
tours are "off-limits" to the area of punishment, 

g. All members of the guard can report any cadet serving punishment 
tours improperly. 

h. Members of the Guard while on guard duty will not serve punish- 


ment tours. 



i. Cadet commissioned and n on- c orani s s i on ed officers will not serve 
punishment tours. 

4*14 Restricted Limit s - "Restricted Limits" include the barracks, club 
rooms, areas of barracks, cadet store, gymnasium and outdoor areas for ex- 
ercise for not more than two hours, the Post Library for reading and study 
only, and such other places for official visit when permission has been granted 
by the Officer in Charge, The cadet involved will be subject to inspection 
at any time and must account for absences by properly marking his absence card, 
and by signing out in the Cadet Departure Book. 

4.15 Company Punishm ent - Company punishment my be served daily as 
directed by the Company Tactical Officer, Buch punishments will not be altered 
as a delinquency report on a cadets record. Punishment as listed below, singly 
or in combination, up to the maximum which may be served in one week, may be 
awarded for offenses other than those described in subsequent pertinent parag- 
raphs : 

a. Admonition 

b. Reprimand 

c„ Deprivation of one or more privileges, including cancellation of 
leave 

d. Restriction to prescribed limits 

e. Barracks fatigue on personal property or equipment, living space 
and space used in common with other cadets 

4.16 Genera] - a. Other duties will take precedence over the serving of 
punishments unless specifically excepted. 

b. Punishment Tours will be effected as soon as posted on the 
Bulletin Board. 

c. Cadets with punishment to serve, unless specifically exempted, 
will serve all of the punishment meted out to them. 

d. Cadets having punishment tours to serve, who are - deficient in 
Academics may request for confinements in lieu of touring. Requests will be 
submitted in writing to the Commandant of Cadets through his Company Tactical 
Officer, for action. Subject cadet will be required to study while punish- 
ment tours are in effect. 

e. Punishments will be suspended as the Superintendent nay direct. 

f. A cadet may not serve any punishment while he is in sick con- 
finement, or when excused by the School Physician. 

g. Cadets required to serve punishments, who desire to attend 
extra instructions, will not serve punishment on that day. This does not 
relieve cadets undergoing punishments for very serious offenses from obser- 
ving restricted limits. 

I'ioRITo 

4.17 Genera l - a. For excellent performance of duty, cleanliness of 
quarters, best appearance, obedience to orders, good conduct and other 
commendable actions, cadets may be awarded merits at the discretion of the 
Commandant of Cadets. 


- 9 - 


b. All nerits earned by cadets nay be utilized by then to cover 
up for their denerits acquired during any demerit period. However, un- 
used merits cannot be utilized as a deposit to cover up future demerits 
but may be included in the over-all computation for grades in conduct. 

Two nerits earned is equivalent to one punishment tour served for excess 
demerits; four merits earned is equivalent to one punishment tour served 
for special awards. 

4.18 Dismissal. Suspension, and Loss of Leave - For very serious 
offenses the Superintendent nay direct the dismissal, suspension, or 
forfeiture of vacation, or Christmas leave of a cadet, subject to the 
approval of the Board of Trustees. Special orders covering this procedure 
will be issued when necessary. 

5 - LOST PROPERTY 

5.01 Anyone who finds a lost property will turn it over to the owner 
or to any member of the Cadet Guard. The Cadet Officer of the Day, from 
tine to time, will have the list of articles found published in the company 
bulletin board. Any property so published and not claimed within one month 
from the first publication in the bulletin board, will be turned over to the 
Supply Officer, EMI for proper disposition, getting a receipt therefrom 

for file and future reference. 

5.02 A cadet who has had property missing for several days may forward 
a report to his Tactical Officer. The Tactical Officer concerned will, is he 
considers it advisable, have an inspection in his company instead of asking 
for an "All Is Well". 

5.03 An "All Is Well" request for lost property, if approved by the 
Commandant of Cadets, will be asked of all cadets. Prior publication of an 
approved "All Is Well" should be made to enable cadets to check carefully 
all properties in their possession. 

5 .0 4 All comi-iuni cations concerning lost property will include a des- 
cription of the article, the markings, if any, time and date when lost, if 
known, and the place where it is believed to have been lost. 

5 .0 5 Lost and found articles belonging to guests at socials, outings 
or picnics, will be turned over to the Officer of the Day. Publications of 
such items found will also be published on the bulletin boards. The Cadet 
Officer of the Day will note therefrom the full name of the cadet claiming 
the article, or if a civilian, his or her full name and address. 

6 - SCHOOL PROPERTY 

6.01 A cadet will be pecuniarily responsible for all school property for 
which he signs and will not be relieved of this responsibility until his 
receipt is returned to him or a Turn-in-Slip duly signed by the officer from 
whom he received the property, is given. 

6.02 All damages or destruction of school property which are not the 
result of fair wear-and-tear will be charged against the responsible cadet. 



6.03 Cadets will not nark school properties unless so directed. They 
will not take any school property from the Barracks except when authorized. 

They will neither lend or exchange such articles without permission from his 
Tactical Officer. 

6.04 Cadets will not use emery cloth, sand paper or other abrasives on 
their rifles, nor alter them by cutting, filing, scraping, or varnishing any 
part of them without the permission of their Tactical Officer. 

6.05 School property which are rendered unserviceable through fair 
wear-and-tear should be turned over to the Supply Officer, Bhl for replace- 
ment. 

7 - UFFI CIkL 0 Ut-iKUl i ICi .TlOhS 

7. 01 a. all official communications by cadets shall be submitted either 
written in ink and in printed form or typewritten. The letter shall conform 
to the sample letter shown herewith. 

b„ Cadets will transmit official communi cations through channels. 

All letters originating from a cadet and intended for higher authority shall 
be forw r arded through his Company Tactical Officer. Except as elsewhere spe- 
cified, al 1 communications requiring action by the Commandant of Cadets or a 
lower echelon of command will be submitted in duplicate, and to higher authority 
in triplicate. 


c» In the first paragraph of any communi cation , cadets will refer 
to the order or regulations pertinent to the subject of the communi cation. 

d. Except in reference to orders and regulations, abbreviations 
may not be used in the body of the communication. 

e. When a cadet signs a letter in the performance of official 
duties, as the case of a Cadet in Charge of Quarters, he will place his title 
or official designation in block style in line below his rank and class as 
follows: 


JUAN DE La CRUZ 

Cdt Cpl, 4th Yr HS/ College 

Cadet in Charge of Quarters 

f. When a letter is only one paragraph long, the paragraph is not numbered. 
When more than one page is needed, plain paper will be used and all pages num- 
bered starting with page (2). 


- 11 - 


g. Sample Military Letter: 


HEaD QUiilTLkb 

BkGUIO MILITiJTY INSTITUTE 
Irisan, Baguio 


GCL/ chm/ 319 


AD 106.36 


10 June 195S 


SUBJECT: Military Lette: 


THRU: The Commandant of Cadets 


TO: 


Cadet Juan de la Cruz 


1. The military letter is used for communication with other military, 
naval, and air personnel and between activities of major services and other 
units of the AFP and by cadets for the intentions of their higher authorities 
in BMI. 

2. Margins are 11/4 inches (15 spaces-elite type) on the left side 

and 3/4 inch (9 spaces) on the right side. The margin is kept even as 

possible. When no printed letterhead is available, the top margin of the 
typed letterhead is approx.! mat ely 3/4 inch (5 spaces) from the top of the 
paper. On the second and succeeding pages, the top margin is approximately 
1 1/4 inches (7 spaces ). At the bottom, the margin is not less than 1 1/4 
inches (about 7 spaces). 

3. Single spacing with a double space between paragraph is usually 

the practice. If the letter is less than nine lines and neither reply 
nor further action is anticipated, it may be double spaced. 

4. Only one side of a sheet of 1 .per is used. The office symbol of 

preparation is typed on the upper corner as shown on this sample, and the 
list of inclosures typed on the left signing the communication. The com- 
plimentary close is never used. 


BY ORDER OF LIEUTEilANT COLONEL HEIISON: 


C0NR4D0 F FORONDA 
2nd Lt, (BMI ) Inf 
Adjutant 


1 Incl 

Sample of Mil Ltr 


- 12 - 


8 - BARRACKS 


8.01 Assignment of Rooms - a. Except when otherwise authorized in indi- 
vidual cases, all cadets will be assigned to rooms within their own company 
area. 

b. Subject to the approval of their respective Company Tactical 
Officers, Cadet Company Commanders will make all room assignments within their 
companies . 


Co Company Commanders and their staff will be assigned rooms in 
the company area of the barracks. 

8.02 Bath - Cadets may bathe anytime between reveille and First-Call for 
breakfast; anytime after authorized or scheduled athletics, and anytime during 
release from quarters. 

8.03 Inspections - Rooms will be subject to inspection at all times. 

8.04 Authorized Articles - a. Cadets may keep in their possession only 
such articles as are issued or specifically authorized. 

b. Firearms - Firearms and ammunition which ccrne into the pos- - 
session of cadet from sources other than issue will be turned in immediately to 
the Company Tactical Officer, who will arrange for proper disposal with the 
Security Officer, BMI. 

c. Firearms and Deadly Weapons - Wo cadet should have in his 
possession any firearms or deadly weapons such as pistols, revolvers, knives 
etc. Such weapons will be turned in immediately to the Company Tactical Offi- 
cer who shall in turn deposit it with the Security Officer, BMI. 

8.05 Ventilatio n - a. Rooms will be kept well ventilated when occupied. 
Windows should be left open during day and night except during inclement wea- 
ther. 


b. When all occupants of a room are absent from school, or in 
the hospital, the room will be left in order, the windows closed and the doors 
locked . 

8.06 Light s - a. Cadets are authorized lights until Taps. 

b. On evenings of general entertainment or when Saturday 
evening privileges are in effect, lights are authorized until thirty minutes 
after Taps. 


c. All lights in Barracks, except those in the sinks, 
bulletin boards, orderly rooms, and in rooms duly authorized to have late 
lights will be turned off by the Cadet in Charge of Quarters or the Cadet Of- 
ficer of the Day after Taps Inspection. 


- 13 - 


8.07 Late Lights - a. The Company Commander and his staff, the First Ser- 
geant, the Floor Inspector and the members of the School Publication Staff 
(when using the staff room) are authorized late lights 30 minutes after Taps. 


b„ Late lights up to 2300H will be granted automati- 
cally to cadets scheduled to take any kind of examination the following day. 

c. Deficient cadets may apply for late lights on the 
prescribed EMI form. Lacking this, they may apply verbally to their Company 
Officers who will transmit same. 


d. Cadets on Duty as Guards may turn in their lights 
in their rooms after Taps. After the termination of their duty, they may keep 
their lights on to prepare their bunks. 

8.08 V isitors in Barracks - a. Except for the following individuals, any- 
one desiring to enter barracks must obtain a written authority from the Officer 
in Charge : 

Superintendent and members of his Staff 
Mothers of the Board of Trustees 
Tactical Officers 
Barracks Janitors 

b. With written permission of the Officer in Charge, cadets may take 
male visitors (other than solicitors and tutors) into barracks during release 
from quarters and when Saturday evening privileges are in effect, until Tattoo. 

c. Individuals performing authorized repair work or inspections must 
secure a signed pass from the Post Service Officer which will be presented to 
the Officer in Charge or to the senior member of the Cadet Guard present. 

d„ Women may be taken in barracks only during "Open House" 

e. No authorized visitors, except those cadets of similar Military 
and Naval Academies of other countries and ROTO cadets, may spend the night in 
barracks. Request for permission to have visitors overnight will be refered 

to the Command art of Cadets and will include the following information: the name 
or names of the visitors and official status, inclusive dates of visit, and the 
rooms in which visitors will sleep. 

f. Visitors may not loiter to watch the punishment squad; they may 
not loiter in the entrances of the barracks, Cadets are responsible that their 
visitors follow these regulations. 

g„ No cadet may entertain a visitor who had been a former cadet dis- 
missed from the EMI for misconduct or who has resigned for the good of the 
school, unless such visitor has a written permission from the Superintendent 
to visit the school. 

8.09 Bed s - a. All beds except those belonging to the Officer in Charge 
and regular members of the guard shall be fixed for sleeping before Taps Ins- 
pection. 


- 14 - 


b. During evenings of social entertainment, or when Saturday evening 
privileges are in effect, cadets taking advantage of any privilege will fix 
their beds ten (10) minutes after they have signed in* 


8.10 Taps - a. All cadets except those authorized late lights, and other 
cadets inside the room not specifically authorized late lights but who are ta- 
king advantage of the privilege, should be in bed during Taps Inspections. 

b. After Taps - Unless in cases of emergency, cadets may not leave 
their rooms except to attend to the call of nature only. 


9 - MESS HALL 


9.01 Division into Area s - The Company Commander will divide the Mess Hall 
into Platoon areas and assigned the necessary number of tobies to each. 

9.02 Designation of Tables - a. A table at the center will be designated 
as the "Staff Table". 

b. Tables designated to Athletic Squads during actual competitions 
will be referred to as "Athletic Squad Tables". A "diet table" for cadets be- 
low the weight limit will also be designated. 

9.03 Assignment of Seats - a. Cadet Company Commanders and Captains of 
Athletic Squads will be responsible for assigning seats to cadets under them. 

No cadet may change his seat without proper authority. 

b. Unless specially authorized to sit elsewhere, all cadets will 
sit in their platoon areas. 

9.04 Besp ons i bility of Cadet Of fi cers - a. Cadet Officers will be espe- 
cially responsible with maintenance of good order and the enforcement of the 
regulations within the areas in which seated. 

b. In each case the senior cadet, other than the Company Commander 
present, will be in charge. 


c. Mess hall area commanders will remain in their respective areas 
until the last cadet has departed therefrom. They will be responsible that 
Table Commandants in their apea will carry out their assigned duties. 

9.05 Table Commandant s - a. The senior cadet present at any table at any 
time will be the Commandant thereof except athletic squad tables wherein senio- 
rity by designation will prevail. 

b. The Table Commandant ’will always sit at the head of the table, 
except that when the regular Table Commandant leaves the table temporarily, or 
for the remainder of the meal, he may designate a cadet to act as Table Comman- 
dant during his absence. Table Commandants will not relinquish their seats to 
visitors. Visitors will normally sit to the right of the Table Commandant. 


- 15 - 



c. Each Table Commandant will be responsible for gentlemanly and 
orderly conduct and the observance of mess etiquette at his table. 

d. He will see to it that aid New Cadets eat their food without 
physical restraint, maintaining the position and attitude at the table as 
prescribed in the New Cadet Customs. 

9.06 Mess Damages - Cadets will be charged for mess equipment which they 
lose or damage. The Table Commandant will notify the Officer in Charge of the 
loss, damage, or breakage of any mess equipment. He will in turn require the 
cadet to sign a voucher. 

9.07 Entering the Mess Hall - a. All units will enter the Mess Hall as 
prescribed by memoranda. 

b. Cadets excused from marching in formation will precede the Corps 
to the Mess Hall but may not enter until the Corps is about to enter. 

c. All cadets (except Company Commanders and Cadet Guards) will re- 
move their caps on entering the Mess Hall, proceed directly to their seats and 
stand at attention until the command of "Take Seats" is given. No unnecessary 
noise must be made upon entering the Mess Hall. Raincoats if worn, will be ta- 
ken off after "Take Seats" is given. 

9.08 Time Allowed for Meals - Erom the time the command of "Take Seats" 
is given, twenty-five (25) minutes will be allowed for breakfast; thirty (30) 
minutes for lunch and dinner. The Officer in Charge may vary the time when 
necessary. 

9.09 Leaving the Mess Hall - a. No cadet may leave before the publica- 
tion of orders and no cadet may leave individually without proper authority. 

b. After "Company Rise" is given, no cadet (except those specifi- 
cally authorized) will put on their headgear when leaving the Mess Hall. Head- 
gear may be worn only when outside of the Mess Hall. 

c. Any cadet leaving the Mess Hall individually before the dismis- 
sal from meals, will report "All Is Well, Sir" to the Mess Hall Corporal on 
duty near the door. 

d. Only First Sergeants, Supply Sergeants and other cadets specifi- 
cally authorized by the Officer in Charge may leave the Mess Hall individually. 

9.10 Leaving the Mess Hall (Corps) - a. Immediately prior to the termina- 
tion of the meal, the Company Commander will inspect the entire Mess Hall. 

Area Commanders will rise \?ith the Company Commander and remain in their areas 
until the last cadet has departed therefrom. 

b. Cadets will cease eating at the command, "Attention", and leave 
the Mess Hall individually at the command, "Rise". 

9.11 Visiting - Cadets may "visit" other cadets in the Mess Hall only 
with specific authority from the Officer In Charge. 


- 16 - 



9.12 Complaint s - All complaints concerning the cadet mess will be made 
to the Officer in Charge. Whenever an article of food is considered unfit for 
consumption, the Table Commandant will take it at once to the Officer in Charge 
after asking the permission from the Company Commander. Complaints will not 
be made to the waiter. 

9.13 Behavior Insid e t he Mess Hall - a. Cadets will not throw or toss 
any article in the Mess Hall. 

b. They may not make any unnecessary noise. 

c. Cadets while in the Mess Hall shall at all times conduct them- 
selves in a gentlemanly and orderly manner, and shall observe correct mess 
etiquette. 

9.14 Reading Matter - Reading matters except official papers will not be 
taken into the Mess Hall. 

9.15 Bringing and Removing Articles - Cadets will not bring or remove 
any article of food or mess equipment from the Mess Hall without proper autho- 
rity. 


9.16 Visitors - a. The Officer in Charge will authorize cadets to take 
adult male friends to meals as follows: 

1. Visiting Alumni of the Baguio Military Institute, Officers and 
cadets of other Military Schools - Any Meal 

2. Other guests (Members of immediate families of cadets): Dinner 
on free evenings; lunch on Sundays and Holidays 

b. A cadet who takes a visitor to a meal will notify the Mess Hall 
Corporal at the door that he has obtained authority for his visitor. Unless 
entertaining the visitor officially for the Corps, the cadet will sign a 
charge slip for each visitor for each meal. 

c. The Corps is called to attention in the Mess Hall when a visit 
is made by the Superintendent, the Commandant of Cadets, the Dean of Studies, 
or by a distinguished person net on duty with the school. The same procedure 
will be followed when he leaves the Mess Hall before "Company Rise" is given. 

9.17 Special Fo ods - a. Cadets should not ask any Mess personnel for any 
special menu in the Mess Hall. All cadets should be served with the some kind 
of food in sufficient quantity. 

b. Special foods sent by parents or relatives to cadets should not 
be served in the Mess Hall unless there is a sufficient quantity for all cadets 
to be served equally; in which case, the cadet concerned should give the food 
to the Mess Officer for preparation and serving. 

c. Cadets are discouraged from asking any kind of food or dish from 
their parents, relatives or friends. 


- 17 - 


d. In cases when a cadet is allergic to some food served in the 
Mess Hall, he should inform the School Physician in order to get special at- 
tention and diet. 


10 - GYMNASIUM 


10.01 All cadets will conform to Gymnasium Regulations, to be issued by 
the Office of the Director, Physical Education, EMI. 

10.02 Hours for Exercise - Cadets nay visit the gymnasium anytime during 
Release from barters, daily; on Saturdays from immediately after inspection 
to 180 OH; on Sundays and Holidays from 0900 to 1200H and from 1300H to 1730H. 

10.03 Injuries - Injuries incurred during instructions will be reported 
at once to the Instructor in Charge. 

10.04 Uniform - Cadets will habitually wear the authorized athletic 
clothing when exercising in the gymnasium for any purpose. 

10.05 Handling of Equipment - Handling of athletic equipment shall be in 
accordance with instructions by the Director, Physical Education, EMI. 


11 - "ALL IS WELL" 


11.01 The report "All Is Well” means: 

a. Erom an Assistant Floor Inspector: That he has inspected his 

floor at the time and in the manner prescribed; that during his inspection all 
cadets were present or accounted for; and none were visiting without authority; 
or that all violations of the foregoing have been duly reported to the Floor 
Inspector. 


b. From a cadet outside his room or crossing a sentinels’ post: 
That he is going, or has been on an authorized visit and nowhere else; that he 
has observed or will observe the regulations relative to gambling, hazing, li- 
mits and liquor. 

c. Erom any occupant of a room at any inspection (except lost ar- 
ticles and Taps inspections): That all absentees and all visitors are autho- 

rized and that lights, if on, are authorized. 

d. Erom a cadet at an inspection for lost property: That he has 
inspected his own and other similar articles in his possession; that the lost 
property is not in his possession; and that he has no knowledge concerning it; 
or that he has personally returned the property to its rightful owner. 

e. From a cadet entering or leaving the Mess Hall individually: 
That he has authority to enter or leave individually and that any guest accom- 
panying him is authorized. 



f. From a Mess Hall Corporal: That all cadets entering or leaving 

the Mess Hall individually by the door at which he is posted reported "All Is 

Well" and no other person entered without proper authority; or that all viola- 
tions of the foregoing will be duly reported to the proper authority. 

g. From the sentinel (Barracks): That he has inspected in the pres- 
cribed manner all rooms in his floor and that all cadets were present or ac- 

counted for; that no unauthorized persons have erfcered or left the floor and 
that all cadets have reported "All Is Y/ell" on their departure or return; or 
that all violations of the foregoing have been or will be duly reported to the 
proper authority. 

h. From any occupant of a room at Taps Inspections - That all absen- 
tees and visitors are authorized; all ligjits, if on, are authorized; that all 
bunks except those belonging to cadets authorized by para 8.09 (a) are fixed 
for sleeping and that all cadets except those cadets otherwise authorized are 
in bed. 

11.02 a. A cadet is bound to report himself for any violation of "All Is 
Well". 

b. In the event an emergency arises wherein common sense dictates 
that a cadet should violate his "All Is Well", he will take the indicated ac- 
tion, report himself, and submit an explanation of the circumstances to his 
Tactical Officer. 

11.03 No other "All Is Well" will be asked for or given. The All Is Well" 
will not be used away from the Institute unless required by proper authority. 

11.04 The "All Is Well" will not be required at any room inspections until 
after the last note of taps, tattoo, or assembly for call to quarters. 

11.05 A cadet in inspecting his possession for lost property, will not 
necessarily inspect items in the trunk room or other places outside of his 
room if he is reasonably certain that he does not have the property. However, 
should he later find that he did have the lost property at the time the ins- 
pection was made he would have violated his "All Is Well". 

11.06 When an "All Is Well" is given, it applies to conditions existing 
at the time said "All Is Well" was asked for, and not at the time when it is 
given. 

11.07 Signature - a. A cadet’s signature, or whenever used by his autho- 
rity, vrill be binding on the cadet. Fnen signing for another cadet, signature 
will be followed by the initial of the signer. 

b. When taking advantage of privileges authorized in these regula- 
tions, such as dining permits, socials, etc., a cadet’s signature in a depar- 
ture book has the same significance as an "All Is Well" from a cadet outside 
his room or crossing a sentinel’s post, and certifies as to the correctness 
of all entries. 


- 19 - 


c. When, signing out in all other cases, such as for trips away from 
the post, entering or returning from the hospital, etc., a cadet’s signature 
in a departure hook simply certifies as to the correctness of all entries. 


12 - CALL TO QUARTERS 


12.01 Period of Call to Quarters - a. Daily except as otherwise prescribed 

1. From Reveille to First Call for breakfast, and from morning Call 
to Quarters until First Call for lunch. 

2. From Call to Quarters after lunch until Recall from the last re- 
gularly scheduled instructions in the afternoon. 

3. Frbm evening Call to Quarters until Reveille. 

c. Periods not expressly designed as ’’Call to Quarters” will cons- 
titute "Release from Quarters” 

d. Visiting During Call to Quarters - A cadet is "visiting" when, 
after going to a room other than his own, he opens the door, or enters the 
room, or talks with its occupants. The act of leaving his room and going to 
another is essential; the act of entering the room is not. Casual greeting, 
in itself, is not visiting. 

12.02 Restrictions - a. During call to quarters cadets will be in their 
rooms except when required for duty or authorized to be elsewhere. 

b. Cadets must preserve silence in barracks except when Saturday 
evening privileges are authorized. 

c. At assembly for evening call to quarters, rooms will be inspected 
to verify presence of cadets. 

12.03 Leaving Room During Call to Quarters - a. A cadet may leave his room 
during Sail to Quarters for any authorized purpose by properly accounting his 
absence on the Absence Card. The following formations or places are those at 
which cadets are required for duty or to which they are authorized to go during 
Sail to Quarters. 

1. Class or other authorized formations 

2. Barber Shop, Post Tailor, Cadet Store 

3. Dispensary (Physician or Dentist) by permission or appointment 

4. Sinks, Bathrooms, Bulletin Boards 

5. Cadet’s Club Room as authorized by the Officer in Charge 


- 20 - 


6 


?.hen directed in an emergency to report at a designated place by 
an Officer 


7. To take advantage of an authorized privilege 

8. To the office of the different departments on official business. 

b. YJhen Saturday evening privileges are in effect, cadets are autho- 
rized to visit the following from immediately after inspection following eve- 
ning Call to Quarters until Tattoo: 

(1) In Barracks, the Library, Class Clubs 

(2) Friends or relatives at Visitor's Room or at Officer's Qjiar- 
ters in the Post. 

c. Except in emergencies or when specifically authorized to be ab- 
sent, at the sounding of Call to Quarters, cadets shall at once repair to their 
rooms. This applies to all days of the week and only those cadets who have 
signed out in the company departure book for dining permit or special privi- 
leges on Saturday, evening preceding holidays, may be absent. 


13 - LEAVE OF ABSENCE 


13.01 Type : 

(1) Christmas leave (3) Sick leave 

(2) Week-end leave (4) Emergency Leave 

13.02 General Rules - a. Application by a cadet for a leave of absence 
will be made on the prescribed forms. 

b. Cadets on leave will not enter the post or camp without obtain- 
ing prior permission from the Commandant of Cadets in each instance and while 
in the post will conform to the usual customs governing cadets. 

c. Cadets who, for any reason, fail to take advantage of an approved 
leave will endors this fact on their leave request and submit it without delay 
to the officer specified in the instructions appearing on the leave form. 

d. Cadets will report promptly every change of address while on va- 
cation and on Christmas leave, sick, or emergency leave. 

e. In calculating the length of a leave, the day of departure will 
be a day of leave, the day of return a day of duty. Day begins and ends at 
midnight; but when the authority for leave fixes a definite time of return, 
cadet must have returned to duty by that time. 

f. An approved leave blank will be retained in possession of cadets 
until return. In the case of emergency leave blanks, one copy will be left with 
the Officer in Charge. 


- 21 - 



g. Cadets will sign out in company departure book only, giving com- 
plete address. 

h. A cadet returning from week-end leave will return to the Orderly 
Room, sign in, file it with the Cadet in Charge of Qparters and report his re- 
turn in person to the Cadet Company Commander prior to assembly for dinner for- 
mation. Cadets returning from emergency leave will complete the leave form in 
the Office of the Officer in Charge. 

i. Cadets who are going on leave can not ask or withdraw money from 
the S4 unless they have previous deposit as their emergency funds. They are 
therefore encouraged to make the necessary deposits in order that they will 
have money enough to defray the expenses that may be incurred during the leave. 

j. Late Reporting for Duty - Each case will be considered on its me- 
rits, taking into considerations the circumstances accounting for the delay. 
Adequate and timely travel arrangements by the cadet, regardless of the mode 

of travel, will be the determining factor in whether or not disciplinary action 
is warranted. 

13.03 Leaves and Vacations - Leaves and vacations will be granted under 
such regulation as the Superintendent will direct. 


14 - LIMITS 


14.01 Cadets are not allowed beyond the immediate premises of the Insti- 
tute reservation without specific permission, unless when on official business. 
All other roads, grounds and buildings outside the perimeter of the reserva- 
tion, unless specifically excepted, are "off limits" to cadets. 

14.02 All buildings and adjacent premises and inclosures within cadet li- 
mits are "off limits" except those listed below, and as otherwise provided for 
by para 15.14 b. 

a. Officers quart ers and grounds when invited or sufficient notice 
to the officer concerned is made. 

b. Academic building — only when on official business 

c. Administration building — only on official business 

d. Cadet Supply Room, Post Tailor — only on official business 

e. Tactics building — only on official business 

f. Gymnasium, Cadet Store, Post Barber — only on official business 

g. Library — as authorized by para 15.13 

h. Post Guard House — only on official business 


22 - 


14.03 Escort in g Limits - Cadets while escorting may enter a building where 
the escorted guest lives in order to escort such guest to and from a general 
entertainment provided further that such action is limited only to a courteous 
gesture of an invitation: and provided further that it will not jeopardize the 
time schedule of the entertainment and/or the time alloted for escorting. 

14.04 Au tomobile l imit s - Cadets nay ride in automobiles or tazis within 
the City of Baguio when authorized. 


14.05 Superi nt endent * s Qu art er s - Cadets may visit the Superintendent’s 
cottage at any reasonable hour during release from quarters. 


id - RECHD/J?! O N AL AND SOCIAL PRIVILEGES 

15.01 General Pr ovision s - a. Before taking advantage of any privilege, a 
cadet will familiarize himself with the authorizations and limitations pertain- 
ing thereto. He will take no undue advantage of any privilege. 

b. Privilege other than those appearing in this section may be gran- 
ted at the discretion of the Commandant of Cadets. 

15.02 General E n tert ai nme nt - The term general entertainment defines any 
entertainment of a general in nature sponsored by the BMI that is attended by 
all or a large number of the Corps during release from quarters, or when Sa- 
turday evening privileges are in effect. 

15.03 Aft er a Gener al Entertainment - a. Upon the completion of an evening 
general entertainment, all cadets will leave the place of entertainment as soon 
as practicable. 

b. Cadets will be authorized one (1) hour to sign return after the 
completion of an entertainment, cr . in case of early departure, after leaving 
the ent ert ainment . 

15.04 Satu rday Evening Privileges - a. The recreational and social privi- 
leges extended to cadets on Sail". _• day evenings and evenings preceding holidays 
will be referred to as "Saturday Evening Privileges." Advantage may be taken 
of any authorized privilege or combination of authorized privileges on Satur- 
day evenings by any cadet entitled t.o than. Such cadets may be absent from 
their rooms at room inspections up to the termination of their privileges, 
provided such absences are accounted for. 

b. Hie hour terminating any privilege is the hour by which a cadet 
will have signed his return to barracks or will have arrived at the place of 
some other privilege having, a termination 

c„ No cadet will leave his room after Taps to take advantage of any 
Saturday evening pi’ ivi leges. 


- 23 - 




15.05 Limitations of Privileges - a. Cadets serving confinement shall not 
avail of any privilege. 

b. Any cadet who is deficient even in one subject only is discouraged 
for applying for any privileges or leave unless on an emergency. 

c. A cadet who applies for any privilege is understood to have no 
duty to perform during the period of privilege applied for. 

d. Cadets on leave or on privilege should observe strictly the ter- 
mination time of their privileges. 

e. Only the Superintendent can extend the time of leave or privilege 
of a cadet while he is already out of camp on the said leave or privilege. 

f. All requirements for leave as contained in the Cadet’s Leave or 
Privilege form should be complied with before a cadet submits his application 
for necessary action. 

15.06 Automobile Privileges - Automobiles will not be operated by cadets 
while they are in uniform except as authorized by the Commandant of Cadets. 

b. MI behicles will not be operated by cadets. 

c. Cadets may use taxis or garages or privately owned cars while 
they are in uniform. At no time will a cadet ride a passenger bus while he 
is in uniform. 

15.07 Dining Privileges - a. Upon invitation, cadets not performing duty 
or undergoing punishment may dine \7ith officers or instructors residing in the 
Post, with relatives or friends residing in Baguio at their residence or at 
places authorized by current memoranda, as follows: 

1. Evening meals on Saturdays and evenings preceding holidays 

2. Noon meals on Sundays and Holidays 

b. If a combination of privileges is to be taken, entries will be 
made accordingly in the DP Eorm and in the Departure Book. 

c. A cadet taking advantage of a dining permit will return on time 
for the next duty. 

d. Cadets will apply for a dining privilege in the BI.CC prescribed 
form and submit the application 24 hours in advance. All approved applications 
will be submitted to the Cadet Guard Room before departure. 

e. Cadets will wear the prescribed uniform while out on privilege or 
on official business in Baguio, except when authorized by the Commandant of 
Cadets. 


15.08 Visiting in Barracks - Cadets may visit other cadets in barracks as 
follows: 


- 24 - 


a, 


During Call to Quarters 


1. On official business 

2. When coaching or being coached for deficiency in studies (with 
permission from the Officer in Charge) 

3. After Tattoo inspection until Taps as authorized by the 
Company Tactical Officer 

b. During release from quarters 

c. T^/hile Saturday evening privilege are in effect until Tattoo 

15.09 Escorting - Escorting is defined as riding in an automobile with, 
walking with, or holding an extended conversation vtith visitors in the camp. 

a. Cadets may escort as follows: 

1. Any time they are free from duties within defined limits. 

2. Before and after a general entertainment from and to guest’s 
residence in Baguio. 

3. To and from a show privilege combined with dining. 

b. Cadets may escort or entertain visitors in the prescribed uniform. 

15.10 Cadet Dances - a. New cadets may not attend cadet dances until after 
declared proficient in social graces. 

b. Dances shall not be considered a duty unless otherwise specified. 

15.11 Radio, Radio-Phonographs - Radios, radio-phonographs or phonographs 
will be of the small table type. Cadets may not have more than one of such 
article per room. 

15.12 Reception Room - a. Cadets may visit guests in the Reception Room 
during release from quarters and when Saturday evening privilege is in effect 
until Tattoo. 

b. During Call to Quarters, or in confinement (special, ordinary, 
or sick) , a cadet may see an unexpected visitor with the permission of the 
Officer in Charge. 

15.15 Library - Cadets may visit the library any time that they are free. 

15.14 Visits on Post - a. Cadets may visit the quarters of the officers 
in the Post during release from quarters and when Saturday evening privileges 
are in effect until Tattoo. During call to quarters, cadets may visit quarters 
of officers only with specific permission from the Officer in Charge. 

b. Cadets may be visited at the Post Dispensary any time during re- 
lease from quarters as long as this is not in conflict with specific instruc- 
tion from the School Physician. 


- 25 




15.15 Picnics - a. Cadets may attend picnics in camp or in authorized 
places in Baguio. 

b. Applications for picnics should be submitted 24 hours before the 
privilege. No picnic permits will be approved for less than 5 cadets. The 
Superintendent may assign an Officer as a chaperone if he deems it advisable. 

15.16 Snoking - Smoking is only extended to collegiate cadets. Cadets in 
the high school are pro? loited to smoke except when authorized by the Superin- 
tendent. 


a. Cadets will not : 

1. Snoke on roads or sidewalks 

2. Smoke cigars or pipes outside of barracks 

b. Smoking by cadets in barracks will only be confined inside their 
rooms or sinks, in the vicinity of their tables, if a member of the Guard. 

c. Miile away from the Post and in uniform, cadets will conform to 
the spirit of the regulation governing smoking. They will not smoke in movie 
houses or in places as would invoke criticism of the Corps of Cadets, or would 
render them impolite or conspicuous 

15.17 Inviting Privilege - a. Cadets may invite relatives and friends in 
Baguio City to any cadet affair in camp as those enumerated below as directed 
by the Company Tactical Officer. 

1. Cadet Dances and Frolics 

2. Programs taken in the nature of general entertainment held in 
the camp 

3. TShenever specifically authorized by the Commandant of Cadets 

b. A cadet taking advantage of an inviting privilege is not excused 
from any duty. 

c. A cadet is given a maximum of 2 hours while on inviting privilege. 

15.18 Show P riv ileges - a. Cadets not performing duty or undergoing pu- 
nishment may go to any movie Low./e in Baguio as follows: 

1. Saturday afternoons 

2. Evenings preceding holidays 

3. Holidays 

b. Show tickets will be procured from the Cadet Store 

c. Cadets will go and return fran show in formation 


- 26 - 



d. Cadets are not permitted to sign on credit for movie tickets in 

town. 

15.19 Dane in g - Cadets may attend dances and parties in private homes 
only. This privilege will be treated as a Picnic Privilege. 

15.20 Combination of Privileges - The following combination privileges 
are authorized: 

1. Dining Privilege combined with the show, escorting and dancing 
or picnic privileges. The place for dancing or picnic privilege, if applied 
for should be the same for dining privilege. 

2. Visiting privilege combined with show and escorting privilege. 


16 - ABSEN CES AMD FORMATIONS 

16.01 Call s - The schedule of calls will be scheduled in current memoran- 
da. 


16.02 Fire C all - Fire call will be sounded repeatedly on the bugle and a 
series of 2-second rings on the bell continued for approximately two minutes. 

16.03 Cadet in Command - In certain special cases the cadet in command of 
all formations will be determined in detail. In all other cases, the senior 
cadet present for duty at the formation of any group will command. He will be 
responsible that the formation is conducted in a military manner. 

16.04 Attendance Che ck - An attendance check and report will be required 
at all formations. Late cadets and absentees will be reported to the guard. 

16.05 Reforming an d Dismissal - Unless otherwise specified, groups will 
always be reformed after any duty and marched back to the place of dismissal. 
Exception to this: only in cases idien cadets are allowed to leave individually. 

16.06 Cadets Ex cused from. Marching - A cadet who is required to attend 
any duty to which he would normally march, but who is excused from marching by 
the School Physician, will proceed as follows in attending a duty: 

1. If the formation for duty is a company formation, the cadet 
will report to the First Sergeant at the place of formation at 
assembly, then proceed individually to the place of duty. 

Upon the completion of the duty, he will again report to the 
First Sergeant prior to dismissal. 

2. In other cases he will report first to the Officer of the 
Day before he will proceed to the place of duty. 

16.07 Absen t in Fo rmation - A cadet absent in formation after the formation 
has marched off will first report to the Officer of the Day before going to the 
place of duty. 


- 27 - 



16.08 a. Only the Superintendent or the School Physician can excuse a ca- 
det from any duty. Only the Superintendent can call off a prescribed duty. 

b. A cadet will be declared absent from duty when he does not join 
before the duty ends, and absent from a ceremony if he does not join before 
Adjutant’s Call. 

r 

c. A cadet is late in formation if he is not in his proper place at 
the last note of assembly. 

d. When a cadet fails to report all absentees from a formation, he 
will correct the report to the Guard at the first opportunity. 

e. When a cadet is excused from inspection in ranks, he will display 
his arms and equipment at room inspection of the same day. 

f. Cadets excused from any ceremony may not observe that ceremony. 

/ 

16.09 Absence Card - a. Any authorized absence of a cadet from his room 
during call to quarters must be accounted for on the cadet’s absence card. 

b. During release from quarters, cadets in sick, ordinary, or spe- 
cial confinements will record their absence as though it were Call to Quarters. 

c. Entries on an absence card are considered official statements 
that the cadet's absence is authorized and for the purpose indicated. 

16.10 Departure Books - a. Cadets will sign their departure and return in 
the Company Departure Books as follows: 

1. When going on leave or vacation 

2. When taking advantage of any privilege outside of the school 

3. When being admitted or discharged from the hospital as a 
pati ent 

4. On special occasions to be announced by the Department of 
Tactics 

b. Entries will be accurate to the minute basing upon the official 

time. 

c. These are official statements that the cadet is going to the 
places indicated and nowhere else. 

d. A cadet will be responsible that he is properly signed out be- 
fore he leaves, except when the Guard is required to sign out for him. 

e. If he violates his indicated entry, he must report himself to 
his Company Tactical Officer upon return. 


- 28 - 



17 - SICK 


17.01 General - A cadet will go to the Dispensary for examination, consul- 
tation, or treatment as follows: 

a. At Sick Gall 

1. He will report to the Cadet in Charge of Quarters any time be- 
fore breakfast to have his name entered in the Sick Book, The 
Sick Squad will be formed in front of the Gymnasium at Sick 
Call. Cadet Officers, First Sergeants and Supply Sergeants 
will be excused from the formation of the sick squad and will 
proceed individually to the hospital. 

2. If a cadet is detained at the hospital at sick call so that 
he will be late for classes, he will ask the School Physician 
for an "Individual Absence Slip" and see that it is properly 
filled, up before leaving the Dispensary. 

b. In Emergencies 

1. Unless prevented by the seriosness of his illness, a cadet 
will mark his Absence Card and obtain an Individual Absence 
Slip from the Officer in Charge. Upon his return from the 
Dispensary he will complete his Individual Absence Slip as 
indicated. 

2. Whenever a cadet accompanies another to the Dispensary he will 
turn him over to the School Physician and return immediately 
to his duty. 

3. Any cadet who fails out at a ceremony because of sickness will 
be sent directly to the Dispensary. He will be so reported. 

4. In the event of a serious injury on a cadet, the Officer in 
Charge should be notified immediately. 

c. By Appointment 

1. Except in cases of emergency, dispensary appointments will 
not be made in conflict with academic iiritten examinations. 

2. A cadet will obtain from the School Physician an Individual 
Absence Slip at the time his appointment is made, complete 
the Individual Absence Slip and sign in upon return. 

* 

17.02 Excused from any Duty - a. Any exemption from duty by the School 
Physician must be shown in the Individual Absence Slip. 

b. When a cadet is excused by the School Physician from all formations 
the cadet will automatically be in sick confinement. During meals, he will be 
present at the door of the Mess Hall in time to enter the Mess Hall before the 
Corps. 


- 29 - 




c. A cadet "excused from athletics" will attend the physical training 
class but will not indulge in manuel exercises. 

d. When a cadet is excused from any duty, he will report for Sick 
Oall the next day, except when the Physician enters on his Individual Absence 
Slip "Excused from sick call until (date)". 

e. Cadets excused from drill and athletics but are not excused from 
academic duties will attend military instructions of a nature that requires no 
physical exertion. 

17.03 Sick in Confinement - a. Sick in confinement will restrict a cadet 
to his room, except to go to the sink for proper purposes, and to attend meals 
in the Mess Hall. Cadets in sick confinement will however attend all scheduled 
duties from which they are not specifically excused. 

b. Cadets in sick confinement will be inspected by the Cadet in 
Charge of Quarters. Absence cards must account for all absences. 

c. Cadets in sick confinement may not serve punishment tours or or- 
dinary confinements. 

17.04 Admission of a Patient - a. A cadet who at any time is admitted to 

the dispensary will, if he is allowed to return to barracks for his personal 
belongings (textbooks, bathrobe, slippers, pajamas, laundry bags, toilet ar- 
ticles) , mark his absence card. i" : ' 

b. If not allowed to return to barracks, the cadet will notify the 
Officer of the Day of the admission, or request someone at the dispensary to 
do so. The cadet may also arrange for someone to telephone the guard room for 
his personal belongings. 

17.05 a. Cadets will fill out and submit an Individual Absence Slip for 
each appointment outside the area of barracks. 

1. When a cadet receives an Individual Absence Slip notifying 
him of an appointment, he will complete the slip as pres- 
cribed below. 

2. When a cadet is notified by official orders, daily bulletin 
or other memoranda, that he has an appointment, he will at 
the end of his appointment, submit a complete Individual Ab- 
sence Slip, indicating as his authority "HQ, MI". Physical 
examinations, dental surveys, and immunizations are not con- 

‘ sidered appointments unless so stated. 

3. Cadets will be held responsible that all data on the dispen- 
sary section of the Individual Absence Slip has been proper- 
ly filled out at the dispensary and that the slip has been 
presented to the School Physician for signature. 

b. Cadets will fill out and submit an Individual Absence Slip when 
reporting to the dispensary at the time other than sick call. 


- 30 - 


# 



c. Individual Absence Slips will be filled out and submitted as 

follows : 


1. Cadets will complete the form to include initials* 

2. On the following circumstances, individual absence slips shall 
be presented to the Cadet Guard for the latter’s signature be- 
fore delivering them to the Cadet in Charge of Quarters. 

(a) When cadets are excused from duty 

(b) When cadets in the sick squad return from the dispensary 
after assembly for the first scheduled duty in the morning. 
(Refer to 17,01 a, 2) 


18 - CHAFiF, 


18.01 General - a. Attendance at chapel is a part of cadet’s training. No 
cadet will be exempted. 

18.02 Catholic Chapel Service - a. Cadets will be formed for Catholic 
service in company formation. 

b. All cadets attending chapel, except those having duties to per- 
form in connection with the service, will sit with their respective companies. 

c. Cadet chapel ushers shall be designated by the Company Commander 
and shall perform such duties as desired by the Chaplain. They shall proceed 
to the chapel individually before the start of the service and perform their 
duties. After the termination of the service, they will join breakfast for- 
mation. 

18.03 Ca thol ic Service Other than Sundays - During Holy Days of Obligation, 
cadets shall be marched direct to the Chapel immediately after report for re- 
ve ill e bas been rendered. Uniform for chapel shall be prescribed by the Offi- 
cer in Charge. 

18.04 Religiou s C onfession - Confession shall be held during Saturday af- 
ternoons, during Saturday evenings up to Tattoo, or before mass is served. The 
latter form is discouraged. 

18.05 Other Chapel Squa ds - a. Company First Sergeants will list the names 
of non-Catholic cadets with tlieir religious affiliations and submit their names 
to the Department of Tactics which will arrange for their chapel services in 
Baguio City. 

b. The separate chapel squads will proceed to their respective 
chapels in Baguio City in time to attend one regular service and return to the 
Post upon completion of the service. 


- 31 


19 - FIRE REGULATIONS 




19*01 Notification - A cadet who discovers fire anywhere in or near the 
barracks will notify at once the Officer in Charge, or in his absence, the 
senior member of the guard present. 

19.02 Nhen the Officer in Charge is present, he alone may authorize the 
sounding of fire call; otherwise the decision rest with the senior member of 
the Guard present. 

19.03 Fire Call - Fire call will be sounded repeatedly by bugle. A series 
of 2-second rings on the Post bell will be done by the guard and continued for 
two minutes. 

19.04 Procedure Uhen Fire Call is Sounded — a. Except as otherwise pro- 
vided for below, all cadets will proceed immediately to the areas of barracks, 
form as for reveille, and await orders. 

b. The Officer of the Day will immediately inspect the barracks, 
proceed to the highest numbered room thereat, taking the rooms in order, require 
all cadets to precede to the area of assembly. The inspection will include the 
sinks and bathrooms. Upon completion of the inspection, the Officer of the 
Day report to the Officer in Charge for absences . 

c» All cadets will arm themselves with any water container available. 
No unnecessary noise will be made. 


20 - SERVICE FACILITIES AND SUPPLIES 


20.01 Barber Shop - Cadets will patronize only the barbershop in Camp. 

20.02 Cadet Store - Cadets may visit the Cadet Store anytime it is opened 
for business. 

20.03 Supplies - a. The BMI, through the Supply Officer, will issue all 
supplies that a cadet is entitled to, All School properties will be signed for 
by cadets on a Memo Slip. 

b. Cadets will be responsible that all personal belongings will be 
marked properly with their names, serial numbers, or laundry numbers. 

c. Automatic Issue - Uhen all or a majority of the cadets are re- 
quired to have an article, it will be issued automatically without requisition. 

d. Special Requisition - Submitted on regular BMI prescribed form 
in three (3) copies thru the Company Tactical Officer. A1 requisitions for 
the re-issue or replacement of articles of clothing will be made on this form. 


- 32 - 


t 



20.04 Cash - Cadets may not hold cash except when specifically authorized. 
Cash received from home or from any other source shall be deposited with the 
Treasurer, BMI, immediately upon receipt. Cash left unspent upon return from 
trips will likewise be deposited with the Treasurer, or in his absence, with 
the Officer in Charge immediately upon return. 

20.05 The Treasurer, BMI, or any authorized Tactical Officer will not be 
held responsible for lost cash not otherwise reported to them. 

20.06 Laundry - a. Cadets will send laundry clothing according to pub- 
lished schedule. 

b. Articles sent to the laundry will be placed on a laundry bag with 
a laundry list properly made out. Cadets will retain a duplicate laundry list 
until the return of the laundry. Laundry bags will be deposited near the Or- 
derly Room before breakfast of the scheduled day. 

c. Cadets will be charged for laundry on a flat rate basis. The 
maximum number of pieces per bundle will be prescribed in current memoranda. 

d. Clean laundry will be claimed before evening call to quarters on 
the day it is delivered. It will be folded and placed in the prescribed places 
before the next morning inspections. 

e. A cadet receiving articles from the laundry belonging to another 
cadet will return the article to the owner or to the Cadet Officer of the Day. 

f. Any laundry complaint will be made to the Cadet Officer of the 
Day who will in turn report the matter to the Supply Officer, BMI for proper 
act ion. 

20.06 Mail Matters - a. Outgoing — All outgoing mails will have a return 
address; cadets may go to the mail boxes in barracks any time between reveille 
and taps. 

b. Incoming 

1. Special delivery letters and registered mails and parcels shall 
be signed for by the Officer of the Day from the Administration 
Office, BMI. These letters shall be delivered personally by 
the Officer of the Day to the cadets concerned. 

2. Ordinary Mails shall be taken from the Guard Room by the de- 
signated Mail Orderlies after noon moss and delivered to the 
addressee in person. All other cadets are not authorized to 
get their mails in the Guard Roam. 

3. The Cadet Officer of the Day will deliver mails of cadets con* 
fined in the dispensary. 


- 33 - 


4. Cadets will advise correspondents that all mails sent to them 
shall be addressed similarly as follows: 

Cadet Juan dela Cruz, Co A 
Baguio Military Institute 
Baguio City 

No other designations are necessary, 

20,07 Telephones - A* General — Cadets may use the telephone not to ex- 
ceed five (5) minutes at any one time: 

Company orderly rooms 

Cadet guard room 

Any other place with proper authority 

b. Local Calls — Cadets must not receive or send unofficial local 
calls during call to quarters except when in emergency, 

c. Incoming Long Distance Calls — Cadets, xoho are not on duty, may 
receive long distance calls. When a cadet is not available, the calling party 
^•Tl be notified at what time the cadet is available. Cadets should notify 
their friends to call them over person-to-person rather than st at ion-to- sta- 
tion calls. 


21 - UNIFORMS 


21.01 Uniforms shall be worn as prescribed by memoranda. 

21.02 Clothing and equipment will be kept clean and worn in a matter so as 
to present neat appearance at all times, 

21.03 Cadets will not lend articles of clothing or equipment without per- 
mission, except raincoats which can be lent to visitors during inclement weather, 

21.04 Jewelry — Upperclass cadets may wear one watch, one ring and an 
identification bracelet only. No new cadet will be authorized to wear any form 
of jewelry until after the July 4th parade. 


