MANAGEMENT 



Of The 



PRESIDENCY 




Bread And Dignity 



The 



Aq uino 

MANAGEMENT 

Of The 

PRESIDENCY 




Bread And Dignity 



Published by the 
Presidential Management Staff 
Office of the President 
Manila, Philippines 
June 1992 



Project Director 

Executive Secretary Franklin Drilon 



EDITORIAL ADVISORY BOARD 
Chairman 

Secretary Aniceto Sobrepena 

Members 

Asst. Secretary Mary Ann Fernandez 
Asst. Secretary Demetrio Ignacio 
Asst. Secretary Narciso Inlong 

Production Manager 

Director Nicanor Torres 
Production Support 

Felicitas Estrella 

Office of Special Concerns - PMS 
Writers/Researchers 

Director Sergio Andal (lead writer) 
Director Virginia Ballesteros 
Director Teresita Castillo 
Asst. Director Bernard Sychangco 
Asst. Director Aurora Siacunco 
Ms.Pacita Montinola 
Gloria Georgina Jota 
Minerva Generalao 
Merci Biluan-Tabafunda 

Editorial Consultants 

Hugo Yonzonlll 
Guia Tecson Prado 
Minerva Qucmuel 

Book Design 

Fusion Media 
Special Thanks 

Resource Persons/Institutions 

Executive Director Maria Montelibano - RTVM 
Project Management Office - PMS 

^S^t^^^:^^^^^^^^ 1 and 2 - PMS 

Regional Operations Directorates - PMS 

Photos 

Photo Lab - Office of the Press Secretary 
Undersecretary Lourdcs Siytangco 

Logo 

Philippine Information Agency 
Editorial and Visual Office - PMS 

Printing 

Ncda Secretariat - APO 



Foreword 



"OURS IS A government that came to power borne on the shoulders of our 
people; we must, therefore, govern on the basis of that same people power". 

These were the very words of President Corazon C. Aquino - words that 
laid the foundation of the highest office of the land. For six years and four months, 
her people-powered presidency reflected itself in the very nature of the executive 
branch and on the implementation of several projects closest to the President's 
heart; closest, because they touched the warp and woof of our people's aspira- 
tions. 

To document in part her people-powered presidency, we have compiled this 
series of volumes titled The Aquino Management of the Presidency. The first 
part of the series attempts to outline the evolution of the support offices and the 
various management tools and technology employed in the decision-making and 
decision dissemination processes in the Office of the President. The second part 
of the series, to which this volume belongs, provides a chronicle of some specific 
undertakings initiated by the Office of the President which, now, constitute part 
of the legacies of the Aquino government. The third part of the series is a summa- 
tion of the Aquino government's performance during its six years in office. 

This volume, "Bread and Dignity", attempts to clarify the approach used 
by President Aquino in providing financial assistance to needy Filipinos. In go- 



ing through this volume, the reader will note that the President shunned the 
dole-out approach. She had specifically directed that any form of financial assist- 
ance must be seen as investment, rather than as plain aid. She stressed that they 
n\ustbe used to help people get back on their feet and riin their own lives, rather 
than to just make them dependent on what the government hands out. She has 
placed a premium on human dignity as the net worth of financial assistance. 

This series of volumes. The Aquino Management of the Presidency, is by 
no means a complete coverage of the legacies of the Aquino presidency. Some of 
those not documented here are contained in materials better covered by other 
line agencies or academic groups. 

Some of President Aquino's legacies, however, will find no archive to pre- 
serve them for posterity. One would have to look at the faces and listen to the 
hearts of the people she touched in order to find them. 



Aniceto M. Sobrepena 

Cabinet Secretary 
and 

Head, Presidential Management Staff 



"The people are not only entitled to the 
results of an endeavor, they should also 
share in the dignity and pride in making it 
happen . . . 

By making our beneficiaries participate 
actively, we taught them to believe in 
themselves and encourage them to pursue their 
dreams through their collective strength". 

President Corazon C. Aquino 

Vitsi National Assembly of NGO Partners 
Heroes Hall, Malacanang 
July 6, 1990 



The 
Presidents 
social Fund 



FE NOBLE CAME to Cebu on a summer morning of 1992, on a mission for her 
employer, the Presidential Management Staff (PMS). From there, she immediately 
took a boat to Dumaguete. In Dumaguete, she borrowed a vehicle to take her to 
Bacong, 30 minutes away, where she would be met by representatives of the Silliman 
University Extension Program, a nongovernment organization or NGO. 

The sight of Mt. Talinis greeted her, but she was not awed. After all, she grew 
up in Baguio and climbing rugged terrains had become part of her life. But Mt. 
Talinis had no foot trails. 

"We had to step on the roots of trees as we went higher up the mountain. After 
hiking for about two hours, my right foot got caught in the roots of a huge tree. I 
tried to yank it out, but I got more entangled. I lost my balance, fell, and rolled 
down the slope. I was able to grab a branch and I clung to it for dear life 'til my 
companions helped me back on my feet," Fe relates with amusement. 

Later in the afternoon, as the summer sun sunk in the distant horizon, Fe and 
her group reached their destination, Barangay Timbao. Ignoring the ugly bruises on 
her arms, and what could had been a sprain on her foot, she proceeded promptly to 
do her assignment, which was to check on the proposed site for a potable water 
system project. 



4 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



She broke into a smile. As an experienced civil engineer, Fe knew right away 
that the site would be ideal for a water catchment. 

After two days, Fe was back in her office in Manila. She prepared her report 
and finished the project proposal for a potable water system to serve Negros Orien- 
tal. Within a week, the President approved the project. A check for P290 thousand 
was prepared and released to the Silliman University Extension Program which 
was tasked to implement the project. 



Financial Support that Empowers 

The speed by which the community project in Negros Oriental was imple- 
mented was only possible because it was under the aegis of the President's Social 
Fund (PSF). Established in 1988, this fund reflected the personal social agenda of 
the President. It was both a resource base and a mechanism which the President 
used for projects needing immediate attention and action. 

Following the priorities set by the President, the PSF implemented projects 
under four major programs: schoolbuilding, potable water system, livelihood as- 
sistance, and the streetchildren. 

Early on, the President set the thrust of the government to tap NGOs in the 
implementation of socioeconomic development projects in the countryside. The PSF 
was intended to complement the regular programs of other line agencies and local 
government units. 

Some political leaders did not immediately appreciate this approach. Some 
even complained that they were not consulted in the identification of schoolbuildings 
and other PSF projects in their areas. They suspected the President of having a 
hidden agenda. 

The President had an agenda, but that never was hidden. 'Transparency' had 
been the hallmark of her administration. Not wanting the PSF to be used as a politi- 
cal fund, she ordered that urgent and real socioeconomic and development needs 



Bread and Dignity 



5 



be the primary factors in determining the extent and location of the proposed projects. 
In the case of schoolbuildings, for instance, the Department of Education, Culture 
and Sports' (DECS) findings were the bases for sites selection. 

Proposals for projects were received by PMS from various sources. These were 
all evaluated with speed and equal care. In cases where the request met the priori- 
ties of the President, the PMS undertook field validation to check on three criteria: 
the viability of the proposal, the number of beneficiaries, and the identification of 
the NGO which will undertake the project. 

As part of the evaluation process, the PMS field officers visited the proposed 
sites and sat down with the beneficiaries. It can be said that the experience of Fe was 
routine, give or take a bruise. 

Working Partnerships 

The PMS also checked the capability of the NGO to implement the project. 
First, NGO partners must be registereci with a government regulatory body such as 
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), Department of Science and Tech- 
nology (DOST), Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), Depart- 
ment of Labor and Employment - Bureau of Rural Workers (DOLE-BRW) or Coop- 
erative Development Authority. The NGOs must have experience in fund/ project 
management and be willing to work with PSF to undertake projects under the four 
major programs and other projects approved by the President. 

Concerned government agencies and local officials were also consulted to avoid 
duplication and overlapping. 

This process was called EDSA: Evaluation, Determination, Synchronization 
and Approval. Every project packaged by the PMS for the President's approval 
passed through this process. 

Upon approval of the President, a memorandum of agreement was signed by 
the NGO-proponent and the PMS head. The check for the NGO was then immedi- 
ately prepared. 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



But the process did not end with the handing over of the check. Close coordina- 
tion with beneficiaries and local officials was maintained throughout the course of 
the project, as in the case of the PSF schoolbuildings projects in Mahayag, 
Zamboanga del Sur. 

Tagdulang is a barangay in Mahayag which was severely hit by Typhoon 
Unsang in 1988. Among the structures badly damaged was the makeshift school 
bulding of the Tagdulang Primary School. Through the DECS rehabilitation fund, 
theschoolbuilding was repaired. Unfortunately, it collapsed again in October 1989. 

Despite this situation, classes continued to be conducted in a decrepit barangay 
hall without walls and flooring. Furthermore, the barangay hall cum schoolhouse 
seemed forlorn and was two kilometers from the highway. The road to it was pass- 
able by land transport only during the dry season. 

Patience and perseverance could only go so far. Thus, the Mahayag South 
District Supervisor of DECS, Adriano Magpatoc, mobilized concerned barangay 
officials. They sent petition letters to the DECS offices in Manila, the provincial gov- 
ernment and the Office of the President for the construction of schoolbuildings, not 
only in Tagdulang but also in the other barrios of Mahayag. The barangay captains 
later even tried to raise funds to finance a trip to Manila so that they can seek an 
audience with the President and personally relay their problem. 

Realizing the urgent need for schoolbuildings in the area and impressed by the 
strong determination of the people to seek government help, PMS Field Officer Beth 
Benedicto conferred with Magpatoc and the barangay officials on what to do. She 
convmced them to abandon the costly plan of going to Manila and instead explained 
about the PSF and how they can gain access to PSF funds. 

With renewed enthusiasm, the group wrote a letter to the President in January 
1991. Meanwhile, Beth advised the group to find an NGO which would be willing to 
act as PSF project partner. 



Through the mayor's office, the group sought the help of two local farmer 
irrigators associations. The assistance of the Municipal Planning and Development 



Bread and Dignity 



7 



Officer was also enlisted in preparing two sets of schoolbuilding project proposals 
for submission to PMS. Beth conducted the site validation and background investi- 
gation on the capability of the proposed NGO implementors. 

In May 1991, with the President's approval, construction began. Ten units of 
PSF schoolbuilding projects were granted to the municipality of Mahay ag. Among 
the priority sites was Tagdulang. 

By August of the same year, the people of Tagdulang became proud owners of 
a new schoolbuilding for their children. 

The President's Priorities 

From August 1988 to June 1992, or in barely four years, the PSF had allotted 
and spent almost PI .26 billion for its four major programs (see Table 1). Although 
the final approval of the projects rested solely on the President, these were initiated 
from the grassroots. And although, as illustrated in many cases, it was really easy 
for the people to avail themselves of the funds, their projects had to have merits. 

The PSF, under strict orders from the President, was able to check cosmetic 
projects and those which would only engender the patronage system. 

The SchoolbuUding Program of PSF addressed the shortage of classrooms. When 
the program commenced in 1988, the DECS estimated a shortage of 10,000 class- 
rooms nationwide. The PSF helped to meet this need by constructing two- to three- 
classroom schoolbuildings on sites identified by the PMS in coordination with con- 
cerned agencies, e.g., DECS and NGOs. 

The President approved a total amount of P751 million for the construction of 
3,224 schoolbuildings nationwide. Of this amount, PMS had already released P723 
million to 227 NGOs, benefiting 257,920 schoolchildren in far-flung areas. As of 
June 30, 1992, some 2,446 PSF schoolbuildings had been completed. 

PSF schoolbuildings, built directly by NGO partners, can be found all over the 
archipelago. And like the ones at Mahayag, Zamboanga del Sur, each has a story to 
tell. 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Table 1 

President's Social Fund 

August 1988 - 24 AprU 1992 



From August 1988 to 24 AprU 1992, total available funds for PSF projects was PI. 221 
billion. This came from PAGCOR remittances of PI ,187,499,226.64 and interest earnings of 
P34,380,534.61. Out of the total available funds, PI. 197 billion worth of projects were 
processed by the PMS and approved by the President. This amowit was used to support 
5,329 projects throughout the country. Approximately 300 NCOs a)id POs acted as 
partners in the implementation of these projects which benefited 1.17 millioi individuals. 
The over-all fund utilization rate was 98 percent. Furthermore, out of the approvals, PMS 
prepared checks and released a total amount of PI. 063 billion, for a cumulative release rate 
of 90 percent. 



TOTAL FUNDS AVAILABLE 

TOTAL APPROVALS 

School Buildings 
Potable Water Systems 
Streetchildren Programs 
Livelihood Programs 
Special Concerns 

UTILIZATION RATE 



Pl,221,879,761.25 
1,197,821,398.93 



P734,l 27,491. 71 
104,088,517.10 
50,000,000.00 
110,152,035.65 
199,453,354.47 



98.0% 




Bread and Dignity 



9 



It was not so long ago when the residents of Area J. Gen. Mariano Alvarez, 
Cavite urgently needed a new schoolbuilding. The area, however, was not yet in- 
cluded in the schoolbuilding program of DECS and the Department of Public Works 
and Highways (DPWH) since these two departments had already programmed 
other priorities. The creation of a new schoolbuilding seemed a distant dream. The 
residents, encouraged by the President's weekly radio program 'Magtanong sa 
Pangulo' sent her a petition. Immediately, the President, through the then newly- 
formed PSF, built the San Gabriel Elementary School. The schoolbuilding was a 
fitting Christmas gift as it was inaugurated in December 1988. 

The folks at Capamoan Peninsula in Camarines Sur have a very good reason to 
be thankful, too. Despite their place being reached only via a five- to six-hour mo- 
torized banca ride, their children go to a proper schoolbuilding in the Haponan 
Elementary School built by the PSF. 

PSF schoolbuildings can also be found in areas not normally reached by other 
government agencies, as in the case of the schoolbuilding in the municipality of R.T. 
Lim, Zamboanga del Sur, which was a rebel-infested area. 

PSF schoolbuildings can also be found in areas not ordinarily reached by peo- 
ple other than their residents. The three units of 2-room schoolbuildings in far-away 
Turtle Islands, Palawan seem to be the community's only gateway to the nation, to 
civilization, and to its future. 

The schoolbuildings in Turtle Islands took more than a year to build, from 
September of 1990 to March 1992. And as an exception to its policy of linking with 
an NGO, the PMS worked with the AFP Engineering Brigade. Correctly so, because 
construction materials had to be transported from the main island. Soldiers pains- 
takingly loaded G.I. sheets and bags of cement on bancas which shuttled back and 
forth to Turtle Islands. Instead of moving logistics of war, this time, their mission 
was peace. 

In the Visayas, the Army's Engineering Brigade also built dozens of school- 
buildings funded by the PSF. Col. Luciano Duldulao of the 53rd Engineering Bri- 
gade beams whenever he enumerates the structures that they completed in record 



10 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



time inNegros, Samar, Leyte, Bohol and Panay. He takes comfort in what the Presi- 
dent once said:"Indeed, you are a compleat soldier of our Republic, tasked with the 
protection and defense of the Filipino people against the enemies of the state as well 
as against underdevelopment". 

ThePSV Potable Water Program, on the other hand, aimed to provide a ready 
source of safe drinking water, specifically in the rural areas. In particular, it sought 
to improve the health and sanitary conditions of beneficiaries and organize and 
train them in the management and maintenance of a potable water system. 

Potable water proposals were considered from barrios not covered by regular 
projects of the Local Water Utilities Administration (LWUA) and from those in de- 
pressed and isolated areas. 

The residents of Hungduan, a town in the highlands of Ifugao, had been fetch- 
ing their drinking water from contaminated wells, rivers and springs for genera- 
tions. Through the PSF, a potable water system was constructed which now pro- 
vides safe drinking water to at least five communities there. 

Assistance for the construction of deep and shallow wells for 15 barangays in 
ati, Davao Oriental was also provided by the PSF, benefiting 799 households. In 
e municipality of Lamitan in Basilan, PMS packaged a P7.5 million PSF project 

tor spring development. The Lamitan Waterworks System Project now services 2,400 

poor households. 

All in all, the President approved PI 08.7 million for the installation of 1,945 
potable water systems. Based on PMS monitoring, 1,21 2 water systems had already 
been completed as of June 30, 1992. 

Out of the approved budget, P88.8 million was released to 88 NGOs which 
benefited 842,786 individuals, most of whom were from the poorest or remotest 
parts of the country. 



One of the biggest implementors of the PSF potable water program was the 
Tulungan sa Tubigan Foundation, an NGO established immediately after the EDSA 



Bread and Dignity 



11 



Revolution. Linking up with other groups, the Tulungan sa Tubigan had covered 32 
provinces. Regina Coseteng of the foundation says: 'The President asked us to in- 
clude Tawi-Tawi and Batanes in our efforts. We are glad we were able to do that". 

Tulungan sa Tubigan was tasked by the President to target 1,062 water sys- 
tems. It was able to dig 396 shallow wells, 505 deep wells, develop 75 spring sources, 
and 86 rainwater catchments for a 96 percent accomplishment. 

The grit and determination by which the Tulungan sa Tubigan and the PSF 
pursued its targets are reflected in the story of Alice Alcantara of the PMS: "I was 
assigned to visit all of the 100 units of deep wells implemented by the Tulungan in 
the 20 municipalities of Cebu. Three of these municipalities were located in the 
island of Camotes. On that summer day of 1990, our group had just finished visit- 
ing around 20 sites in the nearby towns of Cebu City. We were so exhausted that we 
never even bothered to make reservations for the boat to Camotes. That started our 
ordeal. 

We left at midnight for the four-hour trip. We were able to ride the boat but we 
didn't get any sleeping cots. My companions, being male, had an easy time finding 
spots for them to sleep on. Floro balanced himself on a narrow ledge of one of the 
windows (though I don't know how), and Ramie sat asleep on the stairway. I settled 
for an empty space on the aisle. I got my towel and used this as my mattress, and 
my bag as pillow. I was so tired and sleepy but I couldn't help but think about my 
baby in my tummy. I was five months pregnant then. 

At around three in the morning, I was awakened by the deck officer who, upon 
seeing my condition, offered me his couch near the radio room. I was hesitant at 
first, but I accepted the offer. I had 30 minutes of blissful sleep before we docked. 

The wind felt cold and it was still dark when we got off the boat. I was a bit 
surprised to see that their only land transportation in Camotes Island were motor- 
cycles. Yes, motorcycles with planks of wood attached behind the drivers' seats. 
These served as benches for the passengers who balanced themselves on either side - 
like a seesaw. 

After a quick breakfast, we hired motorcycles to take us to the project sites 
which were located in the distant mountain barangays of Tudela, Poro, and San 



The Aquino Management o^the Presidency 



^'^^ncisco. The trip was rough, bumpy, dusty, and uph.U most of the way. I felt my 
^^byprotestmg inside me. 

^ ^ The air was very humid, and I was perspiring all over. At around 1 2 noon, 
^hen we were about to reach our destination, heavy rains fell. We were all wet. The 
f^^ins were able to wash away the dust but not our hunger. We could not eat though, 
^^^^use food poisoning was very prevalent in the town where we stopped. We had 
proceed through slippery trails to reach the next town so that we could eat. 

^ , I ^ould not help thinking then: 'Shouldn't I rather be working in an office of a 
;;:^;tinational company? Why, in heaven's name, should the President insist on 
*^'ling a potable water system in so remote a town?' ". 

, Three months later, Alice gave birth to a healthy and "well- traveled" baby, 
^^PPy in her new role as a mother and in the thought that she was part of making 
"^^"yn^ore families happy. ^ 

. The PSF livelihood Assistance Program, in consonance with the President's faith 
^^elf-help, generally addressed the following objectives: to provide start-up capi- 
r *° generate jobs and employment opportunities; to provide livelihood skills and 
^nowledge; to organize groups and individuals to enhance their participation in 
f°"^munity development and, to optimize the use of indigenous raw material and 



. Farther to this, the PMS evaluated livelihood projects for PSF generally on the 
2^^^ of economic viability, sustainability and impact on the bottom 30 percent of 
depopulation. 

The PSF Livelihood Fund was mainly a start-up capitalization for small-scale 
projects which cost not more than half-a-million pesos. Preference was given to 
proponents coming from the bottom 30 percent of the population - the sector of our 
society long considered 'nonbankable' and, hitherto, helpless and hopeless. 

Yet, the PSF made sure that the money forwarded was not perceived as a dole- 
out. It required that each livelihood project must be viable, sustainable, and must 
have an impact on the community as a whole. 



Bread and Dignity 



13 



Livelihood funds from PSF were in the form of grants. The borrowers were 
required to pay back the grant into a predefined community fund, from which 
another group of borrowers in the community can borrow. Due to this rollover 
concept, allotment of the PSF for this program was made virtually inexhaustible. 

The President approved PI 1 7.2 million for the implementation of 77 livelihood 
programs. Of this amount, PI 03.0 million had been released to 68 NGOs and ben- 
efited 72,678 individuals as of June 30, 1992. 

The PSF Streetchildren Program was instituted to address the proliferation and 
plight of the street children throughout the country whose numbers have astound- 
ingly increased in the last decade. The UNICEF estimates that there are only about 
200 private and public social welfare and development agencies nationwide that 
attend to street children. 

In 1989, President Aquino allocated P50 million from PSF as a special fund for 
streetchildren. Total approval for this program amounted to P42.8 million, of which 
P30.8 million was released to 77 NGOs implementing 88 projects. Thirty-four of 
these projects had been completed as of June 30, 1992 and had benefited 42,953 
individuals. 

One of the NGOs which was assisted by the PSF was the Kanlungan in Manila 
which provided temporary shelter for streetchildren below 1 7 years old. It also gave 
education, health, and livelihood assistance to their wards. 

Kanlungan tried to send their children to formal schools but had often met 
difficulties. To children used to wandering aimlessly, classrooms were strange places. 
And besides, having started late in schooling, younger classmates were always causes 
of humiliation. 

Thus, Kanlungan gave alternative education such as value formation and Bi- 
ble studies which tried to raise the self-image and confidence of the children who 
opted to stay until they were old enough to be weaned from the shelter. 

But there were children whose choice of home was the street. To them, it was 
life without restraints. In this situation, Kanlungan had the Street Education Pro- 



gram where the staff reached out and sat down with the children right on the streets. 

nis approach had resulted to some streetchildren or "run-aways" being reconciled 
with their families. Battered or sexually-abused children were referred to proper 
agencies. 

It had been noted that streetchildren who went to Kanlungan to take advan- 
age of free meals were weaned from sniffing solvent. Observes one NGO worker: 
unger stalks these children. When they feel pain in their stomach and they have no 
T^oney, they buy rubber solvents which are cheaper. They sniff the solvent all day 
fid-*^^"^ t^eir hunger. Eventually, they become drug addicts". The shelter's 

ee mg program had indirectly become an antidote to drug abuse. 

Among the other streetchildren projects approved for assistance by the Presi- 
dent were those in Baguio City and Pasay City. 

stre ^^^y' t^irough the New Horizon Drop-in Center, approximately 200 

^jetchildren were provided with education, health and nutrition support, skills 
aining, and value formation seminars. In addition, their parents were given liveli- 
hood assistance. 

ated b* ^^^^^ provided assistance to Pangarap Shelter, a center oper- 

ment d '^^'ich provided basic services to streetchildren and imple- 

ch^ldr '"^°^^generating project for them. As a result of this project, the street- 
ren were able to open a bank account of at least P2,000.00 each. 

b TJ^^*^^ ^^^^ °*her development projects which the President chose to support, 
u which did not fall under the four major PSF programs. These projects were then 
grouped under the Special Concerns Program. 

The projects under this program were varied and covered a wide range, among 
them: drug rehabilitation, repair of schoolbuildings, projects for victims of Typhoon 
Ruping, health program for urban poor communities, government housing project, 
workers' fund seed money, interim financing for the Community Mortgage Pro- 
gram, and capability program for NGOs. 

The President approved P232.2 million worth of projects under the Special 
Concerns Program. By June 30, 1992, the PMS had already released the amount of 



Bread and Dignity 



15 



PI 78.5 million for 87 projects nationwide implemented by 94 NGOs serving 30,000 
beneficiaries. 

Source for Social Funding 

As mandated by PD 1 869, the PSF was sourced from the net proceeds of the 
Philippine Amusement and Gaming Corporation or PAGCOR (see Table 2). The 
fund was initially known as the Special Presidential Action for Regional Concerns 
(SPARC) and managed by the PAGCOR Board of Directors which reported directly 
to the President. The turnaround performance of the PAGCOR under the Aquino 
administration (see Table 3) made possible the wider spread of projects that went 
directly to the people. 

In August 1988, then Executive Secretary Catalino Macaraig, upon instruc- 
tions from the President, issued Memorandum Order No. 184 transferring the fund 
balance of SPARC and all succeeding net proceeds of PAGCOR accruing to SPARC, 
directly to the Office of the President. In addition to its regular policy and program 
review work, the Presidential Management Staff, upon specific instructions of the 
President, was designated as the agency to identify, evaluate, recommend, process, 
and monitor its projects. It was the first time the PMS handled a fund. 

All principals transferred by PAGCOR to the Office of the President for the 
PSF including interest accruing to the Fund were used solely for the projects. No 
amount was ever used by the PMS for operations nor for personal services. The boat 
fare and the salary of Fe and others like her were not charged to the PSF. 

The government watchdog, the Commission on Audit (COA), audited the PSF 
yearly. Moreover, it was asked to conduct spot audits. The efficiency with which the 
PMS discharged its PSF responsibilities is attested by the fact that the COA, in a 
special audit of 26 provinces, found its accomplishment reports true to the last 
detail. It found no false claims, much less ghost projects. 

But the President, in addition to the PSF, had at her disposal a variety of other 
funds which came mainly from local and foreign donations during times of calam- 
ity. Examples of such a fund were the Earthquake Victims Fund and the Mt. Pinatvibo 
Calamity Fund (see Table 4). 



Philippine AmusemfntA Gaming Corporation 
(PAG COR) 
Remittances 

July 1986 - Dec. 1991 



Franchise tax paid to the BIR 

Government's income share, paid to the National Treasury 

PSC's income share 

Host cities' income share 

Customs duties and taxes 

Withholding taxes, other fees and licenses 

Corporate income tax 

Net cash income remitted to the President's Social Fund (PSF) 
Total 



Amount 

(In millions) 

P 890.27 
8,457.61 
422.60 
496.95 
155.51 
309.53 
650.63 
^.566.88 

P 12,949.98 



Table 4 

President's Social Fund 
Other Programmed Funds 



August 1988 - 


24 April 1992 




Projects 


Allocated 


Approved 


Amount 


Amount 




SPECIAL CONCERNS 






Community Mortgage Program 


P 10,000.000.00 


P 8,033,871.60 


NGO Capability Building Program 


P 6,000.000.00 


P 0.00 


Marag Valley Rehabilitation and Development Pla 


n P 3,500.000.00 


P 791,000.00 


Streetchildren 


P 50,000,000.00 


P 36,908,071.25 


TOTAL 


P 69,500.000.00 


P 45,732,942.85 


TOTAL BALANCE 




P 23,767,057,15 



Bread and Dignity 



17 



Table 3 
PAG COR 



Under 

Before Aquino 



Administration 



Monthly Income 



Before the February revolution, the average Under the New PAGCOR, the average, 

income was P29 million. The monthly income went up to P169 million 

highest monthly income declared was in 1987, P212.5 million in 1988, P290 

P55 million. million in 1989, P341 million in 1990, 

P428 million in 1991 and P495 million for 
the 1st quarter of 1992. 

Remittance to Government 

In ten years, from 1976 to June 1986, the In only five years and nine months of 

total remittance of the old PAGCOR to operation, from July 1986 to March 31, 

the government was P2.1 billion. 1992, the New PAGCOR remitted a total of 

PI 4.0 billion to the government. 



Tax Privileges 

PAGCOR, then, was exempted from all Since March 1987, all the tax exemption 

kinds of taxes, except the 5% franchise tax. privileges have been withdrawn. Now 

PAGCOR is paying the 5% franchise tax, 
corporate income tax, customs duties for 
imported equipment and employees' 
witholding taxes. 

Audit Procedure 

PAGCOR, then, was exempted from audit. Today, all PAGCOR transactions are 

dutifully recorded, accounted for and 
audited by the Commission on Audit. 

Secrecy vs. Transparency 

PAGCOR operations then were veiled in Today PAGCOR operations are carried 

secrecy. out on an open-book policy in keeping 

with the President's directive of transpar- 
ency in the government. Pursuant to this 
PAGCOR publishes its fianncial statement 
quarterly, perhaps the only casino operator 
in the world who does so. 

The difference in fhe way the casinos are run today has led to a sizable increase in PAGCOR's income. With the 
substantial amount it remits to the government, PAGCOR has become the third biggest revenue-generating arm of 
the government PAGCOR todai/ is considcrnbli/ different from what it was in the past 



Funds for 




and 
Rekabilitation 

THE MILITARY PUTSCHES, typhoons and floods, a killer quake and a dev- 
astating volcano eruption thundered like the four horsemen of the apocalypse in 
slow motion back and forth across the land. Very eerie each time they came, like 
curses. Whole towns were literally wiped out. Hundreds of lives were lost. And 
millions of pesos worth of properties were destroyed. 

At the height of the volcano ash fall in Central Luzon, foreign television caught 
Filipinos fleeing with their children and belongings. While they looked lost, they 
managed to broadly smile and wave at the cameras. Such is the indomitable Fili- 
pino spirit. 

Whatever may be said of the Filipino, his capacity and will to svirvive is unbe- 
lievable. The President knew this. She only had to show her people her usual calm 
and it was enough to stop the wave of panic that naturally builds up in times of 
widespread grief 



The tremendous challenges posed by the series of military adventurisms and 
natural calamities could have easily toppled down a government. But not the Aquino 
government. 



Bread and Dignity 



19 



Whenever crisis struck, the President methodically orchestrated her trusted 
men; in hindsight, designating the right people and choosing the right options at the 
right time. 

The President was not without help. Donations poured in from generous Filipi- 
nos and from foreign governments. These, she had to make sure, must be used with 
careful dispatch. The right help for the right beneficiaries was the order of the day. 

Time and again, the Aquino administration showed its mettle in meeting the 
challenges, as in the case of its management of the various special funds that had to 
be created. 

Rebuilding Blocks of Confidence 

Soon after the killer quake of July 1990 struck, the Earthquake Victims Fund 
was mobilized through the Integrated Livelihooci Reconstruction Program, for Earth- 
quake Victims (ILRP-EV). The program brought together livelihood agencies at- 
tached to the Office of the President, including the Livelihood Corporation 
(LIVECOR), Technology and Livelihood Resource Center (TLRC), and the National 
Livelihood Support Fund (NLSF). The PMS, again in addition to its regular policy 
and program review work, acted as the overall program manager. 

Three types of funds were made available under the program. These were m 
the form of grants, loans, and investments. 

The loan and investment funds were provided and implemented by NLSF, 
LIVECOR and TLRC, while the PMS administered the grant fund through the fol- 
lowing interventions: restoration of damaged, small-scale livelihood infrastructure/ 
facilities; introduction of modified livelihood support systems; and, initiation or ex- 
pansion of alternative livelihood activities to adapt to an altered environment. 

A Program Review Committee, chaired by the head of PMS and composed of 
the heads of LIVECOR, NLSF, and TLRC was constituted to deliberate on the project 
proposals prior to their endorsement to the President. 



20 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



To facilitate the delivery of assistance to the targeted beneficiaries, the Aquino 
government once again tapped the nongovernment and private sectors to help in 
project implementation. This was an act of faith on both sides that has now been 
tested and strengthened. 

Out of the more than P139.6 million Earthquake Victims Fund, a total of 48 
projects amounting to P139.3 million was approved by the President as grant assist- 
ance under the ILRP and other Presidential commitments. The coverage of the 
approved projects ranged from the rehabilitation and/or improvement of liveli- 
hood related infrastructure/facilities to the provision of alternative livelihood and/ 
or livelihood-related support systems. 

The whole effort consisted of more than 600 project components with such 
diverse concerns as foot trails, communal irrigation systems, foot bridges, box cul- 
verts, farm-to-market roads and bridges, poultry raising, swine dispersal, transport 
vehicles and horses, even training. 

In Caba, La Union, the farmers of seven barangays found themselves without 
land after the earthquake. The ricefields that they were tending sunk under six feet 
of brackish water. But the residents noticed that the newly-formed lake was teeming 
with fish. Enter PSF. 

The farmers of Caba were extended funds with which they bought 180 fish 
nets and 16 motorized bancas. They became fishermen. With spirits soaring, they 
adapted quickly to the new conditions. Says Dionisia Picana of Caba: "Our lives are 
now prospering with the bancas. I was able to send my child to elementary school. 
And I sell a lot of fish in the market". 

Mrs. Picana and 333,810 other individuals from the six earthquake affected 
provinces of Abra, Benguet, La Union, Pangasinan, Nueva Vizcaya, and Nueva 
Ecija benefited from the fund. The grants not only helped them back on their feet, it 
also, by the very nature of help that was extended, gave them back their pride and 
dignity that came from self-determination. 

As of March 1992, the average accomplishment rate of projects under this 
program was 70 percent. All projects were expected to be completed and turned 
over to the beneficiaries by the end of October 1 992. 



SUNSHINE IN. Former 
streetchildren Ely Bitare and 
Emma Kabigayan present 
President Aquino a painting 
which they made and com- 
pleted during a program in 
Malacanang on Januairy 21, 
1992. 




President Aquino listens 
as Negros Occidental 
Governor Daniel 'Bitay' 
Lacson explains prawn 
farm operations to Cana- 
dian Ambassador Andre 
Simard and Japanese 
Ambassador Toshio Goto 
in Bacolod. 





The President 
converses with workers 
at Basket Village, 
Kalookan City on April 
23, 1991. The multi- 
purpose structure was 
financed by PSF. 



Inspecting 
a vegetable 
garden in 
Floridablanca, 
Pampanga. 



WARMTH. The 
President greets 
children Alan and 
Emma at the 
Palace lobby 
before address- 
ing the First 
Regional 
Conference on 
streetchildren at 
Malacanang's 
Heroes Hall, May 
8, 1989. Looking 
on is DSWD 
Secretary Mita 
Pardo de Tavera. 




On December 28, 1991, the President met with 
Olongapo City Mayor Richard Gordon and the base 
workers at the Heroes Hall to assure them of continued 
government support. Two weeks after, the President 
visited Subic Naval Base and awarded PSF checks for 
livelihood projects of both base and non-base workers 
in the area. 




A LIFT. The President 
carries a child at JP 
Laurel Day Care Center 
on January 25, 1991. 
The Day Care Center is 
near Malacanang and 
was the last stop on 
her "Fifty-ninth Birth- 
day Tour". 

President Aquino 
conducted her own 
"laharvest" at the 
Project Genesis Site in 
Basa Airbase last May 2, 
1992. Funded under 
PSF, the project 
produces bountiful 
harvests of fruits and 
vegetables on lahar- 
laden farmlands. 





▲ 




r 7^ -r 



<D c) 



TO 



•:r a > a 



ISO- « 



o 



0) 



=^ O ^ 



o 

Ql 
o 



2 I? E 



f- C u. 



O TO S 

0) CD 'E* »- 



CO ^ 

o o 



o 



0) f- ^ — — - 



2 m 

TO O 
"TS "n — 



2 5 

0) Q. 



TO o 



£: -3 o> 
c E 



o 

Q. 
O 

o 
> 

0) 



o 2 

(/) TO 

is 

^ o 



(2> 



^ 2 Q) o 

TO S i2 

O 0) c 




STRAIGHT FROM 
THE HEART. The 
President and 
Presidential Assist- 
ant Flerida Ruth 
Romero visit 
'Handog ng Puso', a 
free clinic project of 
PAGCOR at 
P. Zamora 
Elementary School 
in Pandacan, 
Manila on 
Feburary 19,1987. 

January 25 
1991, the Presi- 
dent beams at 
Milk Feeding 
Program children. 

Looking on is 
(second from left) 
PMS Head Chito 
Sobrepena. 




Federation of Filipino-Chinese Chambers of 
Commerce and Industry pledged in April 1987 to 
construct 150 schoolbuildings in depressed 
areas of the country. President receives a 
miniature model from Federation officers (from 
left to right) Leonardo Ty, Domingo Lee, Ralph 
Nubia, and Yao Fiong Fio. 



I 



President Aquino, assisted by Bernabe 'Ka Dante' 
Buscayno and Aeta chldren, tries out a manual 
water pump at the P18 million Kalangitan Aeta 
Resettlement and Rehabilitation Center in Capas, 
Tarlac. Looking on are Tarlac Rep. Herminio 
Aquino (second from right) and Budget Secretary 
Salvador Enriquez Jr. (extreme right). 




Bread and Dignity 



21 



New Leases on Life 

When Mt. Pinatubo erupted in June 1991, the whole world took notice, not 
only because of the global effects of the eruption but also because of the human 
costs of the disaster. Donations from local and foreign sources which poured into 
the Office of the President amounted to PI 01 million. 

Known as the Mt. Pinatubo Fund, it was used in two ways: first, through the 
Integrated Livelihood Reconstruction Program for Eruption Victims (ILRP-EV2); 
and second, through special projects for Pinatubo-affected areas and resettlement 
sites. 

Out of the donations received, the PMS recommended to the President the 
allocation of P87 million for the livelihood reconstruction program. 

The program was tasked to fast track repair and rehabilitation of small liveL^- 
hood-related facilities in the affected provinces of Pampanga, Tarlac, and Zam a 
including Palayan City, Nueva Ecija, and Bataan as special areas. 

As in the Earthquake Victims Fund, a Program Review Committee was consti^ 
tuted to deliberate on the merits of project proposals prior to their endorsemen^^^ 
the President. Representatives from the Department of Trade and ^"^""^J^L^qj^' 
Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), Land Bank, 
and TLRC comprised the Committee, again with the head of PMS as chairm 

As in the Earthquake Victims Fund, too, the Mt. Pinatubo Fund made possible 
a new lease on life for a lot of people. 

In the concerted effort of the government, the NGOs were tapped fund 
, . , • • iv,^ ^oT-trK^rsshiD was smootri 

conduits and project implementors. Not everything in the partnersiup 
though. In most cases, NGO members themselves were victims of the disaster. Apart 
from overcoming their trauma, they had to adjust to a dual role 'f'^^^'J^^^^^ 
lives as well as those of others. In instances like these, the PMS applied the hand- 
hold' approach where it guided the NGO and the beneficiaries through the project 
phases, step by step. Experience has shown that, as soon as the NGO and beneficiar- 
ies take the first steps, they become eager to walk the mile. As what happened m San 
Nicolas. 



22 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The farmers of Barangay San Nicolas, Sta. Ana, Pampanga had long been 
waiting for government assistance for the provision of an irrigation system and 
farm-to-market road. The eruption of Mt. Pinatubo compounded their problems. 
The ash fall covered farmlands and had reduced farm productivity to almost zero. 

Mar Manuel, the PMS field officer assigned to Pampanga, recounts how the 
Mt. Pinatubo Fund became the answer to the prayers of the people of San Nicolas: 
'Tn November of 1991, the president of the Central Luzon Assistance for Regional 
Development (CARD) discussed with me the needs of barangay San Nicolas in Sta. 
Ana, Pampanga. I encouraged her to submit a detailed project proposal so that I 
may validate it. 

On January 13, 1992, 1 went to the CARD office and followed up their intent to 
implement the project. They said they were willing but they did not have the pro- 
posal yet. That same day, I took it upon myself to validate the project site and 
coordinate with the concerned line agencies regarding the proposed project. I asked 
for the necessary data and helped the NGO package their proposal to the Program 
Review Committee in Malacanang where it was subsequently approved. 

The approval brought great excitement and hope to barangay San Nicolas. 
But since the Program Review Committee still had to get formal approval from the 
President, the barangay captain called for a general assembly to explain the process 
to the residents". 



The initial efforts of Mar Manuel appeared like spoonfeeding. In truth, it was 
like trying to make a grouchy stranger smile. Facing a distraught people, many of 
whom had grown weary and cynical of promises from "heaven", was not easy. 
Manuel not only had to put across that he was acting for the President, he also had 
to tell them that the President can do something for them - if the situation so merits. 

Manuel succeeded in explaining the process to the farmers. First, they loos- 
ened their stoic faces. Next, they put down their folded hands. Then, they sat down; 
cocked their ears, and smiled. Before long, their voices were booming across the 
hall. When that happened, it was a signal that they had regained hope. 



Bread and Dignity 



23 



On the way back to the office, Manuel fainted and had to be rushed to the 
hospital. The doctors found that he had respiratory infection which he got from the 
area. To the hospital, the leaders of the farmers came. Some of their members had 
more questions to ask. Feeling a bit better, Manuel checked out of the hospital and 
went back to San Nicolas. 

"At the barangay assembly, the NGO explained their participation in the pro- 
gram, while I talked about the President's Fund. The residents felt assured that help 
was indeed coming", Manuel says. 

After the assembly, Manuel was hospitalized again for two days and had to 
rest for two weeks. 

The irrigation system and farm-to-market road for the farmers in San Nicolas 
were completed on April 30, 1992. 

A total of 44 projects amounting to approximately PI 00 million were approved 
by the President as grant assistance to the Mt. Pinatubo victims. '^'j^^^.j^P^j^j^ ^f 
projects consisted of 83 project components which included the reha ^'^^^^^.^^ 
communal irrigation systems through the provision of pumps, the '"^^^^^^^^^^ 
potable water systems, the provision of hand tractors and farm tools, a 
ration/repair of farm-to- market roads and bridges. 

In some resettlement areas, livelihood inputs such as farm "^^^^^^^^^^ 
bancas, and fishing gear were also provided to assist the victims in aaap 
altered environment. 

v-u A finrnQfc; of thc Mt. Pinatubo 
For projects which did not fall under the ^'^^'^^^f ^"^^^^^^^^^^^ of the Presi- 
Fund, the PMS directly packaged and evaluated proposals for appro 

dent. 

An the approved projects for the Mt Pinatubo victims aimed to benefit a total 
of 11,000 families and 7,500 individuals from the different affected rnun,c,paht,es 
of Pampanga, Tarlac, Zambales, and Nueva Ecija. All were prodded to be com- 
pleted and turned over to the beneficiaries by end of December 1992. 



24 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Riding Winds of Change 

There were other funds which were entrusted by the President to PMS to ad- 
minister and manage. These funds came mainly from local and foreign donations 
received by the Office of the President for natural calamities and disasters. 

One such fund was the Taiwan Fund which was sourced from the sale of the 
rice donations from Taiwan. This fund was set aside for special economic, social, 
and humanitarian projects of the President. 

The Taiwan Fund was remitted by the National Food Authority (NFA) to the 
PMS in October and November 1989 with a total amount of P48,598,l 46.00. 

The fund had total approvals amounting to about P48.2 million. There was an 
uncommitted balance of P253,479 although the overall fund utilization rate was a 
high 99.9 percent. 

The Typhoon Uring Fund, on the other hand, came from donations to the Of- 
fice of the President for victims of Typhoon Uring in the provinces of Leyte (includ- 
ing Ormoc City) and Negros Occidental. The Fund consisted of foreign and local 
donations totalling P44.1 million. 

It was also the PMS which identified and recommended the projects to the 
President for funding. 

^ Among these projects was the Fund Assistance for Typhoon Uring Affected 
ommunities or FASTRAC, which the PMS conceptualized and implemented. 

of L ^^^^ f^'^STRAC, the following projects were committed for the province 
o eyte. P2.0 million to the Runggiyan Foundation - for the Burauen and Julita 
Livelihood Rehahnu...- r, 

^"aoiJitation Program; PI .5 million to the Department of Agriculture 
for theAericultnrai D t, , •,• 

6 cultural Rehabilitation Assistance; and, PI .5 million to the Department 

of Trade and Industry for the Tulong Sa Tao program. 



Bread and Dignity 



25 



Out of the total receipts of the fund, P21 .8 million was committed to the DPWH 
for the reconstruction of damaged bridges in Ormoc City. Furthermore, the PMS 
released PI 2.8 million to Ormoc City for the rehabilitation of its waterworks sys- 
tem. Total approvals out of the fund reached P42.5 million as of June 30, 1992. 

Another fund sourced from local and foreign donations was the Typhoon 
Ruping Fund specifically for the rehabilitation of infrastructure and livelihood as- 
sistance for the typhoon's victims in November 1 990. The devastated areas were in 
Regions 6, 7, and 8 in the Visayas and Region 10 in Mindanao. 

A total amount of PIT .4 million was received for the Typhoon Ruping Fund 
with almost all of it approved for various projects. 

On the other hand, the Typhoon Disaster Fund which also came 
tions was meant to meet the needs of victims of the other typhoons that vis^ 
counb-y in varying degrees of destructiveness. The PMS received the fun 
Office of the President in November 1991 . 

Of the total donations of PI 4.9 million, nearly 1 00 percent had ^^^V^^^^^^^l 
of June 30, 1 992. The bulk of the fund (PI 4.5 million) was used for tne ^J^^^^^ 
Feeding Program. The remaining fund balance was used for repair o 
schoolbuildings (P0.4 million). 

Saving the Children 

72 1989 the President 

In the 'Magtanong Sa Pangulo' program of October / , j^er birthdays, 
told her friends that instead of giving her gifts on *^^^'^*"^^^^^^^^j.en program. To 
she preferred that her friends get involved in her stree c i ^^^g^jgd the 
operationalize the President's desire, the PMS conceptualized a 
Concern for a Streetchild Project. 

A ^\ft^ tn the President could in- 
Under this project, those who wanted ^^'t^^e ^^, ^.ese cards, which 
stead buy colorful Concern for a Streetchild -^js from *e ^^^^^^^.^^^ ,f 

were donated by the San Miguel Packaging Corporation, wei 
PI 00, P500, and PI ,000. The PMS coordinated the production of these cards from 
artworks of some 40 streetchildren who depicted their desire for education. 



26 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The proceeds from the sale of the cards were used for scholarship grants to 
streetchildren. Started in December 1989, the PMS was able to raise around P3.5 
million. The fund benefited 1,104 streetchildren in elementary and 676 in high school. 
The grants were coursed through 90 NGOs. 



Funds 

for 
Peace 



POVERTY BEGETS INSURGENCY. During the Marcos regime, the ^^^^^^^ 
grew in number and the d ictator tried to expunge them with force. But to no av 
The CPP-NPA only became stronger with its force reaching up to 22,500 by 

By 1986, too, many barangays in the PhiHppines had been declared "'^^^'"^^^ 
zones" and the Communists confidently predicted that, in two or three mo^^y^ 
they would have achieved strategic stalemate. In other words, they wou 
power to force the goveriunent to treat them as equals. 

Corazon Aquino set the tone of her approach to the '"^"''.^^"''^ 
freeing all so-called political prisoners when she assumed ^^P^'^^'^^^^^^^rdillerans 
the doors to the Communists, the Muslim separatists, and t^^er , ^ ex-rebels, like 
by meeting them and listening to what they wanted. She gave help o 
Bernabe Buscayno, so that they may pursue a life of peace and progres . 

But she remained firm against those who wished to subvert the State. 

In the military offensives against the insurgents who ^.^^^^^^^ 
the government, many citizens got displaced. Many had to leave heir homes and 
farmlands, as in the CHICKS Area in Negros Occidental and in the Marag Valley in 
Kalinga-Apayao. 



28 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The CHICKS Area and Marag Valley were given not only special, but proper, 
attention by the President. 



A Commuiiity Reborn 

Marag Valley, bounded by virgin forests and resource-rich rivers, extends from 
Luna, Kalinga-Apayao to Pamplona, Cagayan. It is home to Ilocano migrants, Isnegs, 
and Aggays. 

Prior to 1984, Marag Valley, a barangay belonging to the municipality of Luna, 
Kalinga-Apayao, had the services of a complete elementary school and a PC de- 
tachment. Although its rugged terrain made it inaccessible, the social services sector 
conducted regular visits to the area. 

The people were self-sufficient. The residents had their own farmlands to till 
and the valley's fertile lands produced rice that supplied Pamplona and other towns. 
Some residents were skilled rattan craftsmen and their products were bartered in 
the neighboring towns. 

But sometime in 1984, Marag Valley was declared a "no man's land". It had 
become a resource base and a training ground of communist insurgents in northern 
Luzon. Since then, a series of military offensives were launched and the area be- 
came a battleground of the military and the communist New People's Army (NPA). 

The worsened peace and order condition prompted some of the residents to 
leave their homes and farmlands and evacuate to Luna and Pamplona. The only 
teacher also left the area and the school was closed. By 1986, other basic services 
ceased to be provided and government presence was no longer felt in Marag Valley. 

In October to December 1990, the biggest military offensive, dubbed "Oplan 
Sahdumay", was launched in the area to flush out the insurgents. The Concerned 
Cagayanos for Justice and Peace (CCJP), in the pamphlet"Total War Policy: When 
Will Peace Reign?", reported that, "Whole communities fled to the forests, leaving 
their ready-to-harvest crops which were uprooted and burned or left to rot". 



Bread and Dignity 



29 



During the interagency meeting of the Task Force on Marag Valley held on 
June 4, 1991, rebel returnees Nonong Marcelo and Loida Basilio confirmed that 
Marag Valley was the center and training ground of the communist movement in 
northern Luzon. Marcelo, 1 9 at that time, admitted belonging to the sniper platoon 
of the NPA. He reveals: "A thousand of them were in the basic course and about 200 
were in the advanced course. The training graduates were later deployed in the 
provinces". Bgen. Robert Manlongat, Commander of the 503rd Brigade whose area 
of responsibility included Marag Valley, later showed certificates of training in mili- 
tary courses given by the NPA. 

Several private and government agencies organized fact-finding and mercy 
missions to Marag Valley. Two staff from the PMS, Chelle Cruz and Mario Narag, 
joined one such group composed of representatives of other government agenc , 
NGOs, and medical and documentation teams. 

The trip from Manila to Marag alone took two days since the area "^^^^^^^^ 
ble only via a five-hour boat ride and a one-hour hike from Pamplona, a 
at the northern tip of Cagayan. 

The mission spent three days in a cave at Calabigan, ^^.^^'^J^g^g turned by 
saw for themselves the destroyed houses which the people ^'^^"1^ operations and 
the soldiers. The residents recounted their ordeal during the miii ^y^j^^ ^^^^ 
expressed fears that indiscriminate logging will resume an 
forests and other natural resources in Marag. 

ommitted against 

While a formal inquiry on the alleged human rights presidential 
the people of Marag Valley was being conducted by '^^^^^^^^^^^ the first-hand 
Human Rights Committee (PHRC), PMS submitted ^J^P^^^.^^^-^^ of an integrated 
experience of Chelle and Mario and recommended the ins^^^^^.^^^^^ ^^^^^ 
rehabilitation and development program for Marag va y ^^^^ priority be given to 
ernment agencies and NGOs. It was also recommen e 
health and educational services. 

• , in the acenda of the Cabinet Cluster for 
The Marag Valley issue was mcluded in tne ageiiud 
Security and Political Affairs (Cluster E) meeting of May 8, 19^1 • 



30 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The PMS recommendations, together with the findings of the PHRC, became 
the reference for discussion of Cabinet Cluster E on the Marag Valley issue. It also 
became the basis for the creation of an Action Team tasked to draft the Integrated 
Rehabilitation and Development Plan for Marag Valley. 

The PMS was designated chairman of the Action Team, with the concerned 
government agencies as members. This group absorbed the Task Force on Marag 
Valley previously convened by Bgen. Emiliano Templo, Deputy Chief of Staff for 
Civil-Military Operations. 

The Integrated Rehabilitation and Development Plan for Marag Valley was 
drafted. It proposed an approach which envisioned the reestablishment of govern- 
ment in Marag Valley through the delivery of basic services and the organization of 
the residents into self-help units. The member agencies agreed to this vision and 
recognized their respective roles in the effort. 

The Department of Agriculture (DA) committed PI 24 thousand for farming 
projects and DPWH allocated PIO million for the clearing and construction of a 
road from Luna to Marag proper. The Department of Justice (DOJ), assisted by the 
Commission on Human Rights (CHR), sent two teams of prosecutors to investigate 
and document alleged human rights abuses committed by both the NPAs and the 
military. The Department of National Defense (DND), as Coordinator and Secre- 
tariat, provided the logistics requirements for these activities. 

The PMS also recommended to the President the allocation of P3.5 million 
om the PSF for projects in Marag Valley. This amount funded the construction of 

schoolbuildings and multi-purpose Hope Centers which offered a combination of 
eaitn, day-care and feeding services. It also funded start up livelihood projects as 

requested by the Marag Valley residents. 

1 J^JT^2^!l'^^' ^^^^'200 00 out of the approved P566 thousand was re- 
leased to the 54th Engineering Brigade for the construction of a schoolbuilding and 
a multi-puipose center completed when schoolyear started in June 1992. 

On March 6, 1 992, the President personally handed to the Zonta Club of 
Tuguegarao a check for P225 thousand which was part of the approved P450 thou- 
sand for the implementation of the Marag Motorized Banca Service. 



Bread and Dignity 



31 



Today, many residents of Marag had already returned to their homes. They 
had started to treat the soldiers as allies. Together with the men of the AFP Engi- 
neering Brigade, the development and construction projects in Marag Valley had 
been going full blast. 

The CHICKS Area: Victory Against Poverty 

The CHICKS area, an acronym for the municipalities of Cauayan, Hinoba-an, 
Hog, Candoni, Kabankalan, and Sipalay, lies on the southernmost portion of Negros 
Occidental. Considered to be the most depressed of the seven congressional districts 
of the province, the area was within the lowest 30 percent of the province's poverty 
level. Only 61 percent of the total households had access to potable water, beve y 
four percent of its children under six years old were suffering from malnutri ion. 

In April and May of 1989, the military launched Operation JjT^j^^jJg^^ 
fltish out the insurgents in the area, considered the base of the CPP-N 
Island. This, however, resulted in 35,000 evacuees. 

In these same months, the President activated the Special Development A 
(SD A) program for the CHICKS area. 

The SDA Program was an alternative approach to ^'^'^''^^^"JfXntensified 
insurgency. It aimed to establish effective government presence tn ^^^s cHlCKS 
delivery of basic services to the people. The development thrus ^ ^^^^]dir\g of 
area was to squash poverty rather than the insurgents. It mclu ^^^^^^^ ^^^^ ggj-y- 
schools, the initiation of livelihood projects, and the provision o 



ices. 



•1 flip needs and problems 
After touching base with local government officials on 
of their respective areas, the CHICKS-SDA program started its oper 
1990. However, as early as October 1989, PSFschoolbuUdmgs were already g 
constructed by the 53rd Engineering Brigade. 

Livelihood projects, too, were implemented in the CHICKS area through NGOs 
such as the Negros Economic Development Foundation (NEDF), the Paghid-et sa 



32 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Kauswagan Development Group (PDG), and the Odisco Farm Systems Develop- 
ment Foundation (ODISCO). 

The livelihood assistance served at least 3^25 people. Assistance came in the 
form of social credit and micro enterprises to improve the economic well-being of 
the poor. Beneficiaries who were recipients of the program's livelihood assistance 
had increased their income by 35 percent. 

Hope Centers were built in the hinterland barangays of the CHICKS area. These 
were greatly appreciated by the people who, for a long time, had been deprived 
access to health and welfare services. Each of the Hope Centers was manned by a 
midwife who catered to the health needs of the people and a social worker who ran 
a day-care center for preschoolers. 

Likewise, regular free dental and medical clinics were conducted in these 
centers by the Department of Health (DOH). The Hope Centers also served as multi- 
purpose halls and evacuation centers. 

The road improvement program of the SDA completed the construction of 
2.075 kilometers of roads in different areas in CHICKS. The construction of these 
roads will provide access to the remotest barangay and sitio in order to move goods 
and people. 

Another project involved the construction of a potable water system in Bocana, 
Hog which was being implemented by the HOPE Foundation. The project, with a 
budget of PI million, was also funded by the PSF. 

As of June 30, 1992, there were 49 completed projects funded under the PSF 
and 12 under the DPWH Small Infrastructure Fund amounting to a total of P25 
million. PSF projects included the construction of schoolbuildings and Hope Centers 
while the DPWH Small Infrastructure Fund was utilized in the improvement of 
farm-to-market roads. 



Edwin Nacionales, SDA manager of PMS for CHICKS, stated that, "In my day 
to day interaction with them I develop a deeper understanding of the root causes of 



Bread and Dignity 



33 



poverty and the reasons behind the swelling of (the) insurgency problem. First, the 
prolonged state of neglect and deprivation had developed negative values and atti- 
tudes such as pessimistic outlook in life, lack of self-respect and dignity and will to 
succeed. Second, they resist change or reform. Thus, they are perpetually trapped 
in poverty that created a fertile ground for insurgency. 

We do not like people to get disgruntled again and go back to the mountains. 
The call of the hour is genuine countryside development". 



Epilogue 



WITH THE MANY vicissitudes endured by the six years of the Aquino admin- 
istration, one would probably not be surprised to find a people down and out, if not 
a government in outright disarray. 

But the Aquino government, perhaps epitomizing the indomitable spirit of the 
Fihpmo, had faced the challenges with flying colors, as attested by the success of its 
many projects undertaken with and for the people. 

On June 18, 1992, on the occasion of the turnover of the Kabisig People's Move- 
ment from President Aquino to President- elect Fidel V. Ramos, the NGO partners 
of the President - 394 as of last count - paid tribute to Mrs. Aquino and her nurtur- 
ing of the vision of people's organizations and government working productively 
together. 

In her response, the President stated: "... the work we have done together has 
lined the vast democratic space we regained with an orchard of opportunities for 
even greater service. For it is not only schoolhouses and potable water systems in 
communities that we build, not only post-harvest facilities or livelihood systems. 
But also the capabilities of people's organizations and the confidence of the Filipino 
people in themselves". 



Bread and Dignity 



35 



Together, the government and the people symbolize the enduring spirit of co- 
operation that is one of the cornerstones of the management of the Aquino years in 
government. 



