


1 


Why was martial law proclaimed in the 
Philippines on 21 September 1972? 

Why did not the Filipinos take up arms 
and take to the hills when it was done? 

After all, the Filipinos were not craven 
fools, more careful of their lives than of their 
liberties. 

They had been trained in the American 
system of representative democracy for more 
than 40 years, to become the American 
showcase of democracy” in Asia. 

And, against heavy odds, they had 
fought a powerful and experienced 
occupation army for three years during the 
Japanese war. 

When, in the performance of his 
diplomatic duties, the author of this work 
undertook to answer these questions, he was 
in two minds about his qualifications for the 
task, having been away from the Philippines 
as an Ambassador of the Republic for more 
than 20 years. 

This presumably gave him a detached 
perspective; on the other hand, it made it 
impossible for him, he thought, to get the real 
feel of the situation, what things were really 
like back home, what the Filipinos were 
actually thinking and talking about, and if 
indeed they dared to do so. 

He chose to interpret the present in the 
light of the past, and to take a historical 
approach to the proclamation of martial law 
in the Philippines, to find its roots in the 
Revolution against Spain, in the war against 
the United States, in the ensuing political 
struggle for independence, and in the “25 
years of Watergate” that followed the 
establishment of the Third Republic. 

The conclusion he suggests to the 
unprejudiced is that the Filipinos, like every 
other people, have the government, not so 
much that they deserve, as that which they 
need and have the right to choose in keeping 
with their experiences and expectations. 


Today Began Yesterday 


A Historical Approach 
to Martial Law 
in the Philippines 

Leon Marfa Guerrero 


Publ istied In 
Manila. 
1975 



Copyright 

Lc6n Maria Guerrero 1975 
All rights reserved 


For forms of government let fools contest: 
Whate'er is best administer'd is best. 

_ ALEXANDER POPE, Essay on Man 

/ would not give half a guinea 
to live under one form of 
government rather than another. 

It is of no moment to the 
happiness of an individual. 


SAMUEL JOHNSON 



I 


What would the American people do if mart al law were proclaimed iin 
the United States? 

Perhaps it would be easier for them to u nderstand the situation in the 
Philippines if they were to realize that upon just such a proclamation ^ 1 1 tlhc 
Filipinos did nothing. They did not take up arms. Although there were no 
tanks in the streets, they did not rise or take to the hills. I 2 I 

Indeed, an official report of the Secretary of the United States 
Senate/ 3 ^ found that “(i)n outward appearance, the Philippine Republic h, 
rarely been more serene ... It is said that when martial law was decreed 
there was a near universal sigh of relief in the Philippines. ” Yet the Filipino 
are not craven fools, more careful of their lives than of their liberties. 
Against heavy odds, they fought a powerful and experienced occupation 
army for three years during the Japanese war. 

The difference in reaction — and one assumes there would be a 
difference — suggests a disparity in national experience that goes far to 
explain the general acceptance by the Filipinos of a suspension, albeit unde 
color of constitutional authority, of the political processes normal in an 
American-style representative democracy such as they had known and 


21 September 1972 the President of the Philippines signed Proclamation 
No. 1081 placing the whole country under martial law. 

(^The Filipino Muslims fighting government forces in the Sulu archipelago and 
some parts of Mindanao island are engaged in a secessionist movement, while the 
Communist-led “New People’s Army” operating in certain regions seeks to 
overthrow the constituted authorities. These activities antedated and indeed 
brought about the proclamation of martial law, and cannot reasonably be regarded 
as a protest against it. 

(^“Martial Law in the Philippines”, Report of Frank Valeo, Secretary of the 
Senate, U.S. Congressional Record, 21 February 1973, pp. S3015-7. 


1 


practiced for three generations. It should also serve to remind Americans 
how unreasonable and unfair it would be for them to pass judgment on the 
basis of their own history and contemporary situation. 

A more legitimate comparison could perhaps be made with the 
Philippines’ neighbors in Southeast Asia, or indeed in the whole of the 
so-called Third World, where with a handful of exceptions the military has 
seized power in the past or continues to exercise it, avowedly in an effort to 
heal the plagues of endemic poverty, corruption, and economic stagnation 
and inequality. Yet even then the parallel would not be wholly valid for the 
Republic of the Philippines is not now under a military regime. The armed 
forces have not takpn over the government or any of its branches, and 
remain fully under the control of their commander-in-chief, who, as the duly 
elected President, exercised the powers vested in him by the Constitution 
when he proclaimed martial law.* 4 * 

The purposes underlying that proclamation, in the language of the 
official report to the United States Senate, “have to do with bringing about 
fundamental changes in Philippine society. Once declared, martial law not 
only brought out the military to maintain order, it also opened the way for 
the President to initiate by decree the social reforms which, for many years, 
have been widely recognized as essential to the survival of a free system tn 
the Philippines." 

One must seek in Philippine history the nature of these reforms, 
political as well as social, and the way to bring them about best suited to the 
traditions and character of the Filipinos. 


( )"The President shall be commander-in-chief of all armed forces of the Philippines, 
and whenever it becomes necessary, he may call out such armed forces to prevent or 
suppress lawless violence, invasion, insurrection, or rebellion. In case of invasion, 
insurrection, or rebellion, or imminent danger thereof, when the public safety requires it, 
he may suspend the privileges of the writ of habeas corpus, or place the Philippines or any 
part thereof under martial law.” Art. VII, Sec. 1 1 (2), 1935 Constitution. This provision is 
reproduced in Art. IX, Sec. 12, of the 1973 Constitution, with the powers vested in the 
Prime Minister. Under Art. XVII, Sec. 3 (1) the incumbent President "shall continue to 
exercise his powers and prerogatives under the 1935 Constitution and the powers vested 
in the President and the Prime Minister under this Constitution until he calls upon the 
Interim National Assembly to elect the interim President and the interim Prime Minister, 
who shall then exercise their respective powers vested by this Constitution.” 


2 


II 

Let constitutions founder, 
and principles be saved! 

- AP. MABIN1 

One need not go as far back, as the early Malay settlements before the 
Spanish conquest, patriarchal and consensual in their organization, or the 
priestly autocracies in the isolated towns which maintained the Spanish 
colonial regime for 333 years with only a handful of peninsular soldiers. It 
should suffice to compare the Philippine and American Revolutions. 

The American War of Independence 200 years ago was really a Britisl 
family quarrel about social institutions which both sides shared, as they alt 
shared blood, beliefs and memories. Despite the egalitarian sonorities of 
Jefferson’s Declaration, the American Revolution was made by and for 
slave-owning landlords, together with merchants, lawyers and divines, 
defending what they conceived to be their inborn rights and privileges as 
Englishmen against the encroachments of the Crciwn. No black slaves sat ii 
the Continental Congress; and the Indians who hurled the casks overboard 
the Boston Tea Party were only Yankees in disguise. The Founding Father 
were concerned with “taxation without representation" but by and large t 
Philippine Revolution of 1896 against Spanish rule was not at all about th 
workings of government as such. . 

True, JoseRizal and other members of the educated elite,* 5 * in what 
now known as the Propaganda Movement, precursors and unwitting 
begetters of the Revolution, agitated for political reforms that would give 
them the rights granted in the various liberal Spanish Constitutions of the 
time, but they would have been well content with the status, as it might b 


* Jose Rizal (1861-1896), the national hero of the Philippines, Marcelo H. del F 
Mariano Ponce, the Luna brothers, Juan and Antonio, Graciano Lopez Jaena, Jose Ma 
Panganiban, Edilberto Evangelista, et al. 


3 


of Filipino "Spaniards”, and indeed they condemned the uprising when it 
broke out.*®) 

The Philippine Revolution was in fact made and fought by peasants and 
workers recruited by a talented organizer, Andres Bonifacio, a street peddler 
turned warehouseman, and later led into battle by Emilio Aguinaldo, a born 
soldier, a petty trader ironically enough turned village mayor to escape 
conscription.* 7 * It was anti-clerical in inspiration and racially nostalgic, even 
xenophobic, as the rites of its secret society reveal; it was about 
independence from the rule of white men, and it was also about land and the 
structure of society. 

What is likewise still relevant is that the “Association of the Sons of the 
People” (known to history as the Katipunan )* 8 * was indisputably 


(^Having been wrongfully exiled to Dapitan, Rizal offered to serve in the Spanish 
armies in Cuba as a physician. He was actually on his way there when he was implicated 
in the Revolution and brought back to Manila to stand trial. In these circumstances he 
drafted a manifesto to the Filipinos, suppressed for their own reasons by the colonial 
authorities, which read in part: “Countrymen, I have given proofs, as much as anyone 
else, of desiring liberties for our country, and I still desire them. But I made them 
conditional on the education of the people so that by means of learning and work they 
would have their own personality and make themselves worthy of (such liberties). In my 
writings I have recommended study and (the development of) civic virtues, without which 
there can be no redemption. I have also written . . . that reforms, to be fruitful, must 
come from above, for those that come from below are irregular and insecure changes. 

Holding these ideals, I cannot do less than to condemn, and I do condemn, this absurd and 

savage rebellion ’’ (Italics between brackets, supplied). It is only fair to note that one 

can quote from Rizal’s works to almost any purpose, but these sentiments were not expressed 
by a fictional character in his novels, but by himself in the culminating moments of his own 
life. 

(^Andre's Bonifacio (1863-1897), founder of the Katipunan, and Emilio Aguinaldo 
(1869-1964), President of the first Philippine Republic and commanding general of its 
armies. 

(8)j 0 give it its full name, the Kataastaasan at KagaJanggalangang Katipunan ng mga 
Anak ng Sayan, Tagalog for the Most High and Honorable Association of the Sons of the 
People. 


4 


authoritarian, a characteristic essential to a revolutionary conspiracy but uls 
perhaps suggestive of a racial trait, and demanded absolute and 
.unquestioning obedience. When the Katipunan became a victim of its uvn 
success, it was replaced by a scries of ru d imentary governments, tli c last of 
which, upon the outbreak of war between the United Stitesand Spain and 
the resumption of the Revolution, proclaimed national independence in 
1898. The first Philippine Republic was what would now be termed a 
provisional revolutionary government, headed by a dictator, Aguinaldo, the 
commander-in-chief of a people's army, manned and officered for the most 
part by unlettered peasants. 

Partly because they shared the nationalism and the desire for 
fundamental human rights and privileges bespoken by Rizal and the 
intellectuals, and partly in precautionary defense of their interests, which tl 
expiring Spanish colonial regime was now plainly incapable of securing, the 
land-owners and other men of property now edged their way into the 
revolutionary camp. The military dictator, for his part, was not adverse to 
attracting their financial support and unifying the country, and drew them 
into a national Assembly which was originally intended to be only an 
advisory council of notables. 

Indeed, its members were, for the greater part, not elected by the 
constituencies they were supposed to represent.* 9 * The civil disorder causci 
by the insurrection and the subsequent war with the United States made 
normal elections impractical, and in any case the suffrage was restricted to 


(^At the start, only about 13 members were elected, and about 35 
appointed by Aguinaldo. By the time the Constitution was being drafted, 35 had 
been elected out of a total of about 94 -r- the figures vary and arc as uncertain 
as the times — among whom were 43 lawyers, 23 physicians and pharmacists, 
seven businessmen, four agriculturists, three educators, three military officers, 
two engineers, two painters and one priest. 

. 5 


those inhabitants of the towns and their outlying barrios, of at least 20 years of 
age, who were "most distinguished by their education, social position and 
honorable conduct”, and who were furthermore committed to the cause of 
national independence. These local assemblies, whose composition was more 
often than not dictated by the local military commissioners, elected 
neighborhood leaders, presumably by acclamation or by a show of hands 
since no provision seems to have been made for a secret ballot; the leaders in 
turn elected a town mayor; and the town mayors, a provincial governor and, 
subject to confirmation by' the President, a representative or representatives 
in the national Assembly, which would hopefully, upon the advent of peace 
and the international recognition of the Republic, elect the constitutional 
President — all a remarkable anticipation of the system of indirect elections 
that was to be in later times the framework of the “guided democracies” of 
much of Asia, but conspicuously different from the American form of 
government. 

The architect of this structure, which by the force of events was to 
remain in effect until the fall of the Republic, was Apolinario Mabini, ( ’ °> a 
paralytic lawyer of genius, w.ho had become Aguinaldo’s most trusted 
adviser and later the first Prime Minister of the Republic. As such he was in 
almost constant conflict with the Assembly. He objected to the Assembly’s 
assumption of powers to draft a Constitution, and opposed even more 
strenuously the draft Constitution itself, which sought to impose the 
Assembly’s supremacy over the President and the judiciary. In this he 
perceived an attempt by the men of property, “education” and “social 
position” to safeguard their interests against any egalitarian invasions or 
confiscations by the President at the head of a revolutionary people’s army. 


^Apolinario Mabini (1864-1903), author of "Programa Constitutional de la 
Republica FiHpina" (Constitutional Program of the Philippine Republic) and other 
seminal documents of the revolutionary regime. Like Rizal, he placed great emphasis 
on the education of the people in the civic virtues and their social regeneration. In a 
manifesto to the Filipinos at the start of his public career he said in part: “ (l)f instead of 
using our freedom, you should abuse it, not only would we not achieve our betterment 
but we should be worse off than we were before. Not only that, in order truly to 
shape our social regeneration we must radically change not only our institutions 
but also our way of behaving and thinking. An internal as well as an external revolution 
is necessary. ...” 


6 


And indeed a dual system of government li a J d evsl® |>ed vi til the 
authority given to the provincial comnuitders to intervene a,nd takeoverl 
local governments whenever the danger arose of attack. by the enemy — 
Spanish or later American. “Hurwfanst las tonstititcio ties, y seJvense Ivs 
principios! ” was.the solution Mibini suggested to the political crisis whe 
he had fallen from power. “Might not a situation arise when the salvation 
our ideals would depend on ( t/re prodemetfon of) a dictatorial govern mer 
And if this should happen due to contingencies of the conflict, would it b 
reasonable not to adopt that form (of government) because it would be 
unconstitutional? In such a case we could and should declare, let 
constitutions founder and let principles be saved! ”1 11 > 

No revolutionary people, he went on to say, should attempt to draft 
theoretically perfect constitution, but should instead limit itself to "a 
declaration of principles in whose light it proposes to achieve its objective 
the forms or ways to do so being “flexible so that they might be adjusted 
the time, the place, and the circumstances. A revolution does not build, b 
prepares; it makes the people fit for a more perfect constitution upon the 
advent of peace, and it is important to keep this in mind because the best 
system applied at the wrong time gives very bad results. The science of 
government does not consist in knowing how to choose its best and most 
perfect form, but what is more useful and timely . . , To know how to 
govern in a revolution it is necessary to know how to find the easiest and 
most practicable way to do so at any given moment of time.” 

Alas, neither constitutions nor principles, neither doctrinal nor 
pragmatic forms of government survived. The blame was laid on Mabini 
when Aguinaldo imposed amendments to the Malolos Constitution which 
maintained executive supremacy, postponed its promulgation, delayed th< 


^ ^lt should be noted that the principles he considered should be saved were 
national independence, the republican form of government and individual rights 
(derechos individuates). It would appear that in his view a dictatorship was not necess; 
incompatible with a republican form of government, any more than a restriction of 
freedom of speech, press and assembly. In point of fact, Mabini’s views, contained in 
the article "Algo para el Congreso", earned the newspaper where it was published 
an official warning by the Government. 


7 


convocation of the Assembly as a parliament, and packed it with his 
appointees. When it finally met, Mabini, the “absolutist” as opposed to the 
“constitutionalists,” the “intransigent” as opposed to the “pacifists”, 
quickly lost the confidence of the Assembly. 

Who can tell now what form of political system the Filipinos might 
have worked out by and for themselves if the First Republic had not been 
betrayed — as the Filipinos saw it — and destroyed by its ally against Spain, 
the United States? And what social structure? Seventy-five years later, after 
much waste of spirit and substance, the 1971 Constitutional Convention was 
to reach back to the parliamentary system of that Republic, which, for all its 
congenital weaknesses, had worked well enough' in the middle of a losing 
war, and in fact under martial law, to enable an orderly and logical transfer 
of formal responsibility from a Prime Minister pledged to uncompromising 
resistance to one committed to seek "peace with honor”. 

i 

If the United States had not intervened, would the peasants in arms 
have imposed a redistribution of land? Would Aguinaldo have eventually 
implemented the Malolos Constitution and submitted the Presidency and the 
Army to the paramountcy of a Congress of landlords, lawyers and 
intellectuals? Would the commander-in-chief have been overthrown by a 
rival general, beginning a succession of meaningless military dictatorships? 
Surely the least likely of the possibilities is that the Filipinos would have 
chosen the political system of the United States as the one best suited to 
serve the ends of their Revolution. 


8 


Ill 

The forms of democracy are infinite, 
depending upon the genius of the petypfe 
who adopt it. And the best form of 
democracy is that which can best 
promote and insure the fibe/ty, welt- 
being and happiness of alt the peopte. 

- MANUEL L. QUEZON 

Be that as it may, it would be insensitive not to realize that tho 
Americans who know or care should somehow feel betrayed by the 
proclamation of martial law in the Philippines, their “showcase of 
democracy” in Asia, and should look on it almost as disloyalty and 
ingratitude. So also it would be churlish to question the motives of.their 
predecessors when, having crushed the first republic in Asia, they sought to 
salve their consciences by making good Americans of their "little brown 
brothers”. 

English was the language of democracy, and the Filipinos would have 
learn it, like it or not. The American Constitution was the perfect 
formulation of democracy, and the Filipinos would have the benefit of its 
institutions, like it or not. Little matter that the unlettered serfs of the gre; 
estates were no Jacksonian frontiersmen; they would cast a free and secret 
vote. Little matter that the greedy and despotic landlords were no 
Jeffersonian squires; they would respect a Bill of Rights. 

So it was that American-style representative democracy came to the 
Philippines. Not, of course, all at once. The commanding-general gave way 
a civil governor, but the executive power was retained in American hands 
until the establishment of the autonomous Commonwealth in 1 935. 1 1 2 * T 


( 12 hr>e executive power was exercised by the American Governor-General. Upo 
the establishment of the Commonwealth it was vested in an elected Filipino President. 
American High Commissioner retained authority to intervene in financial affairs. Forei; 
relations, of course, were conducted by the U.S. Government 


9 


Filipinos were allowed to elect an Assembly in 1907, but they were not 
given full control of the legislative power until 1916. 3) The decisions of 
the judiciary were to remain subject to review by the Supreme Court of the 
United States until independence in 1946. 

Furthermore, the franchise was hedged by stringent property and 
literacy (which in the circumstances was a form of property) qualifications, 
so that the first Assembly elections outside of Manila were apt to be cozy 
and decorous affairs of the elite. But as the suffrage was gradually extended, 
the Filipino politicians proved to be alert and increasingly proficient 
students of the American system, sharpening their skills in patronage and 
demagoguery. 

They found the Americans good teachers and splendid models. In its 
beginnings the colonial, regime had sought to promote the fortunes of the 
Federalist Party — which, advocating admission to the American Union as a 
state, was in fact the only one allowed to operate legally — by restricting 
appointments to the various civil posts of honor and profit to members of 
that party, or requiring the beneficiaries to join it. Withal the Federalists 
found no popular support outside an extremely limited electorate of local 
notables, but the lesson in patronage was well learned with deplorable and 
indeed disastrous consequences reaching to the present day. 

The American effort did provide burgeoning Philippine politics with a 
credible and valid choice of political alternatives. But the Federalists and 
their platform of annexation were so universally abhorred that, even 
reorganizing as the Progressive Party which postulated eventual 
independence after a suitable period of preparation for self-government, they 
were thoroughly defeated and repudiated in the first Assembly elections by 
the new Nacionalista Party which brought together all the factions 


( ^The legislative power was originally exercised by the Philippine Commission 
dominated by appointed Americans, and later shared with the Assembly composed of 
elected Filipinos. Upon the election of a Democratic president in the United States, the 
Filipinos were given a majority in the Commission, which was thereafter replaced by an 
elected Senate under the Jones Act. 


10 


demanding “absolute, complete and immediate independence " fro iji the 
United States. 

From a patriotic viewpoint the overwhelming popular verdict was a 
triumph; for the prospects of an American -style rep resen tat i\e democracy, 
was a catastrophe. Only twice again in the next 65 years would the Filipine 
briefly have a choice between competing principles and policies. Everyone, 
was seen and understood, was for independence. 

For all the long years after, through the two struggles for personal 
leadership and ail the combinations and permutations of faction, the 
Nacionalista Party, the independence party, would almost completely 
dominate the polls. 1 ' 4 ) Furthermore, although the executive power was In 
the hands of an appointed American Governor-General, the Filipino 
leadership contrived, while there was a Democratic administration in 
Washington, to operate within what was in effect a parliamentary system. / 
Council of State, composed of the Governor-General, the President of the 
Senate, the Speaker of the House, and the members of the cabinet, 
controlled appropriations, appointments, and legislation, with the secretar'n 
responsible to the Legislature and exercising “direct control" over their 
departments under the “general” supervision of the Executive. Later a Boa 
of Control composed of a complaisant Governor-General and the two head: 
of the Legislature exercised authority over the national bank, the railroads 
and other state economic agencies. In a famous letter to justify his revolt 
against the Speaker as leader of the party, the Senate President wrote that 
this system “put the executive and legislative powers of the government of 
the Philippines in the hands of two men,” the Speaker and himself. One of 


(^Thus, in 1912, the Nacionalistas held 62 out of 81 seats in the Assembly; in 
1916, they held 75 out of 90 seats in the House of Representatives, 21 out of 22 electn 
seats in the newly created Senate, and 22 out of 32 governorships; and in 1938, all 98 
seats in the unicameral National Assembly, and all the governorships except for one 
independent. 


Ill 


these two leaders, Sergio Osmena and Manuel L. Quezon/ 1 5 * would rule the 
country in effect for 39 years, in fact from the first popular elections until 
independence, rising to power or falling from it on the basis of '‘votes of 
confidence” in the party caucus, rather than Amcrican-style direct national 
elections. Moreover, their rivalry was mainly personal, thinly disguised as it 
might be by specious appeals to principle. That this was so can be gauged by 
the 1 fact that while Quezon, in his bid for leadership, accused Osmena of 
“unipersonalism” and called for a “collective leadership”, and while some 
years later they were to fight a national election on the merits and demerits 
of two practically identical U.S. Congress measures on independence, they 
would quickly and blandly arrive at an accommodation within a re-united 
Nacionalista Party once the votes were counted. Thus, after the 1922 
elections, Manila wits commented that the only difference between the old 
regime and the new was that, before, the bosses had been Osmena and 
Quezon, and afterward, Quezon and Osmena. 

The only important challenge to this one-party, one-leader dominance 
was mounted by the Democrata Party, a combination of disillusioned 
Progresistas and discontented Nacionalistas formed in 191 7. Their first and 
last chance came when Quezon split the Nacionalista Party in 1921 , and the 
elections returned a House of Representatives divided into three almost 
equal parts.* 1 6) But the Nacionalistas were not slow to recognize the danger, 
and combined to elect Manuel Roxas* 1 as Speaker. A year later, shortly 


(^Sergio Osmena (1878-1961) was Speaker of the Philippine Assembly throughout 
its existence, from 1907 to its replacement by the House of Representatives, later 
Senator, Vice President of the Commonwealth, and President Manuel L. Quezon 
(1878-1944) was President of the Senate from its creation in 1916 until he was ejected 
President of the Commonwealth in 1935, holding that office until his death. 

(^Quezon’s Colectivistas won 32 seats; the Democratas, 26; and Osmena’s 
Nacionalistas, 21, in the lower house. Quezon retained control of the Senate. 

(^Manuel A. Roxas (1892-1948), Speaker of the House from 1922 to 1933, later 
President of the Senate, 1945-1946, elected over Osmena last President of the 
Commonwealth and first President of the Third Republic. He transformed Filipino 
leadership into a triumvirate. 


12 


before coalescing into the NtuSofurl/sta Consatidado Firry , they engineerei 
an artificial “cabinet crisis ”” a rt J crushed the EemoCjvto Party's Juar 
Sumulong in a crucial senatorial by-e lectio n « n charges of pro-Americanisi 
The Democratas never recovered from the defeat. Three years later they 
joined the National Supreme Council to form a united front for 
independence; after four more years they proposed the immediate 
dissolution of all political parties and a national union in Ang Bcrgong 
Katipunan, * 1 8 * an allegedly non-partisan patriotic movement organized l 
Roxas; and in 1933, after having split, like the NadonaHstas, into factions 
Pro and Anti the Ha re-Hawes-Cutting independence act, joining as best thi 
might the Quezon and Osmena blocs, and witnessing the inevitable reunio 
of a resurgent Nacionafista Party, they formally voted their own party’s 
dissolution. 

Anglo-American representative democracy, whose essence is the 
peaceful alternation in power of parties with competing principles and 
programs of government, was practically dead in the Philippines, so much 
that Quezon, now President of the Commonwealth, conscious of the fact 
that his party held all the scats in Congress, could call for a ‘‘partyless 
democracy”.!' 9 * 

“The first fetish that we must discard,” he declared, “is th.e discredit 
theory that democracy cannot exist without political parties.” Political 
parties were “not essential to, but on the contrary (were) evils in, a 
democracy.” 

“The second slogan that must be thrown overboard,” he went on to 
say, “is the theory that in a democracy individual liberty must not be 
restricted .... The exercise of liberty is good for the people only when it 
accompanied by self-restraint. It is the abuse of liberty which is today 
causing the disappearance of liberty in many parts of the world.” 


(*^Tagalog for The New Katipunan. 

■^Quezon expounded his thesis in three speeches delivered in 1940 at the stat 
university (University of the Philippines), before the U.P . Alumni Association, and at 
inauguration of the privately owned Far Eastern University. 


IS 




The Filipinos faced the “tremendous task” of “devising our own 
democratic institutions and government .... (T)he forms of democracy are 
infinite, depending upon the genius of the particular people who adopt it. 
And the best form of government, let it be remembered always, is that which 
can best promote and insure the liberty, well being and happiness of all the 
people. Since we cannot for the present,” he urged, conscious no doubt of 
the continuing tutelage of the American colonial regime, “have a partyless 
government, let us at least try to minimize the baneful effects of partisan 
strife. Let us condemn systematic opposition and falsehood in the discussion 
of public issues.” 

His judgment, drawn from long, intimate and practical experience with 
the workings of the American form of democratic government in the 
Philippines, must surely command the respect and acceptance of a later 
generation, particularly when coupled with the considered opinion of an 
experienced and not uncritical American colonial administrator and 
professor of political science.* 20 * 

“They (Quezon and Osmefia) are applying the basic principles of a 
political system that for 30 years was beaten out on the anvil of Philippine 
experience. It is quite true that this system concentrates enormous powers in 
the handful of men who direct its operation. But he is blind to the facts of 
Philippine history who does not realize that this concentration of power was 
deliberately and skillfully provided for both in the Philippine Constitution 
and in the long-established extra-legal political instrumentalities through 
which that constitution is being translated into actual government; and that 
the system as a whole has been sanctioned by an overwhelming majority of 
the Filipino people acting through the forms of self-government provided by 
law and established custom. The system may or may not be ‘democratic’ 
from the standpoint of other peoples. But it is a Filipino system, and he is 
rash indeed who asserts that thus far both the system and the men who are 
applying it in the Government of the Commonwealth have not received the 
steady support of a large majority of the Filipino people.” 


(^Joseph Ralston Hayden, “The Philippines: A Study in National Development’’, 
Macmillan, N.Y., 1950, pp. 374-5. 


14 




/ 


IV 

The majority and mi norfty per ties 
represent almost exclusively the 
intelligentsia and what we world 
call the Philippine plutocracy, 
and the needy classes have nc 
representation in these parties, 

-JUAN SUM ULONG 

The ideal of national independence, which the NacionaHstas an d tl 
leaders were using so successfully to wrest and wheedle governmental po* 
from the colonial executive, and to maintain and stretch it until its t< 
seizure, meant a different thing to the peasants who had not forgotten t 
they had fought the Revolution for land and freedom from caciqae, usure 
and tax-collector. Their vision of a free and just society may have been na 
it was, for all that, not the less magnetic and irrepressible. Their estimate \ 
their own strength and of the forces arrayed against them may have been 
sanguine, but after all they had won the Revolution with their farm-knive 

They were inspired by myths and a fanatical belief in the magical 
powers of their leaders, who claimed to have talked with the spirit of Riz; 
or who invoked the even higher authority of the Sacred Heart of Jesus an 
the Immaculate Heart of Mary. Thus, as far back or as early as 1923, the 
so-called Colorums (21 } took up arms in Surigao and other areas ot 
northeastern Mindanao, and were not subdued for nearly a year. In 1931 
another secret society of discontented peasants in Central Luzon, the 
Tanggulan^ 22 ^ which the Constabulary claimed to number 40,000, seized 


(21 distortion of the Roman Catholic ritual phrase, In soecuic saecuiorum 
usually translated as “World without end". 

(22) from the Tagalog, tanggo! } meaning to defend or protect, and thus the Def 
or Protectors of the Sons of the People, a later version of the old Katipunan. 


15 


town of Tayug, disarmed the large Constabulary garrison, hacking the 
officers to pieces, burned the barracks and the post office, looted the city 
hall, and destroyed the land records. A more openly political peasant 
organization, the Sakdal * 23) Party, claimed more than 68,000 members in 
the Tagalog provinces, according to the Constabulary, and, accusing the 
Nacionalista leaders of betraying the cause of independence by accepting the 
Commonwealth which would delay it for 10 more years, returned to office 
three members of the House of Representatives, one provincial governor and 
numerous local officials. 

They would go farther. On the night of 2 May 1934, in a quixotic bid to 
stop or disrupt the coming plebiscite on the “fake’* Commonwealth 
Constitution, the Sakdal peasants rose in a wide arc of 14 towns from Gapan 
in Nueva Ecija in the north down to Kabite in the south, briefly holding 
Kabuyaw and Santa Rosa in La Laguna. By itself the uprising had perhaps ' 
scant military significance: a handful of peasants, men and women, armed 
only with farm-knives, efficiently slaughtered in a churchyard by the 
Constabulary. But the ancient cry for land and freedom, and the bloody 
repudiation of the orthodox political parties and the national leaders who 
were accused of betraying the Revolution, showed its ideals had not been 
forgotten. 

Indeed, facing the first Commonwealth presidential elections, Quezon 
and Osmena feared that the venerable Aguinaldo, emerging from history to 
oppose their candidacies, would place himself, as of old, at the head of the 
distressed and dispossessed.* 24 * This anachronistic but potentially 
formidable alliance was frustrated, but the fact that the opposition 


(^From the Tagalog word for, among other things, defender or accuser, and thus, 
defender of the poor, or accuser of their oppressors. The Sakdal Party changed its name 
during the Japanese occupation, with which it collaborated, to the Ganap Party, from the 
Tagalog word for complete, indicating perhaps that its work had been completed or its 
ideals attained and realized with the expulsion of the Americans. 

(24) Aguinaldo was supported by an ad hoc political party, the Nacional Sociqlista. 
Another revolutionary figure, Gregorio Aglipay, founder and supreme bishop of the 
Independent Philippine Church, was backed by the Republican Party. 


16 


candidates, with only rudiinen tary organizations and pathetic political 
presences, with no patronage, scan 1 Funds, and a handful of local candidates 
in support, received one out of three votes, was a stark and disturbing 
revelation of disenchantment with the MtrcioncJistnrs and the uses to which 
their monopoly of political power had, or had not, been put. 

Nonetheless, the call for National unity for the attain inert of 
independence had once again prevailed, and s/iiat t he Damocro ic leader, 
juan Sumulong, had warned against in a pre-electoral article, "After the 
Coalition, the Deluge", had come to pass: the continuation of the "farcical 
representative government of the past" under a "feared and detested 
oligarchy”. Foreseeing the growth of a revolutionary opposition, he 
explained: “I am of the belief that the majority and minority parties ( the 
Pro and Anti factions before their coalition in the revived Nacionalista Part^ 
represent almost exclusively the intelligentsia and what we would call the 
Philippine plutocracy, and that the needy classes have no representation in 
these parties, and for this reason they have neither voice nor vote, even onl} 
as minorities, in the formulation of governmental policies.” 

Little wonder, then, that for ail of Quezon’s new found devotion to a 
program of “social justice” and the promulgation of a minimun) wage and a 
eight-hour working day, the Commonwealth’s National Assembly did no 
more than the old Philippine Legislature to alleviate the immemorial plight 
of share-croppers. 

The system of land tenure in the Philippines is a child of its history. 
Before the Spanish conquest the Malay settlements, the barangay, compose 
of families and their clients, held their waterside clearings more or less in 
common. The colonizers destroyed this primitive arrangement. As in his, 
American realms, the monarch in Madrid rewarded his captains with the 
royal grant of encomiendas, vast tracts of land including their indigenous 
inhabitants whom, in exchange, the new lords were to convert to the true 
faith and protect against their enemies. 

True, the Spaniards were only a handful, and in any case until the 
independence of Mexico they preferred to live in Manila and gamble on the 
galleon trade with China. In fact the only agricultural enterprise was shown 


17 


by the Spanish religious orders who developed large plantations cultivated by 
native lease-holders. Significantly enough, it was the latter and their 
share-croppers in the eight provinces around Manila who led and fought the 
Revolution. They made their point, at least initially, when the new American 
regime sought to assuage their grievances by purchasing the “friar lands”, as 
they came to be known, for re-distribution. 

As it turned out, however, the estates ended up in the hands of those 
who could pay their price. Although, unlike in Spanish America, there was 
no color line between landlords and share-croppers, the wealthy and 
influential Filipinos were not above exploiting their kith and kin. At the very 
beginning of the Spanish regime, the native chiefs had been charged with the 
duty of collecting tribute, and, abusing their new positions, had converted 
the village commons into their private properties; later, their successors in 
interest had taken advantage of a foreign system of land titling beyond the 
comprehension of the unlettered tillers of the soil. 

There was, of course, an abundance of land in the huge archipelago for 
the adventurous and the discontented. But living from hand to mouth, at the 
mercy of typhoons, droughts and rinderpest, burdened with children whose 
birth and weddings demanded ruinous festivities, the improvident 
homesteaders, more often than not, lost to usurers, lawyers and old and new 
landlords the lands they had cleared with their blood, sweat and tears, so 
much so that laws were passed — and evaded — to restrict their right to 
alienate their pitiful holdings. 

Moreover, the classic mercantilist system, which had provided the 
incentive for the American adventure in Asian colonialism, encouraged the 
concentration of the richest lands in the hands of the few by the creation of 
a huge and profitable metropolitan market for such commodities as sugar, 
tobacco, hemp and copra, which could be efficiently produced only in large 
plantations manned by farm-workers and seasonal harvesters paid whatever 
wages might keep them and their families from starving to death. 

The American colonial regime does not appear to have been overly 
troubled by this built-in barrier to a truly effective democracy and just 
society. In its beginnings it was so suspicious of the violent, xenophobic 


18 


egalitarianism of the Katipuncu) that it even outlawed trad e-tin ions. It chos< 
to rely rather on the propertied as the stable, trustworthy demerit of the 
native population, bound by class instinct and interest to be conservative, 
conformist and compliant. Nor, it is only fair to add, did the Filipino 
politicians, for all their lip-service to the welfare of ibie people, ever serious 
question the justice of the established social and econo rm ic system. The 
workers and the peasants had no an then tic voice in the Philippine Legislate 
before the Japanese war except for three Sakdals under indictment. They 
had no party. 

No party, that is, except the Communist Party. The Coforums and Tan 
may have been visionaries and fanatics with only an embryonic concept of 
freedom and justice; the Sakdaf, later the Gancrp, were to be duped into 
betraying independence to the Japanese; the Socialists and Communists 
offered a scientific interpretation of history and a sophisticated system of 
social organization that was not beyond the grasp of an intelligent peasant. 

In the last locai elections beioic the war the Socialist candidate for 
governor of the key province of Pampanga, the granary in Central Luzon, 
was only narrowly defeated, and the party elected eight out of 21 mayors, 
including that of the provincial capital, on a platform that called in part fo 
the conversion of the great estates into collective farms. Upon the Japanes< 
invasion and occupation, the peasants of Central Luzon, under the directic 
of the Communist Party with which the Socialist Party hid been merged, 
implemented their pre-war plans for a guerilla force that quickly establishe 
a legitimate claim to being the most disciplined, effective, far-sighted and 
independent in the national resistance movement. The Huks , (25> as they 
came to be known, were not emotionally, politically, or even militarily 
dependent on the return of the American sovereign and the re-establishmei 
of the status quo ante; quite the contrary. Having driven the landlords to t 
sanctuary of Manila, they had established their own “shadow” local 


Hukbalahap or Huks were the popular abbreviations for Huh bo ng Bayan lat 
sa Hapon, T agalog for People’s Army against the Japanese. 1 1 was to change its name al 
the war and independence to Hukbong Magpapaiaya ng Bayan, Tagalog for People's 
Liberation Army, or HMB for short. 


19 


governments and were dedicated to building a new society. But when the 
Americans did come back, the Huk guerillas were denied recognition and 
reward, and instead disarmed; their commanders, arrested; and their elected 
representatives, unseated on charges of terrorism at the polls. The American 
and Philippine military police and, much more deadly and ruthless, 'the 
"civilian guards” of the returning landlords were unleashed against them, 
perpetrating such memorable massacres as those of Maliwalu and Masico. 

The peasants of Pampanga — and perhaps throughout the country — 
read the message. The American form of democracy, at least as it was 
practiced in the Philippines by the traditional political parties under 
Sumulong’s "feared and detested oligarchy”, did not offer them any real 
hope for the redress of their grievances ahd for their emergence into a more 
just and fulfilling society. Until a credible alternative was offered, they 
would be committed to the Communist revolution. 


20 


V 

A good and efficient government, 
a benevolent government, may 
exist and continue indefinitefy 
to function with admirable harmony 
when men of superior moral end 
intellectual endowments are fri 
control of the state. 

- JOSE P. LAUREL 

One is not inclined to linger over the Second (Occupation) 
Republic* 26 * yet, even under the paramount military power of Imperial 
Japan and even allowing for the irresistible compulsion to remove 
completely “the American influence which has thoroughly saturated the 
entire Philippines” so that the Filipinos might “freely return to the natural 
life of an Oriental people,” its policies did suggest, as far as they went in 
those critical times, what form of government the national leaders believed 
might be temporarily viable and acceptable to a cowed and helpless people. 

The political parties dissolved themselves without any great outcry, an 
a new non-partisan national organization, the KALIBAPI,* 27 * took their 
place; its local assemblies chose 54 delegates to the National Assembly who 
joined 46 holdover or appointed provincial governors and eight mayors of 
chartered cities; and in a nostalgic recall of the Malolos Congress they 
approved a new Constitution and elected the President. The Constitution, 
while largely patterned after the U.S.-approved 1935 charter, reversed the 
Malolos pattern and established the supremacy of the Executive, while 
substituting the Bill of Rights with a declaration of the Duties and Rights o 
the Citizen. 


(26) proclaimed on 14 October 1943. 

( 27 ) Acronym for Kapisanan sa PaglHlngkod sa Bagong Pilipinas, Tagalog.for 
Association for Service to the New Philippines, patterned after Japan’s Imperial Rule 
Assistance Association, which likewise followed the dissolution of the traditional 
Japanese political parties. 


21 


The philosophy of government of the Second Republic was defined in 
somewhat Platonic terms by its President, Jose P. Laurel.* 28 ' “The whole 
history of government shows that public affairs would be better 
administered and the welfare of the peopJe better subserved in the hands of a 
moral and intellectual aristocracy. The people cannot be both governors and 
governed at the same time; a statement affirming the contrary would be a 
contradiction in terms. On the other hand, a good and efficient government, 
a benevolent government, may exist and continue indefinitely to function 
with admirable harmony,- when men of superior moral and intellectual 
endowments are in control of the state. And this benevolent government is 
the result not of a given form or system of political organization, such as are 
defined and classified in school textbooks, but rather of a traditional 
practice of allowing the best-endowed men in the service of the state ample 
scope and latitude in the exercise of governmental powers.” 

Brief, unhappy and impotent as was the Second Republic, with all 
human rights and civil liberties sternly denied under the Japanese military 
rule, its revival of the First Republic’s system of indirect elections by a 
carefully winnowed constituency, was perhaps more than an exercise in 
nostalgia. Contrived to meet the people’s lingering, deeply rooted 
attachment to representative government and give them the illusion of 
participation, and at the same time to pander to the enemy occupant’s 
abhorrence of western institutions, the 1943 Constitution also sought to 
preserve the national consensus in a situation where irreconcilable divisions 
were inevitable, while its emphasis on the duties as well as the rights of 
citizens reflected the continuing search for social regeneration which Rizal 
and Mabini had posited as the essential condition for freedom. 


J ose P. Laurel (1891-1959), sometime Secretary of the Interior, Senator, Justice 
of the Supreme Court, and Nacionalista candidate (1949) for the presidency of the Third 
Republic. The quotation is from Laurel: “Forces That Make A Nation Great”, Bureau of 
Information and Public Security, Manila, 1943. 


22 


VI 


We are not angels . 

What are we in power ici 


Whoever seeks to destroy me, 
/ shall destroy him first 



What is wrong with a man 
providing for his future ? 



The recovery of indepcnde rice and the proclamatioin of the Third 
Republic! 29 ) profoundly altered the nature of government and politics 
the Philippines. The withdrawal of American sovereignty, at least forma 
and outwardly, removed the keystone of the national consensus which \ 
enabled the Nacionalista Party to remain in power, well nigh unchalleng 
under the colonial regime. The attainment of independence deprived it < 
only issue. No longer would it be possible to blame the foreign sovereigr 
all the ills of the country. Nor would it ever again be possible to arrive a 
comradely reconciliations and convenient accommodations after the pei 
contests for leadership. 


The old guides were gone or going. Quezon had died in exile, clutcl 
to the very end the reins of power,! 30 ) and his inevitable successor, Osn 
was immensely weary of the burden he had carried for almost four deca 
The Nacionalista Party was split irrevocably, seemingly on the issues of 
collaboration with the Japanese and of efficient government, but in real 
by the personal ambition of Roxas, who, forging a bizarre coalition of 


(^Formalized by the Proclamation of Harry S Truman, President of the U.S 
4 July 1946. 

(•^Quezon had procured the amendment of the Constitution to permit his 
re-election after his original six-year term. He was returned to power for an addition 
two years which would have expired on 15 November 1943 (the amended Constitul 
placed a limit of eight consecutive years in the presidency). To allow him to contini 
the head of the Commonwealth government-in-cxile, the U.S. Congress, at his reque 
with the acquiescence of Vice President Osmena, approved aresolution on 9-10 
November 1943 extending his term of office. 

(J) JdJC /l i/<t( l> 10 

Q/ (J u 23 

Qp<y/\ £c (a 


politicians devoted to American interests and others facing charges of 
treason for holding office under the Japanese, launched a remorseless drive 
for power which was destined to fix the character of Philippine politics 
thereafter. 

What was worse, the Japanese occupation had inflicted a trauma on the 
Filipinos from which they would find it almost impossible to recover. The 
bare need for survival under a ruthless enemy had bred a cult of violence, a 
neurotic avidity for riches, and the unspoken but nonetheless overwhelming 
conviction that might made right. "We are not angels,” a senate president 
told his party caucus when he was accused of the irregular disposal of U.S. 
surplus properties to build up campaign funds. “What are we in power for? ” 

With the virtual abdication of the aloof and austere Osmcna, the elegant 
conventions of pre-war politics were discarded in the ferocious fight for the 
spoils of authority and influence. Graft and corruption became the decisive, 
often the only real, issue in every election, reaching perhaps its cynical if 
witty and realistic depths in the argument of the politician in power that he 
was to be preferred to the opposition because, while it was true they were all 
equally mosquitoes, he was already satiated ind would no longer bite while 
the opposition was hungry for blood. Only twice, as has already been noted, 
and only in the early years of the Third Republic, would the people have a 
chance to decide in contests between competing principles and policies. 

One was the issue of collaboration with the Japanese, raised against 
Roxas in 1946 and Laurel in 1949, and finally decided with the vindication in 
sundry senatorial elections of the President of the Second Republic and the 
members of his government. Yet this issue too was confused by • 
discrimination in prosecution, ambiguous convictions and acquittals, and a 
general amnesty, and was all but lost in the shifting party allegiances of 
resistance leaders and alleged collaborators. 

The second was the so-called “parity amendment” to the 1935 
Constitution giving American citizens and corporations the same rights as 
Filipino citizens and corporations in the exploitation of natural resources 
and the operation of public utilities, upon whose approval the payment 
of compensation for war damages and the continuation of preferential trade 


24 


treatment were made conditio na.1 by the US. Congress.. In a. <le»r-cti t ccntei 
Roxasand his newly foil ndeJ Liberal Party, sponsori ng the amendment, 
were supported by the voters ina rational plebiscite.* 31 1 

Thereafter, the main political parties, the Wacionatfstc and the 
Liberals/ 32 * degenerated into opportunistic coalitions of power groups 
maneuvering for advantage in the scramble for spoils. “Politics is addition, 
not subtraction, ’^remarked a president of the NccicnaHsta Party. Dissident 
leaders — “political butterflies" or men of deeply seated convictions unable 
to accept the ruling hierarchy's decisions — joined the tickets of the rival 
party as “guest candidates". Within the official tickets for senators to be 
elected by the nation at large, individual candidates sabotaged one another 
to the extent of throwing their regional support to the weakest in the 
opposition in order to assure their own survival. It was not unusual for a 
politician to move from one party to the other and back again. A climax of 
some sort was reached when the secretary of defense in a Liberal 
administration secretly joined the Nacionalista opposition and subsequently 
became its victorious candidate to the presidency; and when in a later 
election the president of the Liberal Party, having also secretly defected to 
the opposition, defeated two former Liberal Vice Presidents for the 


(^The amendment provided that “the disposition, exploitation, development, a 
utilization of all agricultural, timber, and mineral lands of the public domain, waters, 
minerals, coal, petroleum, and other natural resources of the Philippines, and the 
operation of public utilities, shall, if open to any person, be open to citizens of the 
United States and to all forms of business enterprises owned or controlled, directly or 
indirectly, by citizens of the United States.” The 1935 Constitution, before amendment 
reserved these rights to Filipino citizens and corporations 60 per cent of whose capital v 
owned bv them. The amendment has ceased to be in effect. 


( 32 *Two split-offs from the Liberal Party, the so-called Avclino Wing in 1949, anc 
the Democratic Party in 1953, were short-lived ad hoc organizations in support of 
individual presidential candidates, as was the Progressive Party in 1957 and 1965. Only 
the Citizens Party had a definite policy and program based on nationalism. 



25 


presidential nomination of the Nacionalista Party and went on to win the 
election against the incumbent Liberal President.* 33 * 

The 1949 election was an international scandal but every election 
afterward was worse than the one before in a crescendo of terrorism, 
calumny, betrayal, and wholesale bribery. At every level the struggle for 
power was unscrupulous and cynical. “You have borrowed my honor! ” 
protested a Vice President when his name was linked to scandal in an official ' 
broadcast of his own party. “Whoever seeks to destroy me, I shall destroy 
him first! ”^an incumbent President threatened when members of his party 
conspired, to deprive him of the nomination for his re-election. "I am not 
stupid,’ ^replied another incumbent President, who, succeeding to the post 
upon the death of his predecessor a few months before the scheduled 
election, was asked if he had enough time to consolidate his position. 

If they were anything, Filipino politicians were not stupid, at least in 
the pursuit and protection of their own interests. “What is wrong with a man 
providing for his future? ’Hm incumbent President asked in defending his 
executive secretary. Indeed there was something to be said for it when their 
stay on the carousel of corruption was so brief, uncertain and erratic. 

Appetites grew with the lavish times. The petty provincial grafters who stole, 
hoarded or profiteered with the tinned sardines and salmon, the cheap 
textile goods and the cracked corn and rice distributed to the starving 
population by the American army after the expulsion of the Japanese, the 
party managers who sold U.S. surplus beer and K-rations to finance 
campaigns, the looters of the depots of U.S. surplus goods, developed into 
Congressmen selling their “quota” of immigration visas to Chinese, fleeing 
from the Communist Revolution, the “ten percenters” who peddled their 
influence to businessmen seeking import permits and allocations of foreign 

exchange, the provincial warlords who collected their personal excise taxes 

I 


should be noted that both changed parties upon the insistent urgings of the 
Nacionalista leaders; and that the first became the best beloved of all Philippine 
presidents, while the second is exerting the most profound and lasting impact on the Philippine 
society. 

/, Ghc.lr'ind 

QrafC>'<x, 2g 

S - CfOA C 6tA) 


on tobacco, the well connected profiteers w t»o battened on the corn an< 
tinned goods imported 1o lower the price of livii»g"fer the reedy ard the 
destitute, the smugglers of jewels and rich fabrics for an opuler t society 
were vested with- immunity by their husbands an d patrons. When the of! 
of an American adventurer, an «x-G. I ., were ra ided ard his secret files 
revealed, it was ascertained that his was not in idle boast when he claim 
“had the government in his pocket". Presidents and presidential Candida 
might preach “simple living” and exhort a threadbare people to practise 
“austerity” — they were belied by the wives of political moguls flauntiri; 
their thumb-size diamonds, emeralds ard rubies at shameless parties wh< 
champagne spouted from man-made fountains. 

With instant wealth within the grasp of anyone in office with the w 
and conscience to profit from it, it was not to be wondered at that the 
scramble for it should be savage and remorseless. The habits of violence, 
which were in their way a patriotic duty during the enemy occupation, ' 
now indulged in the partisan political wars. A provincial governor, like n 
others after him, organized his personal army, torturing and killing even 
most obscure opposition leaders (for which, it is only fair to add, he wa< 
later convicted and imprisoned). An exalted personage, combining in his 
person the offices of secretary of defense and secretary of justice, did nt 
hesitate to call out army tanks to the center of the capital in a confront; 
with the opposition mayor (later he was to be convicted and imprisoned 
directing the murder of the principal witness against him" in bribery char 
Under another regime, a former senator of the Republic was to be convi 
for the murder of political opponents. 

These were the exceptions to the general rule of immunity. Almost 
every politician of importance had his gang of hired gunmen, bodyguard 
and enforcers, easy enough to recruit and'arm when the resistance move 
against the Japanese had left hundreds of thousands of unlicensed fireari 
loose throughout the country, steadily augmented by flagrant smuggling 
even these medieval retainers, a barefaced Mafia, whose loyalty was assu 
by their share of the spoils, were no guarantee of safety. A former gover 
who had converted his province into a family fief, was shot down as he 


27 


for the elevator to his new national government office. Another, then a 
Congressman, under the cloud of similar reports, was murdered as he 
approached the communion rail in the church of his provincial capital, where 
his wife was governor. A House electoral tribunal was terrorized into silence 
when, on the eve of the promulgation of an unfavorable decision, 
premeditated murder was committed in the courtyard of the Supreme 
Court. 

Politics had become a deadly game. In a crime perpetrated in full view 
of the television cameras, and still unsolved, grenades were hurled at the 
speakers’ platform in Plaza Miranda, the political nerve-center of Manila, and 
almost succeeded in wiping out at one blow the national and city tickets of 
the Liberal Barty, then in opposition, and left many of them with the most 
serious injuries. The life of the presidential candidate, Osmcna’s son and 
namesake, was almost despaired of; he had been declared dead on arrival at 
the hospital. In the same election, commandos, roaming the countryside on 
Japanese motorcycles and thus known as ‘‘the Suzuki boys”, isolated an 
entire northern island and terrorized the electorate, apparently for the 
purpose, not only of assuring the election of their patrort, but also of 
securing a smuggling base. Elsewhere whole villages, suspected of opposition 
sympathies, had been burnt down; voters had been ambushed and massacred 
on their way back from the polls; while, in gentler modes of persuasion, 
hundreds of millions of pesos were squandered on bribes, roads that led 
nowhere, bridges that were never finished by the phantom workers on 
padded payrolls. 

It was, in its own way, a form of social welfare and of the redistribution 
of wealth. In truth, the people themselves, drawn into an insidious network 
of self-interest, were being willingly corrupted, while the Constabulary (the 
national police force) and the local police, demoralized by political 
interference and their own ineptness, cowardice and turpitude, were unable 
or unwilling to enforce the law. 

The validity and viability in the Philippines of the American form of 
representative government and its substructure of unlimited private 


28 


enterprise were now challenged by the students, the jobless and tit e landless 
alike, with the cautious acquiescence of a middle class shocked and 
disheartened by the debauchery of democracy. Perhaps, after all, the ills of 
society were the fault of this imposed an<l inherited system, and with the 
most sanguine hopes an election was called fora Convention to draft a new 
Constitution and remake the political and social framework of the nation. 
Incumbent senators and congressmen, with much legalistic obstruction on 
their part, were barred from the Convention ina rational referendum, and 
the voters chose delegates whom they believed were young, independent, 
untainted by politics, dedicated, and equipped for their momentous task. 
Alas, these generous hopes were defrauded. With a few honorable 
exceptions, the delegates to the Convention were soon revealed to be just as 
corrupt, vindictive and hungry for office as their discredited fellows in the 
Congress, to the extent of assuring for themselves seats in the transition 
parliament by constitutional Fiat. 

For ail that, the people’s mandate for a fundamental change was 
unmistakable and irresistible. The Convention threw overboard the 
American form of government, in its time in the Philippines both “noble 
experiment” and “peculiar institution”. The bicameral Congress was 
replaced by the unicameral Assembly of the First Republic; the early 
Commonwealth and the Second Republic. The Presidency, in its time the 
“golden city” of every politician, for which millions upon millions of public 
and private treasure had been squandered, all honor “borrowed” and lost 
without regret or remorse, and much blood, innocent and guilty, shed, was 
reduced to a mere symbol of the state, a Japanese god turned ceremonial 
doll. Its powers and privileges were vested in a Prime Minister elected by a 
majority of all the members of the Assembly and responsible to it. The 
Assembly itself was subject to dissolution whenever the need arose “for a 
popular vote of confidence on fundamental issues”. 

Would this have sufficed? Would the Assembly have been less "a place 
of echoes and mimicry”, less susceptible than a degenerate electorate to 
bullying, bribery, cajolery, fraud and delusions? Would it have held the 
Prime Minister “responsible” for the honest stewardship of the polity and 


29 


the resolute leadership of the nation, or would it have connived and 
conspired with him in the continuing waste of the country’s resources and 
the people’s faith? 

The new Constitution was not yet to be put to the test. It had been 
overtaken by events, (34) and by forces surging from the past and the future. 




(^Tbe draft Constitution proposed by the Convention was submitted to the 
President on 1 December 1972, several weeks after the proclamation of martial law, and 
approved at a plebiscite held in “citizens’ assemblies” on 10-15 January 1973. On 31 
March 1973 the Supreme Court ruled it to be “in force and effect”. In a referendum 
held on 27-28 July 1973 the “citizens’ assemblies” voted to continue the incumbent 
President in office beyond his term under the 1935 Constitution which expired on 30 
December 1973. In a further referendum held on 27 February 1975 the “citizens’ 
assemblies” voted overwhelmingly in the affirmative on the question: “Do you approve of 
the manner President Marcos has been exercising his powers under martial law and the 
Constitution, including the power to issue proclamations, orders, decrees, and 
instructions with the force of law? ” and the question: “Do you want the President to 
continue exercising the same powers? ” Negative votes and abstentions were insubstantial. 
The “citizens’ assemblies”, in a comparatively smaller proportion, preferred to have their 
local provincial, municipal and city officials appointed by the President rather than 
elected in accordance with the pre-martial-law election code when the terms of the 
incumbents expired on 31 December 1 975. At the time of writing the vast majority of 
provincial governors and municipal and city mayors and other elective local officials had 
tendered their voluntary resignations, but the President had not appointed their 
successors. Nor has the President convened the Interim National Assembly which is to be 
called upon by him to elect a President and a Prime Minister under the 1 973 
Constitution. 


30 


VII 


The centra / task of any revolutionary 
movement is to seize political pom/. 

The Communist Party of the PJtiJippfnos 
assumes this task at a time that hath 
the international and national situations 
are favorable to taking the road of armed 
revolution. 

- PROGRAM FOR A PEOPLE’S 
DEMOCRATIC REVOLUTION. 

One of these forces was the Communist Party. 

The proletarian movement in the Philippines had had its ideological 
conception shortly after the Revolution in a Barcelona dungeon where a 
Filipino propagandist absorbed from a Catalan anarchist the social ideas tha 
had somehow failed to touch either the detached liberal mind of Rizal or tf 
hot racial passions of Bonifacio and Aguinaldo. While in exile Isabelo de los 
Reyes was to be chosen “President of the Republic of the Philippines” by 
the revolutionary generals still in the field after the capture of Aguinaldo. 

Upon his return to the Philippines, with socialist and anarchist literatu 
his luggage, he became the organizer of the first labor federation in the 
Philippines, the Union Obrera Democratica (Democratic Labor Union). A 
protean intellectual, he went on to other fields like the Independent 
Philippine Church of which he was the intellectual founder. 

After a series of false starts, marked by repressive arrests and 
imprisonments of its leaders, mainly writers and orators, the labor movcmei 
took definite shape in the hands of Crisanto Evangelista,* 35 ) a Marxist 
printer, who organized his trade union and later, in 1 913, the Congreso 
Obrero de Filipinos (Labor Congress of the Philippines). Six years later the 


(^Evangelista was executed by the Japanese in 1943. At the time he was nation; 
chairman of the merged Communist-Socialist Parties. 


SI 


peasants of Central Luzon were in turn organized in what came to be known 
as the Katipunang Pambansa ngmga Magbubukid sa Pilipinas (National 
Peasants Union). It would be tedious to follow in detail the gestation of the 
proletarian movement, stimulated by American labor leaders who were 
secret emissaries of the Profintern, an Indonesian nationalist, disguised as a 
Filipino musician, at that time the chief Comintern representative in 
Southeast Asia, and a number of Filipino trade unionists who attended party 
congresses in Canton and Moscow and received scholarships there. In brief, 
after many doctrinal splits and maneuvers, the Communist Party of the 
Philippines was finally born on 26 August 1930, the traditional anniversary 
of the Philippine Revolution, and officially proclaimed on 7 November of 
the same year, the anniversary of the Russian Revolution. 

‘ 'i • V . 

( 36 ) 

“The Philippine Revolution,” notes one of the party’s historians, 1 
“was a nationalist revolution, the first in Asia, while the Russian Revolution 
was a Communist-led working-class revolution, the first in the history of 
mankind. In trying to bridge the two revolutions, the CPP would seem to 
emphasize both the nationalist and the proletarian characters of its 
revolutionary struggle.” In the wake of the world-wide economic depression 
of the 30s, strikes by railway and lumber-mill workers, and tumultuous 
demonstrations, the leaders of the CPP were arrested and condemned to 
prison, and the party judicially outlawed, in 1931-32, on the ground that its 
purpose was “to incite class struggle and to overthrow the government by 
peaceful means or by armed revolution”.* 37 * 

Coincidentally, and not apparently as a Communist maneuver, the 
Socialist Party of the Philippines was founded in the heart of the Central 


(■^Alfredo B. Saulo, “Communism in the Philippines: an Introduction”, 
Ateneo Publications Office, Manila, 1969, 113 pp., from which much of this 
account is culled. 

(37)p e0 pje v. Evangelista, 57 Phil. 375, and related cases. 


32 


Luzon peasant country by P«l ro Abaci San tesJ 3 8 • T h e C (*P itsc If had gom < 
underground with Moscow- trained I eiders. Rifts developed among; the 
imprisoned Communists on whether to accept F»*r<l ons p r« ferred to . them b 
Quezon for political or personal reasons, or to reject any form of 
collaboration with the “fascist regime”, as well as between the Communist’ 
and the Socialists on the primacy of the peasantry or t-he urban proletariat 
thejnaking of the revolution. In the event, through the good offices of an 
American comrade and under the influence of the "united front against 
fascism” decreed by Moscow, Evangelista and his supporters accepted 
pardon and upon release joined Abad Santos in a new “Communist Party o 
the Philippines (Merger of Communist and Socialist Parties)" with 
Evangelista as national chairman and Abad Santos as vice chairman. The 
merger was ratified on 7 November 1938. 

There is little on record of the repercussions in Philippine party circles 
of the Ribbcntrop-Molotov non-aggression pact which had such a traumatic 
effect elsewhere; by the time war threatened to spread to East Asia, the Na; 
attack on “the socialist homeland” had dispelled all ambiguities and the 
CPP-SPP found it perfectly orthodox to lead a movement for the boycott o 
Japanese goods, to make contingent plans for guerrilla resistance in the ever 
of enemy occupation, and, after Pearl Harbor, to pledge “loyalty to the 
governments of the Philippines and the United States”. 

The defeat of the United States Armed Forces in the Far East 
(USAFFE), including the Philippine Army, under General Douglas 
MacArthur, which the Communists alone among the Filipinos had had the 
wit to foresee and plan for, led, as has been noted, to the emergence of the 


(38) 

v 'Pedro Abad Santos, whose brother j Jose, was Secretary of Justice, Justice of t 
Supreme Court, Acting Chief Justice, and later the highest representative of the 
Commonwealth Government in the early stages of the Japanese war, came from a wealth 
land-owning family. Jose was executed by the Japanese; Pedro, arrested by them and lat 
released on grounds of ill health, died in 1945. Although the bulk of its membership wa: 
drawn from the peasantry, the SPP organized the general Aguman ding Motdang 
Taiapagobra, Pampango fbr General Workers Union. 


33 


Huks as the most redoubtable force in the resistance. By the end of the war 
they claimed they had inflicted 25,000 casualties on the Japanese and 
supporting Constabulary forces in some 1 ,200 engagements, and to have a 
strength of 20,000 fully armed regulars and 50,000 reserves.! 39 * This 
formidable host, disciplined, strongly motivated, concentrated in the 
country’s granary, and loyally supported by a network of popular shadow 
governments, stood poised for a crucial time between a continuing struggle 
and the peaceful pursuit of its socialist ends within the restored 
constitutional framework. 

They were not Communists, of course, but they were under the rigid 
control of the Communist Party whose leadership, however, was riven by 
fundamental disagreements. The two factions might be typified, for the sake 
of brevity and convenience, by the Lava brothers, Vicente, Jose and Jesus, 
brilliant theoreticians from the upper middle class, and the Taruc brothers, 
Luis and Peregrino, gifted peasant guerrillas, the first of them the charismatic 

Huk commander-in-chief. I 40 * During the war a shattering Japanese attack on 
the Hub headquarters in the Cabiao forest led to the abandonment of the 


^)jhe figures on enemy losses should perhaps be taken with some caution; Saulo 
(op. cit.) admits they were ‘‘mostly local puppets” and probably also a great number of 
rival anti-Communist guerrillas. The Hukbalahap was formally organized on 29 March 
1942 in Cabiao, Nueva Ecija. Patterned after the Chinese Red Army, it was made up of 
sqjads of 100 officers and men, platoons and squadrons. Two squadrons formed one 
battalion, and two battalions one regiment, the biggest autonomous unit. Village units of 
the Barrio United Defense Corps (BUDC) provided support and rudimentary government. 

(^Vicente Lava became general secretary of the CPP after the arrest of 
Evangelista and Abad Santos by the Japanese. After an interval, Jose held the same office 
in effect until his arrest in 1950; he was succeeded by Jesus, secretary general until his 
arrest in 1964. Luis Taruc was commander-in-chief of the Huks and head of both the 
military committee and the military commissariat (political commisars) of the CPP until 
his expulsion from the party and surrender in 1954. Peregrino was also a member of the 
politburo and. secretariat. LuisVaruc now openly supports the “New Society” in the 
Philippines, particularly its land reform program. On 1 1 October 1974 the politburo of 
the “traditional” Partido Komunista ng Pilipinas offered their cooperation to the 
President. 


34 


policy of the continous offensive is “advent wrist ''and to tie adoption c 
policy of “retreat for defense'*. Vicen t« Lava was removed when this 
strategy in turn was jettisoned in September 1944. 

Similar disputes now arose on whether to maintain the party as an 
underground organization or to come out into the open as a mass party; 
whether to fight the first postwar elections in dependent^ through its o\ 
candidates,* 41 * or to support Osmehaaneithe A lacronalistas ; whether or 
“collaborate” with Roxas after Pis election; whether or not to accept th 
1949 amnesty offered by Elpidio Quirino^ 42 ) who succeeded to the 
presidency upon Roxas’s death; whether or not to give “critical support 
Laurel against Quirino in the 1949 election; and finally, and fatally, 
whether or not there existed a “revolutionary situation” in the Philippin 
after Quirino’s questionable victory. 

The Lava thesis was that such a situation did exist; the Taruc broth 
lacked the doctrinal and debating skill to dispute it and, with inner 
misgivings, led the Huksb ack into the field. On. 29 March 1950, the 
anniversary of their foundation, they attacked two towns and 15 villages 
Luzon, inflicting heavy casualties and property damage. In one provincia 
capital they seized and looted the treasury. On 26 August, the traditions 
anniversary of the Katipunan, they hit 1 1 towns in Central Luzon, and t 
and held the supply depot of the Armed Forces of the Philippines in the 
region, capturing guns, ammunition and supplies, and burning what they 


( 1 'After the war the Hukbalahap was ostensibly disbanded and converted intc 
veterans’ league. A Committee — later Congress — of Labor Organizations was openly 
up, together with a National Peasants’ Union, consolidating and replacing the pre-war 
Communist and Socialist organizations. A Democratic Alliance was forged with 
nationalist and progressive intellectuals, including a number of landowners and big 
businessmen. 

(42) Eipjdio Quirino (1890-1956), pre-war Senator and Secretary of Finance, \ 
President and Secretary of Foreign Affairs under Roxas, second President of the Thir 
Republic. He was elected in his own right in 1949, and was defeated for re-election ir 
1953 by Ramon Magsaysay (q.v.). , 


35 


could not take with them upon withdrawal. The next and even larger attack 
was scheduled for 7 November, the anniversary of the Russian Revolution. 

But there was in fact no "revolutionary situation”. People were 
infuriated by the frustration of their political will, disgusted by the cynical 
corruption of the regime, weary of empty slogans, but they were not so 
hbngry, or so angry, or indeed so hopeless of sharing in the general spoils 
that they would stake their lives and properties, paltry as they might be, on 
the forcible overthrow of the Republic. The peasant guerrillas might swim in 
safety in the sea of the countryside, and mount successful raids from their 
camps in jungle and mountain, but they only struck fear in the hearts of the 
uncommitted and the undecided. Nor had the “ruling class” lost its will to 
rule. Shbrtly after the August attack Quirino, upon the urgent 
recompiendation of the U.S. representativfes, appointed Ramon Magsaysay 
Secretary of National Defense.! 43 * 

In less than two months Magsaysay, by a stroke of luck and pluck, 
beheaded the Communist Party, surprising and capturing the entire politburo 
with Jose Lava at their head. The Armed Forces were reorganized, lazy and 
incompetent generals, retired; corrupt, cowardly and extortionist field 
officers and other ranks, dismissed; and all exhorted to win the trust of the 
common people. Magsaysay resolutely set the example; himself a wartime 
guerrilla, he placed himself at the head of forays in the field, and listened 
patiently to the complaints and grievances of the peasants. In the months 
and years that followed, the back of the Communist-led rebellion was 
broken as one after another its ideological leaders and military commanders 
surrendered or were killed in battle, captured, betrayed or murdered by their 
own bodyguards for reward. The climax was reached when, expelled by his » 
own party and under threat of court martial and possible execution, Luis 


^^Rarnon Magsaysay (1907-1957), Congressman, Secretary of National Defense, 
elected third President of the Third Republic in 1953, killed in a plane crash in 1957. He 
was succeeded by Carlos P. Garcia (1896-1971), Congressman, Governor, Senator, Vice 
President and Secretary of Foreign Affairs under Magsaysay; he was elected in his own 
right in 1957, and defeated for re-election in 1961 by Diosdado Macapagal (q.v.). 


36 


Tame surrendered to Magsaysay,!! ewly elected PresiJent of the Republic. 
Within a decade and a half (1967^ a a official « sti. mate assessed the.//wft 
strength at only 1 70 "armed regulars’* 120 c '< o mbat sti p port” troo ps, and 
1,000 "logistic support" cadres. With a h a n d f ill of exceptions the Hub 
commanders had turned into bandits and racketeers selling protection, more 
concerned with their personal fortunes than with ideology. 

But Magsaysay knew that a military victory was only half the solution; 
if, as he often proclaimed, he would crush the rebellion with one hand, with 
the other he offered redress for the age-old grievances of the landless 
peasants. Landlords in the troubled regions were persuaded to exchange thei 
holdings, which the government had no funds to buy, for public lands in 
uncultivated areas. Those who remained were compelled by law and by 
special commissions and courts to allow their share-croppers to choose the 
system of tenancy under which they would work the land. More adventurou 
peasants, together with guerrillas who had surrendered, were re-settled in 
public lands, a project that, as will be seen hereafter, had unforeseen 
consequences in the southern islands. Small farmers were aided with 
government credits, warehousing and marketing facilities, village roads and 
irrigation projects. 

The momentum of the land reform, however, was lost with the death o 
Magsaysay. Under Diosdado Macapagal * 44 ' a Land Reform Code was 
approved by the Congress only after a rancorous and protracted struggle, anc 
only in enmasculated form. The new law would have abolished the 
sharecropping system, and replaced it with government financed contracts ol 
lease under which the cultivator would pay no more than 25‘ percent of the 
harvest to the landowner. But the landlords were not to be so easily 


^■Diosdado Macapagal (1910- ), Congressman, Vice President under Garcia, 

elected fifth President of the Third Republic in 1 961 , defeated for re-election in 1 965 by 
Ferdinand £. Marcos, subsequently elected second President of the 1971 Constitutional 
Convention succeeding Garcia, who died in office. 


37 


I 

overthrown, and when Ferdinand E. Marcos (45) took office four years later 
he found that land reform covered only 29,000 hectares out of a total of 
940,591. 

Lack of money, but still more the lack of will, had effectively replaced 
the lack of vision. It was no wonder that in the growing mood of bitter 
disenchantment the Communist Party, outlawed since 1957 * 4S > and 
seemingly dead and buried, began to show. new signs of life and vigor. 

Young, idealistic and dedicated intellectuals, allegedly trained abroad and 
calling themselves Maoists, had reorganized the party, and regrouped 
ideologically motivated Hub remnants into a New People’s Army (NPA) to 
fight the “protracted people’s war or war of national liberation”. Its 
“PrograiVi for a People’s Democratic Revolution” stated bluntly: “The 
central task of any revolutionary movement is to seize political power. The 
Communist Party of the Philippines assumes this task at a time that both the 
international and national situations are favorable to taking the road of 
armed revolution.” 

To this end the- NPA mounted an ever spreading offensive of 
kidnapping, assassinations, raids, ambushes, bombings and riots throughout 
the country. Front mass organizations were created or infiltrated among the 
workers, peasants, students and intellectuals. In May, june and July 1972 
shipments of war material from abroad were intercepted at isolated bays and 
points on the eastern coast of Luzon, including some 3,500 rifles, several 
dozen rocket launchers, rockets and ammunition. In June also a captured 
document, “Regional Program of Action 1972”, revealed that the NPA was 
preparing to install “provisional revolutionary governments” in provinces 
and cities. Its strength was reported to have increased from an estimated 


(^Ferdinand E. Marcos (1917- ), Congressman, Senator, President of the 

Senate, elected sixth President of the Third Republic in 1965, re-elected in 1969. 

(46) By Republic Act No. 1 700, otherwise known as the Anti-Subversion Act, 
approved on 20 June 1957. 


38 


WgM JL . . 


6,500 (including 560 regulars, 1,5 00 in corohatsupp ort, and 4-,OQO inserv 
support) as of 1 January 1972 to about 7,000 (including 1,000 regulars, 
1,800 in combat support and 5,000 in service su f>port) as of 31 July 1970 
or an increase of 1 00% of its figh ting Force in six months. 


There was, it was declared, “throughout the land a state of anarchy a 
lawlessness, chaos and disorder, turmoil and destruction of a magnitude e< 
valent to an actual war between the forces of our constituted government 
the New People’s Army. ,, ( 47 ^ 



(^From Proclamation No. 1081. 


VIII 

With regard to the forthcoming independence, 
we foresee what condition we, and our 
children who shall come after us, will be 
in. This condition will be characterized 
by unrest, suffering and misery. 

- MUSLIM LEADERS (1934) 

Another force was the accumulated anger of the Filipino Muslims. 

If the Spanish colonial expedition from Mexico, led by Miguel Lopez de 
Legaspi, had reached the Philippines even only 50 years later than it actually 
did in 1565, it could very well be that the Filipinos would now all be 
Muslims. For the first western explorer to reach the archipelago, Magellan in 
1521 , found the chieftains of the central islands still animists, while the 
Spanish colonizers found Manila in 1568 already under the rule of Sulayman 
and other Muslim rajas. The fall of Manila and presumably the other Muslim 
strongholds around Lake Taaal, and the slow but relentless advance of the 
Christian religion under the Spanish aegis in the northern and central islands 
of the archipelago, forced Islam’s retreat to the south, where the Muslim 
Filipinos, while sometimes defeated, and sometimes victorious, were never 
conquered, and fought a long war, a war of 330 years, against Spain. Its 
exigencies could not but divide the Filipinos into two communities, the 
Muslim and the Christian, the latter increasingly westernized, and thus 
alienated from the pre-conque^t Malay traditions. 

The American colonizers quickly grasped the situation since in fact it 
lent plausibility to their propaganda that what they called “the Philippine 
Insurrection” was the work of a “Tagalog Republic” headed and manned 
only by the natives of the politically advanced provinces around Manila. 
American policy'was seen to be one of negotiate, subjugate, separate. Its 
purpose was scarcely concealed. Not entirely without justification it was 
bruited about in the American Congress that the proud brave “Moros” were 
against Philippine independence, and, for all that a hadji sat in the Senate, 
would never submit to the rule of a sovereign Christian government in 
Manila. The success of this policy was proven when, on the very eve of 


40 


presidential approval of the T yd ings -McDuffie tot restoring Phi I if) pine 
independence after a 10-year transition period,a mass meeting of Mtsli m 

datus sent the U.S. President and Congress, a declaration which read as 
follows: 

‘‘Because we have learned that the United States is going to give the 
Philippines independence, we want to tell yon that the Philippines is 
populated by two different peoples with different religious practices and 
traditions. The Christian Filipinos occupy the islands of Luzon and the 
Visayas. The Moros (Muslims) predominate in the islands of Mindanao and 
Sulu. With regard to the forthcoming independence, we foresee what 
condition we, and our children who shall come after us, will be in. This 
condition will be characterized by unrest, suffering and misery. Our 
Christian associates have for many years shown their desire to be the only 
ones blessed with leadership and with progressive towns without sharing witl 
us the advantage of having good tow r ns and cities. Their provinces progress 
by leaps and bounds while ours'are left behind. Should the American people 
grant the Philippines independence, the islands of Mindanao and Sulu must 
not be included in such grant. Our public lands must not be given to people 
other than the Moros. We should be given time to acquire them because mos 
of us have no lands. Our people do not yet realize the value of acquiring lane 
of considerable area. We do not also know how to acquire these lands by 
process of law. Where shall we obtain support for our families if our lands ar 
taken from us? It will be safe(r) for us to have a law enacted' restricting the 
acquisition of our lands by other people. This will also preclude future 
trouble.” 

The declaration was an extreme example of the alienation of the two 
communities for it repudiated the concept of one Filipino nation, preferring 
partition even under foreign rule. But it also revealed the true origins of 
alienation, which at that time in history could no longer be predominantly 
theological disputes, but which were in reality economic fears, arising from 
cultural backwardness and exacerbated by the sharpening rivalry for land, 
later to be complicated by struggles for political power. 

For the best of motives, but not necessarily the wisest, Mindanao had 
been proclaimed ‘‘the land of promise”, whose fertile soil, luxuriant forests, 


4L 


cool uplands, rich mines waiting to be discovered and exploited, and seas 
teeming with fish, offered glittering opportunities to the hard-working 
settler, the resourceful adventurer, the smart operator, the bitter refugee 
from the feudal enclaves of the central plains of Luzon in the north and the 
sugar baronies in the Visayas. 

Here, seen from the north and centre, was the solution to the increasing 
unrest among the landless peasants, the sugarcane harvesters, drifting 
hopelessly from season to season, and later the Communist-led rebels who 
had surrendered in the expectation of the satisfaction of their age-old 
grievances. Why should all these lands lie idle, all these riches remain 
untouched, when there were hundreds of thousands in the over-populated 
central islands willing to work them? 

It was a vision and a policy that would later face very hard questions 
indeed, but in its heyday the Christian settlers were encouraged with 
reservations, with loans for seed-crops, work animals, and agricultural 
implements, and with a.system, albeit unsatisfactory, of roads. For the more 
highly connected, wealthy and unscrupulous, there were lumber and mining 
concessions and cattle ranches. 


There was only one thing wrong with all this. Mindanao was the 
traditional Muslim homeland, and, unprepared for a fateful encounter, the 
two Filipino communities were to come together after many centuries, 
alienated by inherited suspicion, fears and mutual disdain, blinded by an 
almost total ignorance of each other's traditions. The massive infusion of 
settlers, money and technological skills was an economic and political shock 
for the Muslims. By 1960 they were reduced to less than a quarter of the 
population of their traditional homelands of Mindanao, Sulu and Palawan. 
Only two provinces were left with Muslim majorities. (48) Furthermore, the 
Muslims had maintained their traditional political structures, which had been 


( Pilipinas Foundation: “An Anatomy of Philippine Muslim Affairs”, Makati, 
Rizal (Philippines), 1971 i 226 pp. (excluding appendices). By 1960 there were only 
1,300,000 Muslims in the entire country or 4.8 per cent of the total population. 


42 


by and large respected underlie American colonial regime when t be 
non-Christian regions were represented in the central legislature by 
appointment and not by election. But with national autonomy, and lateir 
independence, the introduction of the American form of representative 
government became inevitable. 

This “novel political system vrtli its elections, tenure of office, 
accountability to the people" also led to tension. The feudal Muslim leadi 
were the quickest in adapting themselves to these innovations. “On accou 
of their traditional prestige, the customary obedience rendered them, the 
relative strength of their economic resources, and so on, the traditional 
chiefs were able to campaign and win in elections to become mayors and 
governors.’’ Indeed, in post-independence politics the Muslim leaders prov 
a match for their Christian colleagues, and speedily learned the great game 
seizing and keeping power through the ballot box and the judicious 
disbursement of spoils and patronage, fighting one another, it must be 
added, as members of one or the other national party. But they had to 
“depend to a large extent on traditional loyalty and institutions to mainti 
their power. Their strength in the long run (wouid) depend on their Musli 
followers. A dramatic change in the religious composition of the populate 
where they had exercised their leadership (would) naturally affect their 
position for the simple reason that Christian settlers (would) naturally ele 
Christian leaders.”* 49 ) 

Nor were the Muslim leaders the only ones who felt threatened. Thei 
followers also read their future around them. '“Most of us have no land,” 
the 1934 manifesto had declared. “Our people do not yet realize the value 
acquiring land. ... We do not know how to acquire these lands by process 
law.” The modern concept of the purchase and sale of land to be registere 
under permanent and exclusive title guaranteed by the government was nc 
easily understood or accepted by a people who still lived under what was 
more or less feudal rule, dating back to the times when all land was held ir 


(^Cesar Adjib Majul, “The Muslims in the Philippines and the Present Mindana 


common under the sultans. In many cases, Muslim datus allowed the 
Christian settlers to clear land and cultivate it, only to take it back by threats 
or force when the work had been done. On the other hand, while the big 
Christian ranchers, loggers and plantation-owners were amply protected by 
expert lawyers and sometimes corrupt registrars and judges, the ordinary 
Christian settler was just as unschooled and resourceless as his Muslim 
counterpart. By the beginning of 1970 these disputes over land had led to 
broils and affrays between rival Muslim and Christian gangs.^ 50 * 

In the cpurse of three years these sporadic outbreaks of violence spread 
over wide areas in the Muslim homelands. Seventy Muslim men, women and 
children were massacred in a mosque where they were waiting for a “peace 
conference”. Political rivalries in the 1971 elections added to the tension: 
several truckloads of Muslim voters were shot down by government troops as 
they were returning from the polls. In these bloody incidents almost three 
thousand were to lose their lives. An estimated half a million, both Muslim 
and Christian, were to- flee from their homes in panic to “safe” refugee 
camps among their co-religionaries. Even more ominous were reports that 
the Muslims were preparing for an outright rebellion with foreign 
encouragement and aid. 

When in 1968 a disgrunted Muslim provincial governor, who had lost 
office, proclaimed a “Muslim Independence Movement” - later renamed the 
“Mindanao Independence Movement” - to establish *an Islamic state to be 
known as the “Republic of Mindanao and Sulu”, his manifesto was greeted 
with derision and indifference. But as the conflicts between the two 
communities spiralled and spread, secession no longer became unthinkable. 
The Third Republic was scarcely 26 years old; now its claim to Sabah revived 


(“^Known by such picturesque names as “barracudas", “ ilagas ” (rats), 
“blackshirts", “garudas", etc. A comprehensive account of the disorders may be found in 
' Robert D. McAmis, “Muslim Filipinos in the 197 0’s", Solidarity Magazine, December 
1973, Manila. 


44 


memories of the ancient Sultanate whi c h had hcl J sway for centuries. o\rcr 
the shores of the great Sul u Sea, a proud uncon<| ti e red empire that had 
raided the northern islands with impunity almost to the end of the Spini.sl 
regime, and with which the mighty Americans themselves had made a 
separate treaty. The end of colonialism in Southeast Asia had liberated twi 
great Muslim nations, Indonesia and Malaysia, and the deep southward pul 
of a common religion was reenforced by familial connections arid a. 
traditional trade that knew no man-made boundaries. Thus, at secret traimi 
camps with foreign instructors, money, arms and ammunition, the dream ( 
a separate Islamic state grew, and the Republic teetered on the brink of 
civil war. 

Ik^ ,v 

( 


45 


IX 


/ cannot escape the sense that events, 
the thrust of history, and even 
the will of the people somehow 
guided m y hand to the deed. 

- FERDINAND E. MARCOS 

It was to this pass that the Filipino nation had been driven by historical 
forces when President Marcos placed the whole country under martial law. It 
is beyond dispute that he had the authority, if not indeed the constitutional 
duty, to do so under the 1 935 Constitution which provided for such a 
proclamation in case of invasion, insurrection, rebellion, or imminent danger 
thereof, when the public safety required it. 

That there was more than imminent danger, that in fact there was 
actual insurrection, there can be no doubt; the Supreme Court explicitly so 
found in a series of cases questioning the previous suspension of the 
privilege of the writ of habeas corpusS* 1 > It was the insurrection organized 
and fought by the New People’s Army, the military arm of the Communist 
Party of the Philippines, restored and revitalized by the young Maoists. 

That there was imminent danger of rebellion was established beyond 
doubt when a few days after the proclamation an armed Muslim secessionist 
movement broke out in the southern islands of Mindanao, Basilan and the 
Sulu archipelago which is still continuing. 

That the public safety required the imposition of martial law, over and 
beyond the suspension of habeas corpus, was a question which the 
Constitution left to the judgment of one man, the President; and that his 
judgment was not totally unreasonable was persuasively established by the 
Muslim rebellion. The very integrity of the Republic was at stake. 


^The so-called “habeas corpus” cases (S.C.G.R. Nos. L-33964, L-33965, 

L— 33973, L— 33982, L— 34004, L— 34013, L— 34039, L— 34265, and L— 34339) decided 
on 11 December 1971. The suspension was made in Proclamation No. 889 of 21 August 
1971, and lifted on 11 January 1972. 


46 


And that the public safety required the proelarnatic n of martial law n 
only in the southern islands but throughout the Reput) lie was again a not 
wholly unreasonable judgment of the President. There were at the time 14' 
so-called private armies, and various criminal smuggling and murder 
“syndicates”, throughout the length and breadth of the country, a rmed v/i 
over half a million illegally held weapons. Thousands of activist students 
roamed the streets of the capital, challenging the constituted authorities an 
threatening to sack and burn the presidential palace itself. The captured 
“Regional Program of Action 1972” of the New People’s Army, and the 
discovery and interception of the Digoyo Point landing, perhaps not the fir 
or the last, of a significant quantity of foreign arms, ammunition and 
military equipment indicated that the Communist insurrection wasentcriri] 
a new and decisive stage. 

* 

Subsequently, the President would offer a more elaborate and 
persuasive account based on secret intelligence reports not previously made 
available for obvious reasons.* S2) He was to contend, in brief, that the 
inescapable inference from these reports was that the Communists, the 
“oligarchs” and the “rightists” — apparently a group of retired generals — h 
been conspiring, each for their own ends, to eliminate him either by forcinj 
him to resign or by assassinating him. The details of the murder plot or ploi 
were not revealed, ,53 > but that they were not sheer fancy was shown later 
by an attempt to kill his wife at a public function. In the alternative, the 
forced resignation would have been brought about by increasingly 


(52) 

Ferdinand E. Marcos, ‘‘Notes on the New Society of the Philippines*', Nation 
Media Production Center, Manila, 1973, 169 pp. 

^ ^In Criminal Case MC-5-11 before Military Commission No. 5 five Filipinos, 
three U.S. citizens, and two U.K. subjects have been charged with attempts to 
assassinate the President on 1 3 February, 26 February, 18 March, Holy Week, 

1 May, 12 June, August and September 1972. The case is under re-investigation 
upon orders of the President and, at the ti me of writing, has not yet been tried. 


47 


uncontrollable disorder, fed and fomented by student riots, in reality to be 
financed by the “oligarchs” and spearheaded by the Communists, but to be 
attributed to the President himself and the leaders of the armed forces, who 
were to be exposed as contriving enough “incidents” to justify the 
imposition of martial law. 

In the chaos that would follow assassination or resignation, each group 
of conspirators would reach out for total power, either singly or in 
temporary and opportunistic alliance with the others, and impose its own 
version of “martial law”. At the outset the retired generals, the “oligarchs” 
and the opposition politicans, would seize power on the pretext of restoring 
law and order. Thereafter, as the opportunity arose, the Communists in turn 
would seek to overthrow this fascist dictatorship to establish a people’s 
republic. The scenario was civil war, with the Muslim separatists going their 
own way in the southern islands. In such a war normal constitutional 
guarantees and processes would have been, in any case, meaningless. 

For all that, the proclamation of martial law was essentially a 
temporary measure, and the President was to go much further; the 
Convention had drafted, as has been noted, a Constitution instituting a 
parliamentary form of government, with a Prime Minister elected by and 
responsible to a unicameral National Assembly, which would replace the 
bicameral Congress. Before the latter could convene as scheduled on 22 
January 1973, the President submitted the new 1973 Constitution for 
approval by the people, not by secret ballot in a plebiscite among the 
registered voters, but in “citizens’ assemblies” not envisioned either in the 
1935 Constitution or in the electoral code. In the event, the Congress failed 
to convene, and the Supreme Court, for its part, refused to interfere in what 
it considered to be a political act rather than a justiciable question, and 
declared in a resolution that “there is no further judicial obstacle to the new 
Constitution being considered in force and in effect.” 15 4 1 

\ 


(54) The so-called “plebiscite cases” (S.C.G.R. Nos. L-35925, L-35929, L-35940, 

L -35941, L-35948, L-35953, L-35961, L-35965, and L-35979) were decided on 22 
January 1973. The so-called "New Constitution or ratification cases” (S.C.G.R. Nos. L-36142, 
L-36164, L-36165, L-36236, and L-36283) were decided on 31 March 1973. The 10 Justices 
(one had been recently retired) rendered separate opinions covering 336 printed pages; six 
found that the 1 973 Constitution had not been validly ratified, but another majority 
dimissed the petitions at bar and ruled in a resolution as stated in the text. 


48 


Under the old Constitution, tlie term of the incumbent President, 
barred from continuing in office after eight consecutive years, would have 
expired at high noon on 30 December 1973. Under the new Constitution,. 1 
could remain in office until he convened the new National Assembly to eiie 
the new President and Prime Minister under the 1 973 Constitution. On 
27-28 July 1973 another referendum was held through the “citizens’ 
assemblies” on the question, “Under the Constitution, the President, if he 
desires, can continue in office beyond 1973. Do you want President Marco 
to continue beyond 1973 and finish the reforms he has initiated tinder 
martial law? ” The result, as tabulated by the reformed Commission on 
Elections, was 10 to one in favor. The interim National Assembly, which 
would elect the new President and Prime Minister, has not been convoked, 
nor elections called for a regular Assembly. 

“I am not concerned with the legal nuances of that (first) referendum, 
the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court later declared. “Lawyers, with thei 
infinite resourcefulness, may differ and argue about them. Learned men m, 
c|te precedents to show that the referendum was not according to 
established rules. But the wise man would probably ask: If the people have 
so convincingly spoken, is not their answer an indisputable acceptance of t 
new Constitution? ” He had remarked, he recalled, in his opinion in the 
‘Ratification” or “New Constitution” cases, that“(t)he legal problem posec 
by the situation is aggravated by the fact that the political arms of the 
government -- the Executive Departments and the two Houses of Congress 
have accepted the Constitution as effective: the former by organizing 
themselves and discharging their functions under it, arid the latter by not 
convening on 22 January 1973 or ac any time thereafter, as ordained by th 
1935 Constitution, and in the case of a majority of the members by 
expressing their option to serve in the interim National Assembly.” 

Indeed, the political warlords, the magnates and the intellectuals, the 
orators and the peculators equally, bad not, in the crunch, gathered in a 
tennis court like the French nobles and magistrates of Louis XVI to swear 
defend their privileges and prerogatives; they had gone as quietly as the 
long-robed members of the Long Parliament when Cromwell, the Lord 
General soon to be Lord Protector of the Commonwealth, had summoned I 
musketeers, and calling his colleagues “whoremasters, drunkards, corrupt 
and unjust”, had adjured them: “It is not fit that you should sit as a 
parliament any longer. You have sat long enough unless you had done mor< 
good.” 


) 

“If indeed it be accepted/' the Chief Justice continued to quote from his 
opinion, “that the citizens' assemblies had ratified the 1973 Constitution, 
and that such ratification as well as the establishment of the government 
thereunder formed part of a revolution, albeit peaceful, then the issue of 
whether or not that Constitution has become effective, and, as a necessary 
corollary, whether or not the government legitimately functions under it 
instead of under the 1935 Constitution, is political and therefore 
non-judicial in nature. Under such a postulate, what the people did in the 
citizens 7 assemblies should be taken as an exercise of the ultimate sovereign 
power. If they had risen up in arms and by force deposed the then existing 
government and set up a new government in its place, there could not be the 
least doubt that their act would [have been ) political and not subject to 
judicial review but only to the judgment of the same body politic that is the 
people. This concept of what is a political act, in the context just set forth, is 
based on realities. If a new government gains authority and dominance 
through force, it can be effectively challenged only by a stronger force; no 
judicial dictum can prevail against it. We do not see that the situation would 
be any different, as far as the doctrine of judicial review is concerned, if no 
force had been resorted to, and the people, in defiance of the existing 
Constitution but peacefully because of the absence of any appreciable 
opposition, ordained a New Constitution and succeeded in having the 
government operate under it. "I 5 5 * 

Beyond legal niceties, however, were more fundamental and compelling 
reasons. In a book^ 56 * published after the proclamation of martial law and 
the 1973 Constitution, the President confessed: “Great decisions are made 
for us as much as we make them. I am, to be sure, accountable to history for 
21 September 1972 when I signed the proclamation placing the entire 
Philippines under martial law. And yet, solely and completely responsible as 
I am for this decision, I cannot escape the sense that events, the thrust of 


(55) Querube C. Makalintal, Chief Justice of the Philippines, “The Supreme Court 
under the New Constitution, Footnote to the Ratification Cases”, a speech delivered at a 
luncheon tendered in his honor by LAWASIA, the Philippine Bar Association and the 
Philippine Lawyers Association, 19 February 1974, Supreme Court Press, Manila, 1974, 
15 pp. 

(56) «<^otes etc.” op. cit. 


50 


history, and even the will of the people, scmchov guided my hand tu the 
deed. I say this not to exculpate myself in advance - this is impossible,, no 
man can cheat history - but to offer one more instance, out of personal 
experience, of a well known suspicion : that behind every man wlio makes 
history are forces which blur the distinction between individual initiative 
and historical necessity. The adherents of opposing v iews of history can fi 
whatever support may please them, but to the man who, like myself, has 
touched by a single act the very nerve of history, it is a source of confiden 
to know that while he stands alone, he had not acted in isolation, outside 
in opposition to the compelling circumstances of his time and place." 

Thus in the context of events, the declaration of martial law was mot 
than “a simple police action", the protection of the status quo; it entailed 
much greater responsibility than the restoration of public order: "that 
enormous responsibility, one that could not be shirked, was laying the 
foundations of an entirely new society.” It had been attempted before. 
Mabini had hopefully announced,a new "True Decalogue”. The Japanese I 
imposed a “New Order”. The Communists bad promised a "New 
Democracy”. What was this “New Society”? 

Its progenitor had envisioned it as “a revolution from the center, in 
sum, a democratic revolution” whereby in effect the government itself 
became revolutionary in order to forestall and compete with the 
“Marxist-Jacobin” revolution that sought to overthrow the existing order I 
violence and replace it with a dictatorship of the proletariat.! 57 ) The old 
society was “the social and. political elite manipulating ... a precarious 
democracy of patronage, privilege and personal aggrandizement” in "a 
political culture which was populist, personalist and individualist in 
orientation.” The new society, under a regime of “constitutional 
authoritarianism”, would “democratize wealth” and discipline the 
“oligarchs”. It would redress the grievances of “the rebellion of the poor” 
freeing them from bondage to the landlords, and giving land to the landles: 
and jobs to the jobless through the honest and efficient husbanding of the 


( ^Ferdinand E. Marcos, “Today’s Revolution: Democracy”, Manila, 1971 , 117 
pp. Written and published before the proclamation of martial law, it is a remarkably 
prescient outline of the reasons and objectives of the “New Society'*', 


51 


country’s resources. To achieve this, it would put an end to the old 
"politics of conflict’’, and to the "vertical view” of society, making it 
“authentically human”. It would reform the entire political system through 
the "participatory democracy” of citizens’ assemblies where the old 
inequalities of wealth and influence, and the discriminations against the 
\ young and the illiterate, would no longer be available, and where 
demagogues would no longer be able to "mislead and manipulate” the 
popular will. 

Obviously, even the new Constitution, with its mainly structural 
changes in the machinery of government, was insufficient for this. Pondering 
over Walter Lippmann’s distinction between The People as voters and The 
People “as a community of the entire living population, with their 
predecessors and successors”, and Edmund Burke’s view of The People as 
"connected generations of persons joined in partnership” not only “between 
those who are living” but also with “those who are dead and those who are 
to be born”, the President asked the meaning of the term, “The People of 
the Philippines”, as it was used in proclaiming the Constitution. 

“The framers of our present (1935) Constitution were certainly not 
drafting it for the interest of those who ratified it at a specific period in 
history. If they were, the whole charter would have been so particular that it 
would have lost its validity right after it was made. Nor is the present (1971 ) 
Constitutional Convention meant to consider only the interests of The 
People as voters, as masses, or even all of the people at this time in history, 
for (at) this verv hour, this majority, the masses, and the entire people 
are changing: many are dying and many are [being) born. And it is certainly 
anomalous to say that The People, of the Constitution are whatever people 
there may be at the time of its ratification. Constitutions are changed not 
only because of new social, economic, or political conditions, but because 
the interests of The People cannot be anticipated for all time. 

"We begin to realize, then, the shortsightedness of our approach to 
popular sovereignty, the arrogance of our self-regard, when we confine the 
people’s interest to what we, at present, regard to be our interests. Our 
populist, personalist and individualist culture must give way not only to 
collective responsibility, but beyond that to our historic responsibility. We, 
as a people, exist not only in the urgent present but in the continuum of 
history. We shall live, labor and die as individuals, but as a people, we are a 
part of that historic stream of generations that (is) The Filipino People . . . 


52 


We do exist and die for those who will cone after ws, and by our actions wi 
either serve or betray them - those coming generations whi chare, in their 
totality, The Filipino People. Nothing less than this high moral consci ousne 
must necessarily guide the democratic revolution is it reaches out for anew 
society."' ( 53 l 

Thus, he seemed to be saying, even Constitutions, new and old, with 
their elected parliaments, prime ministers and presidents, had perforce to 
yield to the supreme interest of the whole people, past, present and to com 
"Let constitutions founder," Mabini might have cried with him, “and the 
people be saved.” 


( 58 )“Ioday’s Revolution, etc.” Op. cit, pp. 74-76. 


53 


X 


Tat pueblo, tal gobierno. 

- JOSE RIZAL 


Today began yesterday. 

The Hubs were the progeny of the Katipunan, as indeed they proudly 
claimed to be; the Muslim secessionists were fighting the old long war with 
Spain, seeking their identity in the medieval sultanate; the revulsion against 
the politicians, and the indifference, if not outright relief, upon the death trf 
the Congress and the stillbirth of the New Assembly, were the culmination 
of a long process of disenchantment with a system of government made by 
another people in another place for another time. If, as Rizal observed, “like 
people, like government,” the Filipinos had had perhaps the government 
they deserved, but, in another and more pertinent reading of the phrase, 
they would have the government they needed. 

A nation is its history, and the Filipinos needed and deserved a system 
of government shaped by the national experience, the structure of their own 
community, their own unique capacities, grievances, desires and aspirations. 
Their society of semi-feudal landlords and unlettered peasants, a society of 
arrogant contrasts between palaces and hovels, was not the society of hardy 
pioneers and backwoods lawyers that had evolved the American form of 
representative government, which itself was becoming increasingly 
uncomfortable and unsatisfying for an industrialized and “affluent” society 
of “conspicuous consumption ’’.The experience of the Filipinos with this 
system, after it had been imposed by the colonial regime, had been of parties 
that were not parties but unprincipled coalitions of the rich, the powerful 
and the unscrupulous; of elections that were essentially meaningless 
exercises in fraud, terrorism, bribery and demagoguery; of politicians who 
represented no one but themselves. The people’s capacity for self- 
government had been trapped in a political mechanism they had not learned 
how to work or to control, and their capacity for indignation and generosity, 
sacrifice and service to the country, left to wither and decay. 

Faced with these political realities, Quezon had advocated “partyless 
democracy”, and “self-restraint” in the exercise of individual liberties. The 


54 


V Filipinos, he exhorted, faced the task crt 1 'devising our cvn democratic 
i institutions and government." Sumukmglud spoken darkly_of “farcical 
^ representative government" under a “feared and detested oligarchy'’. Lao re 
1 had ruminated wistfully about "men of superior moral and intellectual 
endowments” who would exercise a "benevolent" control of the state. Lor 
before them, Rizal and Mabini had called for “social regeneration" and an 
! “internal revolution", in brief, a new society. 

Such a society would face the task of redressing grievances that had 
been mocked in the past, and fulfilling desires and aspirations that remaine 
frustrated; of redeeming the peasants from age-old bondage, and giving thei 
the lands that the Revolution had promised; of “democratizing wealth” am 
enlisting it to provide tolerable lives for the common people; of assuring 
equahprogress for all in a just society without sacrificing the workers to the 
technocratic goals of full and rapid development at any cost; of reconciling 
the basic human rights and freedoms with the requirements of national 
discipline and security; of devising a form of representative democracy thal 
would enable the ordinary Filipino, in his village, farm or humble tenemen 
to make his voice truly heard, and his will effectively participate in the gre; 
decisions of his government. 


55 


V 




Philippines. 

Although never attracted to polit 
became a controversial figure as a spok 
of the nationalist opposition to the var 
administrations in power in the Philipf 
the forties and fifties and later as the 
undersecretary of foreign affairs, due t 
early advocacy of a foreign policy of ri 
re-examination of relations with the U 
closer contacts with Asian countries, a 
opening of relations with the govern mi 
countries with centrally controlled 
economies. 

A bi-lingual writer in English and 
Spanish, he has won several awards, 
principally for his biography of the na 
hero, Jose Rizal, entitled “The First 
Filipino", and the collection of essays 
Spanish entitled *'EI Si' y El No. ” 







■ ■■ X ■ ■ ■ 1 • ■ t 7 

/ 


7 - 


