24 Mhy 1945 




U £JORANDUM for: 

The President. 



iUDJilCT: Policy for the separation from the Phi- 

lippine Army of officers and men who 
served in any capacity during the Japa- 
nese regime. 

tthen the secretary of National Defense assumed his 
office he enunciated the policy that all members of the 
armed forces of the Philippines who had served the Japa- 
nese in any civilian or military oapaoity should not be 
retained in the Philippine Army. I attach a copy of the 
same as Addenda No. 1. 

This policy was discussed with General Marshall, 

Chief of Staff, USAFIK. As a result of our conference 
on March 14, the Philippine Army Headquarters received 
from the USAFIS Headquarters the communication attached 
herein as Addenda No. 2. 

By order of the Secretary of National Defense, on 
Maroh 17, 1945, the Philippine Army Headquarters issued 
General Orders No. 20, a copy of which is attached as 
Addenda No. 3, setting the policy to be followed with 
regard to officers and enlisted men who had served under 
th8 Japanese regime. 

To carry out the provisions of General Orders ITo. 

20 two loyalty status boards, composed of five officers 
each who had not served in any capacity durine the Japa- 
nese occupation, were appointed. 

Admittedly, the members of the loyalty status boards 
are Giv© 11 no discretion whatsoever under the provision of 
General Orders No. 20. On them is entrusted only the duty 
of ascertaining the following fact: Has the officer or 
enlisted man under investigation accepted appointment or 
performed service in a military or civil capacity in any 
activity controlled by the Japanese or by the so-oalled 
puppet Philipoine Republic? if so, only one recommenda- 
tion is possible — the party in question is to be dis- 
missed from servioe or active duty in the Philippine Army. 



— 2 •• 



. .v ^ . ; * ' ' * ~ M 

rtk.il only two exceptions provided for to this inflexible, 
unjustifiably rigid policy are the oases of {1) indivi- 
duals who ceased in their service of the enemy prior to 
September 20, 1944, and joined and participated actively 
with guerrilla forces or with United States forces, and, 

(2) officers and enlisted men of the Medical Service or 
Chaplain's Service who performed duties solely pertain- 
ing to the medioal profession or to religious activities* 

Tet, paragraph 4* of General Orders No. 20 states 
that "final decision as to the action to be taken in 
each oase will be made by this headquarters " (Philip- 
pine Army). Was it intended that the Chief of Staff 
act automatically, merely to check on the veracity of 
the facts gathered by the Loyalty Boards, and impose on 
him the obligation of asking only one possible decision 
in case the facts should have been verified? Or was it 
intended that the Chief of Staff use his discretion in 
the evaluation of acts and the clroumstaaces of their 
commission and, in the light of the highest established 
official policy, decide with justice? The latter is the 
only sensible interpretation. Discretion is an indispen- 
sable element of the power of decision. Section 4, as I 
interpret it, confers” on mo the discretion to declde ^as 
to the action to be taken in each case", I would have 
vigorously protested at the time General Orders No. 20 
was issued had 1 understood that the authority given me 
to decide consisted in merely cheering the factual data 
gathered by the Loyalty Status Eoards and reduced Head- 
quarters to a simple mechanical instrument* 

I have argued with the Secretary that there are cases 
where, although an officer or enlisted man had served in 
either a oivilian or military capacity during the Japanese 
occupation, yet he had been in continuous touch with the 
guerrillas and had given them valuable information, thus 
thwarting many a Japanese plan* In other Instances, offi- 
• cers of the Amy who served in the Bureau of Constabulary, 

utilized their positions to help guerrillas, not only by 
passing valuable information regarding Japanese concentra- 
tions and movement of troops, but also by assisting in 
the oapture of guns and ammunition from Constabulary 
barrack. 

Your attention is invited to the attached copy (Adden- 
da No. 4) of a communication received by my office from 
Major Robert D, Laphan, Commanding Officer of the D3AFFJS 
Luzon Guerrilla Army Forces, in which he Btatest 

"2. These zien while supposedly wording for the 

enemy voro actually risking their lives protecting 



t 



th.i» guerrillas by informing thai of the intentions of the 
Z panes© and in many cases securing the release of captured 
guerrillas* The members of this command would not have 
been accented if there and been any question of their lo- 
yalty. Many of the officers have been known by mo for 
several years, and though they attended conferences and * 
meetings, at no time did any of them disclose our secrets 
to the enoay. 

*3. Since ay first meeting with ilajor ^rellano in Fe- 
bruary of 1944, he has done everything in his power to 
cooperate with the guerrillas and has norked untiringly 
for the best interests of the people* 

+ 

"4* The men who joined the Constabulary did not do so 
because of any loyalty or love for the Japanese, but be- 
cause in this way they thought they could boat help and 
protect tholr countrymen* Anyone who has been here through 
the occupation oan inform you of the reat need there was 
for a police force. Not all guerrillas were motivated by 
purely patriotic reasons but were merely outlaws taking 
advantage of a national crisis. Whereas the true guerri- 
llas were not always able to cope with those outlaws due 
to Japanese interference, the Constabulary could move 
about freely, often being reenforced by guerrillas posing 
as Constabulary. The Constabulary also stood as a block 
and a threat against the Japanese to prevent them from 
torturing and atu3int the people* 

n 5» It is true that many of the men who worked for the 
Japanese were activated by selfish ambition and avarice; 
this was true of some nembers of the uerrillas. 3uch men, 
however, are not to be fo nd in this organization. Although 
for obvious reasons they ’ ore not listed on official ros- 
ters, tho members of thl3 command have been with the organi- 
zation. for more than a year, in some oases two years. They 
have all proved themselves able and courageous fighters 
both before and after tho arrival of the Anerioan forces* 

"6. lighting side by side vith the American combat 
units, they have earned and merited great respect from 
the soldiers and officers of tho A ray of the United 
States with whom they have served. I sincerely hope 
and trust that their own nation will give them the same 
respect and gratitude n « 



/s/ Robert h, Lapharn 
ft/ R B i'C B. LAj&AM 

Major, U.3. Army 
Commanding* . 



I contend, Hr. President, that the policy laid down 
and applied by the Secretary of national Defense is con- 
trary to the policy which you enunciated in your speech 
delivered over the "Voice of Freedom" on November 23, 1944 
Allow me to quote a part of it: 

"be cannot close our eyes to the realities of 
the Japanese occupation. It is cruel and harsh. 

An arbitrary government has been imposed on the 
Filipino people by the sword and the initial mis- 
fortune of American and Filipino arms left the 
majority of eighteen million Filipinos no other 
reoourse but to submit to a despotic regime if 
they were to survive. Not all public officials 
could take to the hill3 to carry on the heroio 
struggle, tfome had to remain in their posts to 
maintain a semblance of government, to protect 
the population from the oppressor to the extent 
possible by human ingenuity ana to comfort the 
people in their misery,. Had their services not 
been available, the Japanese would either have 
themselves governed directly and .completely or 
utilized unscrupulous Filipino followers capable 
of any treason to their people. The result ^ ; ; ould 
have been calamitous and the injuries inflicted 
to our body politic beyond cure, 

"The problem under consideration must be solved 
with justice and dignity. Every c ase should be 
examined im partially and deoided on its own merits. 
Persons holding public of ice during enemy occupa- 
tion, for the moot part, fall within three catego- 
ries; those prompted by a desire to protect the 
people, those aotuated by fear of enemy roprisals, 
and those motivated by disloyalty to our government 
and cause. The motive s which caused the re tention 
of the office and oon duo t while in of floe, r athe r 
than the sole fact of it's occupation, v.iil be the 
criteri a upon v.iiich such persons will be judged. 

"Those charged with giving aid and comfort to 
the enemy, whether office holders or private 
citizens, with being traitors and disloyal to 
the governments of the Philipines and of the 
United Jtates will be dealt with in accordance 
with law. But for the common good and our na- 
tional welfare, I appeal to oil the citizens of 
the Philippines to support their government in 
meeting its responsibilities by lawful procedures. 
Persons in possession of information on acts of 
disloyalty to the Commonwealth Government or that 



- 5 - 



of the United i>tatea should report it to the autho- 
rities. But under no circumstances should any per- 
son or group teice the law into their hands"* 

The Secretary of national Defense has consistently as- 
sumed the powers to reverse the decision token by the Head- 
quarters. Officers and men are now being summarily separa- 
ted from the- service, over my objections, regardless of 
their motives for and conduct while in office. General 
Orders No. 20 has established as the sole and conclusive 
criterion the DATE up to which he should have remained in 
his position, via., September 20, 1944; so that, in effect, 
any offioer or enlisted man who continued ostensiveiy to 
render servioe to the Japanese subsequent to this date, 
but who nevertheless actively cooperated with the guerrillas 
at the risk not only of his life, but likewise of the lives 
of the members of his family, must automatically be separa- 
ted from the service in disgrace. 

I am in complete accord with the policy of ellroinating 
from the Philippine Army all officers and men who voluntari- 
ly served and gave aid and comfort to the enemy , But the 
supreme official policy is "that every case should be exa- 
mined impartially and decided on its own merits", as enun- 
ciated by you, as the Conaauder in Chief of the ' Armed ior- 
oes of the Philippines.. I shall 'follow it until ouch time 
as you reverse it. 

Such action by the Secretary of National Defense is 
completely opposed to all precedents. Past Secretaries, 
cognizant of the fact that their Office is noc a part of 
"Headquarters, Philippine Army”, have refrained from inter- 
ferring with internal administrative functions of the latter 
body. In fact. Secretary Cabili himself recognized that 
when, in a press release published in the "Free Philippines" 
Issue of ^arch 26, 1945» he said: 

"I shall not interfere with the Internal func- 
tioning of the ihilippine Army in so far as it 
pertains to the technical and administrative phases". 

Hi3 aots, however, have until now, been in consistent 
opposition with his above statement. On April 18, 1945* 
he iesuea a memorandum to the dhief of Etsff, Philippine 
Army, that breads all precedents and has no bases in law, 

requiring that he be consulted before the issuance by 
Headquarters, Philippine Army, of (a) general orders, 
bulletins, and colicies; (b) special orders and promotion 
of officers; (o) special orders on transfers of personnel 
holding key positions; and (d) notion taken on General 
Order* No. 20. 



- 6 - 



In compliance vith this memorandum, I forwarded to 
the Secretary of National Defense the records of the 
cases of several officers passed by the Loyalty Status 
Boards and vhose recommendations I deemed proper to dis- 
approve under the authority granted ue in paragraph A 
above quoted, and the Secretary assumed the power of 
reversing those decisions. 

Taking advantage further, of my absence from Manila 
on an inspection trip to the Visayaa, the Secretary of 
National Defease again interfered with internal and admi- 
nistrative natters of Headquarters, Philippine Army, when 
he requested USAFFA Headquarters to recall frost Leyte 
eight officers who, upon orders from U3AFFE Headquarters, 
were on their way to the States to attend the Co.-tmand and 
General Staff School. His reason for recalling them is 
that they had not been cleared by the Loyalty Status 
Boards. He vas misinfoimied. All these men had been 
cleared and records of Headquarters, Philippine Army, can 
prove it. By recalling them, without my knowledge, he has 
disrupter tho plans of Headquarters, Philippine Army, to 
send officers to the States in compliance with instruc- 
tions from LSAFFs Headquarters, and broken the morale of 
the officers concerned who are graduates of other U. S. 
Army schools in the United States or in the Philippines, 
Furthermore, the selection of officers to study in various 
U. S. ^rmy Schools is a command responsibility which is 
vested exclusively upon the Chief of 3taff, Philippine 
Army. 

In view of the foregoing considerations, and in con- 
sonance with the policy which you have established it is 
recommended* 

1. That complete and impartial investigation bo con- 
ducted of all officers and men who held a position in any 
Japanese controlled activity; 

2. That this investigation, however, should look in- 
to the motives and more particularly, the conduct of these 
men while retaining their positions, irrespective of the 
date when or up to when they held such of floe; 

3. That before any separation bo ordered, should the 
individual ask for it, he be granted the chance to faoe 
trial in a corresponding military tribunal; 

4. That ultimate decision be vested upon this Head- 
quarters, subject of course to the Presidents power to 
review and alter the same in his capacity as Commander- 
In-Chief of the Army of the Philippines; and 



5. Fi ally, that in order that the above recom- 
mendations may be oarried out, General Orders Ho. 20 
be accordingly amended. 



BASiLIO J. VALDES 

Major-General, PA. 
Chief of Staff 




