
mm im inn 



Defense of the Philippines: I 

An Editorial 



JLlEFENSE of the Philippine Islands, often studied and 
discussed as a problem in strategy and naval tactics, must 
also be considered a problem in cooperation — between 
the United Slates and the Commonwealth. This viewpoint 
is all too infrequent. Yet Philippine-American coopera- 
tion in defense is absolutely essential. 

American officials recognize and proclaim their re- 
sponsibility to defend the Islands until July 4, 1946. when 
the Commonwealth attains full political independence. 
Thoughtful Americans will recognize this responsibility 
as an inevitable concomitant to the sovereignty which 
the United States retains until that date. It is also demon- 
strable that defense of the Philippines means defense of 
the vast interests which the United States and other west- 
ern powers maintain in the Far East. 

Nevertheless the attitude of the Filipinos toward the 
defense of their homeland has been insufficiently explored, 
and the part they must play only infrequently considered. 
Yet they are the ones who must be defended and who can 
aid most in that defense. Some 16.000.000 Filipinos are 
scattered through the archipelago whose defense the 
United States undertakes, and the Filipinos themselves 
are the best potential sinews of that defense. Every Fili- 
pino knows and appreciates his obligation to the Ameri- 
can people. The fact that a new factor — the prospect of 
political independence — is gradually altering our rela- 
tions does not mean we harbor any less gratitude. Di (Ter- 
ences of opinion and occasional sharp words are inevita- 
ble in an evolution as far-reaching as that now affecting 
Philippine-American political ties. But from the stand- 
point of immediate common understanding on such a 
question as defense, there is no difference between us. 

Filipinos are willing and ready to assume all obliga- 
tions and responsibilities of defending their homeland. 
That point cannot be too often or too clearly emphasized. 
It is not a question of defending an apathetic people, or 
of assuming sole responsibility. The Filipino people and 
their government are prepared to carry their share of the 
load, wherever the road may lead. That is no light state- 
ment, and it is made in the face of graphic and heart- 
rending tales of other nations who are defending them- 
selves today. 

The question now arises, what is the Filipino's part? 
To be bombed and to carry on with fortitude the tasks 
of civilian life is not enough. He must also man the 
ramparts, repel the invader wherever he may strike, and 
hold strategic outposts. Hundreds of strategic islands 
must be defended, any number of all-important moun- 
tain passes made secure. The unending coastline must be 
watched and guarded should aggression ever threaten. 



In anticipation of assuming these responsibilities, the 
Philippine government, as its first official act. passed a 
National Defense Act. Already. 120.000 Filipinos have 
learned the fundamentals of soldiery. But manpower and 
loyalty, as the world knows today, are not enough. Faith 
and determination are of little use against mechanized 
ruthlessness. Philippine defense needs power on the sea 
and in the air. 

These only the United States can supply. There are no 
forges, no factories in the Philippines of sufficient size. 
Only manpower. We produce no military airplanes and 
have no shipyards capable of building even a submarine. 

Secretary of the Navy Frank Knox and Secretary of 
War Henry L. Stimson have both stated that the United 
States is ready to defend the American flag wherever it 
may wave, whether in New England or in the Philippines. 
They have declared that measures were under considera- 
tion to discharge that obligation. It may be presumed that 
a supply of arms to the Filipinos is one feasible means of 
defending the Philippines, and it may also be presumed 
that when the expansion of American defense production 
facilities reaches a sufficient level, steps will be taken to 
remedy present deficiencies in these supplies. 

American statesmen recognize the broad scope of 
Philippine defense. They foresee in a powerful and fully 
armed Filipino people the same deterrent to aggression in 
the Pacific as Britain now constitutes in the Atlantic. Just 
as the British fleet now defends the freedom of the Atlan- 
tic, so the American fleet, with a strong outpost in the 
Philippines, may be the guarantor of the freedom of the 
Pacific. 

The advent of political independence for the Philip- 
pines need not modify this prospect nor does the neces- 
sity for defending the Islands alter essentially the out- 
look for independence. The basic need is for a common 
understanding between the American and Filipino people, 
and a common determination to unite in defense of their 
mutual welfare and interests. Each may serve in his own 
way toward that objective — through friendly and cour- 
ageous cooperation. ^ 



Due to poor health caused by continued ov<>r- 
work, President Quezon of the Philippine Com- 
monwealth was ordered by his doctors to seek com- 
plete rest late in December. The usual New 
Year reception at Malacanan Palace in Manila 
was cancelled, and the President retired under his 
physician's care. 



^Philippines 

Vol. 1 No. 2 

Contents for February, 1941 

Defense of the Philippines 1 

Where Does the U. S. Stand? Oscar Chapman 3 

An Army of Better Citizens, Father Edivin Ronan 4 

Blast Furnaces Needed, Stuart Lillico 6 

Economic Steps to Independence 7 

The Story the Magazines Missed, Samuel Gaches^ 9 

Labor and the Commonwealth, /. Avelino 10 

Spain in the Philippines, Dr. David Rubio — 11 

Filipino Women Make a New World, Pilar Ravelo 14 
Can the Commonwealth Buy Health? Dr. 5. Y. Orosa 15 
Crossroads of the World, E. Wallace Moore 16 
The Islands Watch Congress, Julius C. Edelstein. 18 

Professor in Government 19 

Philippine Island News 23 

• • • 

Photo Credit: Chaplains' Aid Association; De- 
partment of the Interior; Harris & Ewing; Philippine 
Tourist Bureau; Office of the President of the Philip- 
pines; Fenno Jacohs from Three Lions; and Tomel- 
den, Washington. 

• • • 

Back Cover: The Road to Bagnio. Mountain Province. P. I. 



Permission to reprint material appearing 
in "Philippines" is gladly granted except in 
eases where use is specifically restricted. Proper 
credit will he appreciated. 




Secretary of the Interior Harold L. Ickes "rep- 
resents" the Philippines in the American Cabi- 
net, since his department is the legal link be- 
tween the governments in Manila and Washing- 
ton. Assistant Secretary of the Interior Chapman 
on page 3 describes in detail the ties that bind 
the Philippines to the United States. 

In This Issue 

Oscar Chapman, who surveys the compli- 
cated legal relationship between the United 
States Government and the Philippine Common- 
wealth, is Assistant Secretary of the Interior. 

• • • 

Father Edwin Ronan is a member of the 
Passionist Fathers of Chicago. His article on 
the moral values of military training is based 
on experience in organizing the Philippine 
Army's Chaplain Service during 1939 and 1910 

• • • 

Samuel Caches, president of the American 
Chamber of Commerce in Manila, thinks Ameri- 
cans don't realize the dollar-and-cents value of 
the Philippines. On page 9 he shows how o- reat 
that value really is. 

• • • 

Jose Avelino speaks on Philippine labor 
progress with authority. He was until recently 
President Quezon's Secretary of Labor. Today 
he is Secretary of Public Works and Communi- 
cations. 

• • • 

Dr. David Rubio is Curator of the Hispanic 
Room at the Library of Congress and professor 
of Spanish-American history at Catholic Uni- 
versity in Washington. D. C. 



Dr. Sixto Y. Orosa. a vice-president of the 
Philippine Medical Association, now resides in 
Bacolod City, Negros Occidental. 



F. Wallace Moore recently accepted a post 
adviser to the Philippine Tourist Bureau in 



as 

Manila. 



"Philippines" is published monthly by the office of the Philippine Resident Commissioner to tlx* United 
States. Editorial and eireulation offices at 2362 Massachusetts Avenue Northwest, Washinpton, D. C. Entered 
as third class matter in the Washington post office on December 1, 1940. Permit No. 5045. Printed in U.S.A. 



U/ltete Voes the U. £. Stand 



IN THE PHILIPPINES? 



What Are the Legal Ties That Bind the Two Governments? 



By Oscar Chapman 



THERE are three quite distinct relationships between 
the United States and the Philippines .... political, eco- 
nomic, and cultural. Perhaps a fourth may be described 
as the "legal" relationship between the Federal Govern- 
ment of the United States and the Commonwealth Gov- 
ernment of the Philippines. 

These categorical relationships, although all part of 
the same organic structure, become the more separately 
apparent when we consider the difference between the 
legal relationship, which is defined by statute, and the 
actual basic relationship which consists of all the unde- 
fined ties and associations which have grown up between 
the people of the Philippines and the people of the 
United States in the many years of intimate connection. 

Such distinction increases the difficulty of appraising 
at a glance, or in a short space of words, the true rela- 
tionship between the United States and the Philippines 
as of 1941. The Department of the Interior is that branch 
of the Federal Government which is charged with ad- 
ministering the legal portion of the Philippine-Ameri- 
can relationship. In a larger sense, however, an estimate 
of Philippine-American relations must take in the entire 
background of history which brought the Philippines and 
the United States together, and the flourishing day-to-day 
business carried on between the two countries, which 
makes them vastly more interdependent than any set of 
laws or political ties could of themselves possibly do. 
The trade and economic ties form a strong and vibrant 
bond, of which the existing legal associations are transient 
manifestations. To my mind this is the central, the basic 
fact of Philippine-American relations. 

On the political and the legal side, the Philippines are 
traveling the road to full political independence, which 
they are scheduled to reach on July 4, 1946. Until that 
time the Islands remain under American sovereignty, 
and the United States Government is responsible for the 
national defense, the foreign relations, and other rela- 
tionships of the Philippines to the outside world, in the 
same way as the United States holds that responsibility 
for Hawaii, Puerto Rico, or, for that matter, South Caro- 
lina, Wyoming, Maine, California and the other states. 

The mere act of providing for the Philippines a pro- 
gram of independence did not and could not end the 
international responsibility which the United States holds, 
in the eyes of the whole world, for the Islands, until the 
actual withdrawal of sovereignty is fully accomplished. 
Sovereignty is an international, and not a limited politi- 
cal concept. Regardless of how defensible or indefen- 




Oscar Chapman, As- 
sistant Secretary of the 
Interior. 



sible the Philippines may 
be (which is the legal con- 
cern of the War and Navy 
Departments) , international 
law would term any act of 
aggression against the Philip- 
pines by a third power an 
act of aggression against the 
United States. That is. until 
the Philippines become in- 
vested with full and inde- 
pendent political sovereignty. 

When the Philippines Avere 
acquired from Spain in 1898. 
they were taken as a posses- 
sion of the United States and 
by 1909 they had been gathered within the full frame- 
work of American law and sovereignty, with the excep- 
tion of citizenship. They were placed inside the economic 
and tariff structure of the United States, and their na- 
tional economy developed as a part of the entire Ameri- 
can economy. 

In 1934 Congress granted the Filipinos a program of 
independence, in the Tydings-McDuffie Act, to reach its 
completion in 1946. The Filipinos accepted the offer and 
the Independence Act became a sort of Independence 
Treaty by which the United States in agreement with the 
Filipino people undertook to free the Islands after a 
specified period of transition, under certain terms and 
conditions. 

By the terms of the Act, drafted after years of dis- 
cussion and controversy, the FilipLios were accorded 
autonomy in their internal affairs under a Commonwealth 
Government, whose broad outlines were laid down in the 
Tydings-McDuffie Act. 

The United States government retained for itself, until 
1946, broad but generally defined controls over the for- 
eign relations, currency, tariffs, and national defense of 
the Islands. In these fields the United States was to be 
sovereign: in internal matters, covering the welfare of 
the people, the Filipinos' own duly elected government 
was to legislate and administer unhindered. 

The Congress of the United States retains the right of 
legislation over the Islands as long as they remain under 

(Turn to Page 24) 



February, 1941 • 3 • 



CITIZENS 



By Father Edtvin Ronan 




Headquarters Staff of the Philippine Military Academy at Baguio. 



No ONE can overlook the significance of the very first 
legislative act of the new Philippine Assembly following 
the inauguration of the Commonwealth on November 15, 
1935. These lawmakers saw a fundamental need to be 
met, an international problem to be solved. Thus, their 
first instrument of law, The National Defense Act, pro- 
vided for the establishment of the Philippine Army. Its 
theory, its composition, its methods, and the basic author- 
ity for all that has thus far been accomplished, as well 
as a guarantee of future progress and efficiency, was con- 
tained in that measure. Guided by Field Marshal Douglas 
McArthur and his staff, the training of both officers and 
men has progressed to a point where the Philippine Army 
has become an actuality — a small actuality, perhaps, but 
one fully warranting the heavy government expenditure 
entailed. 

For more than three years I have been closely asso- 
ciated with this building process, able to observe the 
patience and devotion with which our officers work to 
bring out talent in the rank and file. Indeed, it has been 
a pleasure and a source of inspiration to appraise the 
sound philosophy underlying this army pattern. Its value 
to the manhood of the country and the nation's future 
security is beyond doubt. 

The purpose behind this undertaking is not to foster 
military-mindedness. The glories of war have never been 
played up, nor has the ambition to challenge other na- 
tions on the field of battle been justified. The Constitu- 
tion visualizes the Philippine Army solely as a defense 
mechanism, not as a potential means of expansion by 
subjugating neighboring states. Therefore, shorn of all 
emotional and unpatriotic patriotism, from the Chief of 
Staff down to the humblest Probationary Third Lieuten- 
ant, military training becomes a stern business aimed at 



developing the best in Filipino manhood. Our objective 
is to create no more professional soldiers than is abso- 
lutely necessary. Rather, we want a Citizen Army pre- 
pared and equipped to lay aside its civilian role in an 
emergency and defend its country if threatened. 

A mere glance at our master schedule of training shows 
that the general staff has mapped out an efficient course 
of physical, mental and moral education, designed to 
build sound manhood and genuine citizenship. Primarily, 
of course, trainees learn the fundamentals of military 
science, in theory and in practice. These young men 
spend but five and a half months in the Army; not a 
minute of that time is lost. Daily exercises and drill, 
together with lecture and study periods, consume the 
major portion of the day. Regular discipline, a scientifi- 
cally balanced diet, and 'careful medical and dental at- 
tention have wrought marvels in building up these young 
men bodily. The physical transformation that takes place 
during this short five and a half months is testimony to 
the value of this phase of army life. Our boys leave camp 
physically fit in the truest sense of the word. 

A fairly large number of trainees come to us illiterate 
and, indeed, badly handicapped in meeting modern life. 
A well established department of adult education under 
the Plans and Training branch of the General Staff sets 
up in each class a school for illiterates and another for 
those somewhat more advanced. The educational projects 
embrace sound teaching in citizenship, patriotism and 
social responsibility generally. A steady, marked increase 
in the number of departing trainees who have met the 
literacy requirements and received certificates of satisfac- 
tory progress is our reward in the educational field. 

High morale is so necessary in an army that little con- 



• 4 • Philippines 



structive good can be accomplished without it. Trainees 
come from all sections of the Islands, mingling with total 
strangers and provincial! os from distant parts. Close at- 
tention, therefore, must be given to the task of assuring 
their proper assimilation into a compact body. There 
must be spirit, harmony, cooperation and a cheerful out- 
look. The chaplains are in a large degree responsible for 
realizing this particular phase of army morale. We might 
call it the tone or character of a given group: undoubt- 
edly it produces greater zest and application in all lines 
of military training. No one appreciates this more than 
the officer-instructor. 

The Chaplain Service is one of the branches set up in 
every properly organized military force. The Philippine 
National Defense Act declares that "The chaplains shall 
have charge of the religious welfare of the Army." These 
men are drawn from the various religious bodies in the 
Islands in proportion to the number of adherents to each 
faith. Recognizing religious welfare as a fundamental 
need to be provided for. the training schedule establishes 
regular times during which the chaplains may accomplish 
their mission. 

The profit to the Army and to the country at large in 
men with sound religious and moral character cannot be 
overstressed. The Chaplain Service is producing these 
men through religious services, instruction, moral lec- 
tures, and personal interviews and contacts. These ac- 
tivities are actively supported by commanding officers 
without exception. It goes without saying that the trainees, 
after their stay in the Cadres under such spiritual influ- 
ence, return to their homes better men. It should be noted 



how generously they respond to the ministrations of their 
chaplains. 

At present, approximately 120.000 young men through- 
out the Islands have seen service in our Cadres. The Army 
does not claim to have produced 120.000 finished soldiers, 
experts in any department. That has not been the object 
of the program. However, the Army does take much 
satisfaction in a job well done within the limits imposed 
by the time and means at its disposal. It is justly proud 
of its record. The Citizen Army thus established and 
trained has become a valuable asset to the country at 
large. Nor is its usefulness restricted to times of emer- 
gency and crisis. 

President Quezon, with keen foresight and long-range 
vision, is studying a plan to do more for these young- 
men. Following up the splendid start made by the Army, 
he would open new fields of greater opportunity. The 
training program has been a heavy load for the Com- 
monwealth, so that nothing will be lost of the good accom- 
plished, he will create an agency to guide and further 
their advancement, to keep them ever fit to serve God 
and country. 

When the day of Independence breaks upon an eager 
and awaiting people, approximately 300,000 young citi- 
zens, army trained and well schooled in their civic obliga- 
tions, will stand ready for the responsibility of defend- 
ing a sovereign, free people. Should the necessity arise, 
they would be prepared to take to the field of battle to 
protect their Fatherland. ^ 




^ Mathematics class at 
the Philippine Mili- 
r I tary Academy* 

February. 1941 • 5 • 





The Philippines Has a Treasure In 
Iron Ore, but Lacks a Steel Indus- 
try That Can Take Advantage of 
the Good Fortune. 

By Stuart Lillico 

B\ one of those quirks that Nature apparently delights 
in perpetrating, the Philippines stands almost alone in 
the Far East as a producer of iron ore. Japan proper 
has practically no such resources: Manchuria's two im- 
portant iron deposits are of extremely low grade; there 
is a half-surveyed suspicion of ore in Chahar Province 
in North China. That is about all the experts have 
found. 

Consider the Philippines, on the other hand. Investi- 
gation to date has revealed upwards of a billion tons of 
ore. much of it of high quality. As the result of develop- 
ment in the past decade, iron stands next to gold in im- 
portance among Insular mineral resources. 

However, two important facts must be borne in mind 
in connection with this booming industry. The first is 
that the entire output of Philippine iron mines goes to 
Japan. Nippon in 1940 paid approximately 83,000,000 
for an estimated 1.260,000 tons of ore. In October alone, 
91,000 tons were shipped northward by sea from the 
four important Philippine mines — Larap in Camarines 
Norte Province. Samar on half-wild Samar Island, Insu- 
lar at Paracale, and Gold Star on Marinduque Island. 
Shipments vary widely according to market conditions, 
the availabilit) of ships, and weather conditions. The 
figure has declined sharply each winter in the past. 

The second important point is that the Philippine 
Islands have no steel industry of their own worth men- 
tioning. If the Commonwealth's iron resources are to be 
exploited, the output must go to feed the furnaces of 
some industrial country, and none is available today 
but the hungry Nipponese blast furnaces. 

Iron ore is known to exist in commercial quantities 
at half a dozen points in the Commonwealth. In addition 
to those already noted, deposits are being worked in 
the Bulacan district, immediately north of Manila; on 
northern Mindoro Island and in western Panay, south 
of Luzon. The Islands' most important iron ore deposit 
is not yet being exploited, however. The huge govern- 
ment-reserved deposit at Surigao, in the extreme north- 
eastern corner of Mindanao, has been officially esti- 
mated at 500.000.000 metric tons, but recent surveys 
suggest the figure may be as large as a billion tons. 

The Surigao deposit was discovered in 1912 by an 
American engineer who noted the terrain's similarity to 
the Wipe Bay deposit in Cuba. Subsequent investigation 




Modern Methods of Mining Reduce the 
Cost of Producing Philippine Iron Orv. 



revealed deposits ranging in thickness from seven to 48 
feet, about 85 per cent accessible for mining. Nearby 
Dahikan Bay offered natural harbor facilities within 
easy reach of two ore bodies aggregating 268,000,000 
tons. In short, Surigao comprises probably the finest col- 
lection of iron ore in the Far East. 

Soon after the Surigao wealth was discovered, the 
Insular government took steps to reserve the deposits for 
its own use. In 19L4 the area was withdrawn from the 
public domain, and five years later the Philippine Legis- 
lature created a National Iron Company to exploit the 
deposit. Finally, in 1937 a program of intensive explora- 
tion and development was started. When current plans 
are carried out, power shovels working in open cuts will 
deliver ore to railway cars and a system of conveyor 
belts, which will dump the ore directly into the holds of 
ships in Dahikan Bay. From the standpoint of cheap and 
easy handling of the ore, Surigao is almost ideally laid 
out. 

In one respect, however, exploitation is under a serious 
handicap. Surigao ore is excessivelv porous, tests reveal- 
ing proportions of hygroscopic water as high as 37 

(Turn to Page 22) 



The Commonwealth Government lias 
decided, as a matter of national policy, to 
sell iron ore from National Development 
Company deposits only to the United States. 
No further leases of iron or oil lands will 
he made to private groups. 



• 6 • Philippines 



Economic J?tepl to SJnd.epend.en.ee 



200,000,000 



CIGARS 

DUTY FREE 




4,500,000 LBS 

TOBACCO 

DUTY FREE 



200,000 LONG TONS 

m COCONUT 
OIL 

DUTY FREE 




85,000 GROSS 

PEARL 
BUTTONS 

DUTY FREE 



850,000 LONG TONS 
AND NO MORE 

SUGAR 

DUTY FREE 





6,000,000 LBS 

AND NO MORE 



CORDAGE 

DUTY FREE 



U.S.TARIFF 

.| ON ALL 
£J GOODS 

X Xn ot ON 

FREE LIST 




$10,000,000 

EXPORT 
TAX 

COLLECTED BY 
MANILA 




JANUARY 1, 1941, marked ihe dawn of a new era in 
Philippine-American c ommerce. On that day. for the first 
time since free trade was established in 1909. the ship- 
ment of Insular goods to the United States was subject 
to a general restrictive levy. The imposition — 5 per cent 
of the standard tariff rate — marked an important step 
in the program of preparing Philippine economy for 
independence in 1916. There also went into operation 
the first in a series of reductions in import quotas of 
special commodities. 

Ever since passage of the Payne-Aldrich Tariff Act 
in 1909. the Philippines has been well inside the Ameri- 
can tariff wall. Not only have Insular sugar, coconut 
oil, cigars, cordage, embroideries, canned pineapple, 
lumber, peanuts, straw hats and other goods entered 
the United States without dut\ or quota, but American 
iron and steel products, cotton goods, dairy products, 
cigarettes, gasoline, paper, electrical equipment, toilet 
articles and fruit — farm and industrial products of every 
sort — have gone to the Philippines without levy or hin- 
drance. 

At the time free trade was being discussed after the 
Spanish-American W ar. Philippine leaders expressed the 
fear that Insular economy would be warped by such a 
gift. They were right, for Island products were chan- 
nelized naturally into the eager and highly protected 
American market at the expense of industries that might 
have competed in world marts. 

When the Philippine Independence Act was passed 
by Congress in 1934. establishing a 10-year transition 
period beginning November 15, 1935. it provided for 
gradual elimination of dependence on the free American 
market. An export tax equalling 5 per cent of the Ameri- 
can tariff was to be charged on all Philippine products 
except those on the existing free list. This tax would be 
increased annually by 5 per cent until 1946. when the 
Islands would no longer enjoy any preference. In addi- 
tion, a duty-free quota was set for sugar ( coinciding 
with the already operating AAA crop-control minimum 
of 850,000 long tons), an absolute limit was decreed for 
cordage (6,000,000 pounds annually), and a duty-free 
limitation of 200,000 long tons was established in coco- 
nut oil. These restrictions became effective upon inaugu- 
ration of the Commonwealth on November 15. 1935. 

For a variety of reasons many branches of Insular 
industry faced great difficulty in adapting themselves to 
the "weaning'' process. One of the most important causes 
was the steady deterioration of normal trade throughout 
the world. Elaborate plans for opening new markets for 



February, 1941 • 7 • 



Philippine goods in Asia and the Old World had to be 
scrapped. 

When it became apparent that many Philippine indus- 
tries would be unable to survive the imposition of even 
the first 5 per cent levy, officials in Washington and 
Manila held an economic conference to study the prob- 
lem intensively. The outcome was a series of recommen- 
dations, which in turn formed the basis of the 1939 
Tydings-Kocialkowski amendments to the Independence 
Act. 

Under the new program, plans for an all-inclusive 
export tax were dropped, and four of the Common- 
wealth's principal products were put on a quota basis 
beginning January 1, 1940, the quota to be decreased 
each year by 5 per cent. These items, and the quantities 
that were admitted free of duty during 1940, were as 
follows : 

Cigars— 200,000,000 cigars. 

Scrap and filler tobacco — 4,500,000 pounds. 

Coconut oil — 200,000 long tons. 

Pearl buttons — 350,000 gross. 

The original quantitative duty-free limitations on sugar 
and rope — 850,000 long tons and 6.000,000 pounds, re- 
spectively — set by the Independence Act ( and modified by 
the Cordage Act of June, 1935 ) were retained, but the 
stipulation was added that not a single pound of cordage 
might be shipped beyond 6,000.000 pounds, even though 
the producers were willing to pay the full American 
duty. In this respect, the Islands are in a peculiar posi- 
tion, since foreign countries exporting cordage to the 
United States may ship any quantity they care to, pro- 
vided the tariff is paid on entry. 

Another minor change, but one of considerable im- 
portance to Manila's expanding needlework trade, stipu- 
lated that the duty on embroidered goods be based on 
the actual increase in valuation resulting from the work 
done in the Philippines. This takes cognizance of the 
fact that most Manila needlework is for American firms 
who send half-finished clothing to the Islands to be decor- 
ated by dexterous and highly trained Filipino women. 



Thus, except for cigars, filler and scrap tobacco, coco- 
nut oil and pearl buttons ( which are under decreasing 
quotas), Philippine products enjoying American tarifT 
protection will pay a percentage of the United States 
duties as export tax, as originally provided. Accord ingly. 
since the first day of 1941 the cost of exporting most 
Philippine products to America has been materially in- 
creased. This annual rise in cost will continue until the 
Philippine Commonwealth becomes completely independ- 
ent in 1946, when the Islands will be cut off completely 
from their protection in the American market. 

The new export taxes are expected to yield approxi- 
mately 835,000,000 in the next five years, assuming that 
shipments to the United States remain at their present 
volume. Of this total, about 90 per cent will be paid by 
sugar exporters. The money is earmarked for the com- 
plete retirement of the Philippine bonded debt in the 
United States, and is expected to put Insular finances on 
a sound footing in preparation for 1946, with a probable 
cash surplus of between S13.000.000 and S16,000,000. 

On the other side of the picture, although the amended 
Independence Act forbids a Philippine tarifT on American 
goods, some decline in shipments is likely. This will be 
the result of a lowering of the general income in the 
wake of declining sales to the United States. In past 
years a slightly favorable merchandise balance has en- 
abled the Islands to pay for expensive American indus- 
trial goods. Recently, however, the trend has been re- 
versed and the Islands, instead of having a balance to 
meet freight, insurance and other invisible non-Philip- 
pine expenses, have been compelled to draw on the 
credit obtained through sales of gold and the refund 
of excise taxes by the United States Treasury. 

This unfavorable tendency is principally due to the 
limitations on Philippine products already imposed by 
operation of the Independence Law within the past five 
years. The result has been a decline in both value and 
volume of Insular exports to the United States. This 
trend will be aggravated by the export tax and quota 
system that went into effect this year. ^ 




Philippine Sugar, as Represented by the Insular Sugar Refining Plant Near Manila, Faces 
a Period of Readjustment in Preparation for Independence 

• 8 ° Philippines 




... h 
y 



A m e r ic a n M a c h iner y 
m an n fact a rers have an 
important market in the 
Philippines. 



THE 





THE MAGAZINES MISSED ««— 



IMAGINE a 50-car railroad train pulling out of Akron, 
Ohio, headed for deepwater terminals at Philadelphia. 
Simultaneously, another 50-car train is leaving We- 
natchee, Washington, for Seattle. The first is loaded with 
rubber goods and machinery ; the second with apples. 
The following day, similar trains chuff out of Detroit 
and Woonsocket, filled to capacity with automobiles and 
cotton textiles. And the next day the shipments are from 
the Imperial Valley of California and the cigarette fac- 
tories of Durham, North Carolina. Every day of the 
year the procession continues. For each trainload, cash 
has been deposited in a safe American bank. This is the 
picture of the United States' export trade to the Philip- 
pine Commonwealth. 

American newspapers and magazines during 1939 and 
1940 published an interesting collection of articles deal- 
ing with the Philippines. The subject matter was diversi- 
fied. The majority were "surveys," designed to prove 
that the Filipinos had changed their mind about the de- 
sirability of independence. The problem of defending 
the Islands — either as a detached nation or as an ele- 
ment in American grand strategy — was a favorite theme. 
Manila politics came in for attention. In addition, the 
presence of numerous Japanese colonists at Davao was 
viewed with alarm, and the general Nipponese "threat" 
was often considered. 

There was some discussion of American investments 
in the Philippines and their future under independence. 
Writers made note of some extraordinarily successful gold 
mines. But, strangely enough, little attention has ever 
been paid to the one subject that is of immediate interest 



to millions of American farmers, factorv workers, manu- 
facturers, shippers and merchants — the $100. 000,000 
annual sale of American products to the Philippine 
Islands and the steady expansion of what is probably the 
United States' last normal overseas market. This is the 
story the magazines have missed. 

The most encouraging element of this business is that 
it is steadily expanding. Just as the $100,000,000 total 
for 1939 exceeded the figures for 1938 by some 11 per 
cent, so the trade for 1940 is certain to be better than for 
the previous year. On the basis of 1939 returns. 105 
different American products found their best overseas 
market in the Philippines. In 55 other cases, the Islands 
were second best. That is "big news" in the most funda- 
mental sense of the phrase. 

Fifty-five thousand American cars and trucks operate 
over some 9,000 miles of Philippine roads. About 7,000 
miles are first-class surfaced national highways that have 
been built and maintained by the Commonwealth and 
the preceding governments. Manila imports more Ameri- 
can automobiles and trucks than any other port in the 
Far East. Furthermore, the Philippines is the best East- 
ern market for American tire casings and tubes, and one 
of the best in the world. 

Gasoline and fuel oil are major Philippine imports 
from the United States; the bulk of $3,073,754 worth of 
gasoline and $876,470 of oil bought in 1939 was Ameri- 
can. Half a dozen oil companies have important invest- 
ments in terminals, filling stations, agencies and equip- 

(Turn to Page 21) 



February, 1941 • 9 



LABOR... 

an dike 

THE coming of the Americans in 1898 wrought many 
changes in the Philippine Islands, not only in political 
thought and institutions, but in social and economic life 
as well. For untold centuries prior to 1898, agriculture 
was almost the only occupation of the Filipinos. Their 
placid agrarian life was disturbed by Yankee enterprise; 
as the result, especially during the past two or three 
decades, the country has been going through a period of 
rapid industrialization. Coincident with this development, 
the working population has increased, while labor prob- 
lems of all forms and magnitude have arisen. 

In recent years particularly, labor problems have be- 
come relatively serious. Improvement of labor and liv- 
ing conditions and maintenance of harmony between 
Capital and Labor have required ever increasing atten- 
tion from the law-makers. Every session of the Legisla- 
ture sees the introduction of new labor measures. 

The Philippine Constitution declares that "the promo- 
tion of social justice to insure the well-being and eco- 
nomic security of all the people should be the concern of 
the State," and that "the State shall afford protection to 
labor, especially to working women and minors, and shall 
regulate the relations between labor and capital in indus- 
try." Further, "the State may provide for compulsory 
arbitration." 

The National Assembly has passed a number of laws 
to implement these provisions. Recent enactments, for ex- 
ample, provide for an eight-hour working day, prohibit 
Sunday labor without additional pay, regulate the time 
and manner of wage payment, extend the Workmen's 
Compensation Act, authorize the Secretary of Labor to 
promulgate safety regulations, and create a Court of 
Industrial Relations empowered to arbitrate and settle 
industrial and agrarian disputes. 

While these laws have in a large measure improved 
working conditions, labor continues to be vocal. Filipino 
workers are now conscious of their rights and seek a 
better place in society. The cry for increased wages, 
union recognition and collective bargaining is particularly 
prominent. Fortunately, this fight has not been character- 
ized by serious hostility and violence. However, Philip- 
pine unions have not yet acquired the strength and power 
that characterize labor in some other countries. 

One of the first laws passed by the National Assem- 
bly protects the right of laborers to unite for collective 



By Hon. Jose A vol in o 




bargaining. Nevertheless, many years may have to pass 
before our unions have sufficient coherence and strength 
to meet their employers on a footing of equality. In my 
opinion, the problem of how far the Government should 
go to bolster Labor s bargaining power is one that re- 
quires immediate solution. 

Although labor demands continue, comparative quiet 
reigns today. Threats of strikes increase, but actual 
strikes are fewer. This may be because the Government 
has provided ample machinery for settling labor differ- 
ences. Most demands are compromised, while many 
threatened strikes are averted through either mediation 
by the Department of Labor or arbitration by the Court 
of Industrial Relations. Employers and employes alike 
have learned to accept the intervention of these agencies 
as a matter of course. In most cases, the parties themselves 
seek it. These two agencies have made a distinct con- 
tribution to improving the conditions of the working class 
and bettering relations between Capital and Labor. 

Social security legislation is now engaging the atten- 
tion of both the Government and labor leaders. The 
Philippines has had an Employers' Liability Act since 
1908, and a Workmen's Compensation Law for more 
than a decade. However, labor today demands protection 
from old age, sickness, unemployment and the like. Be- 
fore long, concrete and definite proposals must be sub- 
mitted to the National Assembly. The first is likely to be 
in regard to unemployment. 

Coupled with widespread economic distress and world- 
wide unrest, the Philippines have many peculiar problems. 
Geography — separation of the Commonwealth into several 
thousand islands and islets — renders labor movement 
difficult; the seasonal character of many types of employ- 
ment automatically throws laborers out of work at the 
expiration of certain periods every year; the exodus of 
young people from schools and colleges with no ready 
jobs at hand — all these account for the growing serious- 
ness of unemployment in this country. 

The Commonwealth Government realizes that most of 
its labor problems will continue for some time, beins: 
concomitants of industrial progress. In seeking the proper 
solution, the Administration is guided not only by local 
experience, but also by the experience of other countries, 
especially the United States. ^ 



o SO o Philippines 



£j2ain in the 

PHILIPPINES 

By Dr. David Rubio 

Curator of the Hispanic Room at the 
Library of Congress, and Professor of 
Spanish-American History at Catho- 
lic University, Washington. 



SpAI.WS bloodless conquest of the Philippine Islands 
is unique in the annals of colonization. The principal 
reason for this was that Magellan in 1521 found a dis- 
united group of completely independent tribes. In addi- 
tion, however, the phenomenal spread of Christianit) 
through the archipelago gave the Spanish priests a hold 
on Filipino loyalty that made armed force largely un- 
necessary. Not until 1822 — three centuries after Magellan 
— did Spain have to put a garrison in the Islands. 

The history of Spain in the Philippines begins with 
Magellan's discovery of what he called the Islands of 
San Lazaro in recognition of the holy day on which 
he sighted them. Soon the navigator was on cordial terms 
with man) of the native tribes. Peace pacts were ratified, 
and the "Indians" often brought food to the Spanish 
soldiers. However, on Mactan Island the Spanish did meet 
resistance, and it was there that Magellan died trying 
to cover the retreat of his men to their boats. 

Actual settlement of the Philippines began in 1561 
when Miguel Legazpi. aided by Andres de I rdaneta. an 
earlier adventurer turned Augustinian monk, arrived 
from Mexico with four ships and 400 men. W hen, at 
Cebu, Legazpfs efforts to win over the natives failed, he 
realized the necessity of proving the Spaniards' superior- 
it) at arms. Once this was done, however, the captain 
showed his tact and vision by making friendly pacts with 
the natives and befriending their leaders. It was this 
policy that won the Philippines for Spain without further 
bloodshed. When Legazpi died in 1572. the whole archi- 
pelago was under Spanish rule. 




Si. Augustine Church in Manila Was 
Built by the Spaniards in 1599. 



One of the most interesting aspects of Philippine his- 
tory is the rapid conversion of the native population 
to Christianit). The Augustinians came with Legazpi. In 
1577 the Franciscans arrived, followed in 1581 by the 
Jesuits. The Dominicans came in 1587 and the Recollects 
in 1606. Ministers to bodily wants as well as spiritual 
needs, these priests found no difficulty in converting the 
natives to Catholicism. Morga, in describing the work of 
these missionaries, tells of the assiduity with which the 
natives embraced the Catholic faith. "No native province 
resists religion or does not want it.** he wrote. The 
Filipinos attended sacraments with great devotion. Manx 
times, because of the scarcity of priests, they had to wait 
a whole day to reach the confessional box. 

The effect of Christianit) on the life of the people 
was notable. Woman's position was elevated, temperance 
was encouraged, slavery was lessened and usury was 
attacked. That the real conquest of the Philippines was 
accomplished by these missionaries is shown by the 
ridiculously small military force maintained to support 
the Catholic 1 king. 

The missionaries, of course, had another important 
effect on Philippine life. The native culture was sub- 
merged almost completely by an incoming tide of Spanish 
learning and tradition. 

The first schools were parochial, where students learned 
the precepts of Christianitv while studying reading and 
writing. In music. Filipinos showed great adaptability: 
from the earliest davs Manila had splendid choirs. Even 
in the provinces, this educational process went on con- 
stantly. Land grantees were required to instruct their 
slaves in the Faith, as well as in reading and writing, 
when no friars were near. 

Slaves were also taught arts and trades, for which they 
showed great aptitude. The women quickly mastered 
needlework. 

In 1593 the friars brought Manila its first printing 
press. As publishing facilities increased, man) works that 
we consider monumental even toda\ appeared. ""Mora de 
Filipinas," published in Manila b\ the great Fray Manuel 
Blanco, has never been surpassed. 

In 1001 the Jesuits founded the College of San Jose. 

(Turn /o Page 19) 



February, 1941 • 11 • 




Readers may obtain copies of this map without charge by writing /i 




^HILIPPIISES, 2362 Massachusetts Avenue N.Jf Washington, D. (7. 



FILIPINO 

WOMEN 

Make a 

New WorlJ 

By Pilar N. Ravelo 



Jr ORTY YEARS of American rule has revolutionized 
woman's position in the Philippines. Three or four dec- 
ades ago she was content in her role as ''queen*' within 
the four walls of her home; today, she is a political power 
and a force for national progress. 

Prior to the coming of Magellan in 1521. Filipino 
women enjoyed equality with men. Queen Sima and 
Princess Urdu j a were among the women rulers who ad- 
ministered laws as efficiently as the men did. They held 
the family purse, engaged in business, and were economic 
consultants to their husbands. Philippine court records 
are full of instances in which a woman took up her 
husband's fight as her own. But feminine prowess was 
nullified under Spanish rule. Women were relegated 
to the background. The man became lord and master. 

With the arrival of the Americans in 1898 and the in- 
troduction of liberal public education, women awakened 
and began to demand observance of their rights. The first 
institution of learning for women — the Instituto de 
Mujeres — was established by Rosa Sevilla de Alvero in 
1900. As early as 1902, agitation for better laws was 
started by La Liga Femenina de la Paz. Tn 1905, Miss 
Conception Felix organized the Asociacion Femenista 
Filipina. Among its aims were the suppression of im- 
morality, the regulation of work in factories, elimination 
of the practice of allowing parents to parcel out their 
children as servants in payment of debts, and the selec- 
tion of women for municipal and provincial education 
councils. Though this group accomplished little in a con- 
crete sense, its aims served as a standard for future years. 

In 1912. two famous suffragettes. Carrie Chapmann 
Catt and Dr. Aletta Jacobs of Holland, visited the Philip- 
pines and urged the women to join the world feminist 
movement. The first woman's club was founded as the 
result, with Sofia Reyes de Veyra as one of the in- 
corporators. From this club stem the 900 women's clubs 
now found throughout the Philippines. Agitation for 
feminine suffrage followed, but the movement was hope- 




Mrs, Jo so fa Llanes Escoda, 
Organizer of the Philippine 
Girl Scout Movement. 



lessly premature. Not until 1918. when Governor General 
Francis Harrison, in his message to the Philippine Leg- 
islature, recommended votes for Filipino women, did 
the idea receive any popular support. Hut although bill 
after bill was introduced, nothing concrete resulted. 

The women were persistent, however, and in 1933. 
Governor General Frank Murphy signed a feminine 
suffrage bill. Before the bill could take effect, the Com- 
monwealth Constitution was drafted, stipulating that 
women would be granted the vote only if 300,000 went 
to the polls at a special plebiscite wtihin two years and 
signified their approval. As the result of a strenuous 
campaign, the women obtained about 500,000 votes in 
1937. Today, many elective positions are held by women. 

An aftermath of the suffrage victory was a demand for 
eradication of obsolete laws in the Civil Code. The first 
result was amendment of the paraphernal law, which 
gave the husband unqualified control over his wife's 
property. As the resuit of revision, women may now dis- 
pose of their own property whenever they wish, and hus- 
bands cannot touch it without permission. 

A year ago the Philippine Association of University 
Women submitted to the Speaker of the National As- 
sembly eight proposed laws to improve the legal status 
of women. To date, however, no action has been taken. 

Few movements progress without leaders. Typical of 
the Filipino women who have led the struggle for 
emancipation are Mrs. Asuncion Arriola Perez, executive 
secretary of the Associated Charities; Mrs. Pilar Hidalgo 
Lim, president of the National Federation of Women's 
Clubs of the Philippines, and Mrs. Josef a Llanes Eseoda. 
chairman and organizer of the Girl Scout Movement of 

(Turn to Page 20) 



o 11° Philippines 



Il\ 1901 the Philippine Insular government appropriated 
$149,100 for puhlie health purposes. By 1938 the figure 
had risen to $2,191,963, the equivalent of 19 cents for 
every man. woman and child in the Commonwealth. If 
municipal and provincial expenditures on health work 
is added, the figure rises to 22.5 cents per capita. 

This steady increase 1 in appropriations for public 
health in the Philippine Islands speaks well for the 
progressive nature of the government. Nevertheless, our 
physicians are not satisfied. 

"Just a little more money."* they plead, "and well 
give our nation the best health record in the Far East.*" 

As proof of what "just a little more money" will do 
they point to the record of some of the big Philippine 
sugar "centrals.*' Their annual expenditure on health 
and sanitation averages slightly more than the govern- 
ment's: the increase, however, has distinctly improved 
sickness and mortality records. As their immediate goal, 
government health men want Manila and the provinces 
to raise their appropriations to 50 cents per capita. 

To show where today's appropriations for public 
health go, let us look at a typical province and a tvpical 
town. Excellent examples are the province of Occidental 
Negros and the town of Silay, one of the most pros- 
perous in that part of the Commonwealth. 

In accordance with the Philippine law. the province 
devotes at least 5 per cent of its total budget to health 
work. In addition, each municipality uses 5 per cent of 
its income for the same purpose. This fund is occa- 
sionally augmented by grants from Manila for the pur- 
chase of medicine or the construction of new dispen- 
saries. Thus, in 1939 a total of 816,500 was available, 
of which 75 per cent was used for salaries. 

Occidental Negros has 24 towns and one city, with 
a total population of 753.788. The province is divided 
into 19 sanitary districts, each with a physician in 
charge. Populations of these districts range from 25.000 
to 66.000. At Bacolod City, the provincial capital, a 
government general hospital has 100 beds. Scattered 
through the province are four maternity hospitals. 32 
child health centers, and 27 dispensaries and charitv 
clinics. 

Fifteen physicians are employed in the maternity 
hospitals, while the general hospital at Bacolod City has 
three resident physicians I including the director) and 
four interns. Each of the child health centers has a quali- 
fied nurse, and the province has 62 licensed midwives 
who have completed at least a year's training in a 
maternity hospital. Scattered through the province are 
52 sanitary inspectors — an average of one inspector to 
each 15,000 population. 

The city of Bacolod and two other towns have run- 
ning water. Other sections of the province have a total 
of 586 artesian wells. Although this is an average of 21 
wells to a town, actually several have more than a hun- 
dred, while two have none at all. 

Occidental Negros boasts of 158 physicians in private 
practice. A few of these are in the employ of the prov- 



— &an the 

COMMONWEALTH 




Public Health? 

By Dr. Sixto Y. Orosa 



ince's sugar "centrals." All of the 17 "centrals** and 
three large lumber mills have their own hospitals or 
infirmaries. Two of these industrial hospitals are par- 
ticularly well managed, and one enjoys the reputation 
of being better equipped than any in Manila itself. 

In considering the results of this situation, it should 
be borne in mind that Occidental Negros is one of the 
richest provinces in the Commonwealth, that its total 
of hospitals, infirmaries and clinics is somewhat above 
the national average (some provinces have no maternity 
hospitals at all), that the sanitary facilities are better 
than average and that the per capita health appropria- 
tion is greater than most other provinces. The mortality 
rate in 1939 was 16.82. The figure for the entire Com- 
monwealth was 16.53. and for the United States. 10.7. 
Of the Occidental Xegros deaths. 92.97 per cent oc- 
curred without medical attention. In other words, al- 
though this province has a generally favorable health 
record, more time and money must be spent before 
western standards are approached. 

Now let us examine the town of Silay. the "Paris of 
Negros"* and one of the most progressive in the province. 
Its population in 1939 was 39,571. The Silay sanitary 
division is under the direction of a physician, assisted 
by four nurses and two sanitary inspectors. There is a 
child health center, and a 1 6-bed maternity hospital with 
a physician, two nurses and four midwives. One nurse 
visits government schools, treating skin diseases and 
similar minor ailments. 

The 10 private physicians in active practice in Silay 
are generally alert and well trained. About 25 per cent 
of their sen ice is rendered to the poor without charge. 
The big provincial hospital in Bacolod City is only 10 
miles away by an asphalt road. Nevertheless, in spite 
of these comparatively favorable facilities, only 16 per 
cent of those who died in 1939 had medical attendance. 
Actually, only 8 per cent can be said to have had ade- 
quate medical service prior to death, since many oi 
the rest were seen by the doctor onl\ on the last day. 

It is interesting to note that about 75 per cent oi 

(Turn to Page 24) 



February, 1941 • 15 • 




THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS— all 7,000 of them— 
stand at the crossroads of the great Oriental trade routes. 
Rich in agriculture and minerals, its people an easy- 
going, lovable, happy-spirited lot, the Archipelago in 
all its overpowering beauty and natural wealth has for 
centuries tempted empire-builders. The mark left by 
repeated invaders, oriental and occidental, is evident in 
Las Filipinas today. The people are in the truest sense 
of the word a blend of the East and the West, of old 
and new, of progressive and conservative. 

The Philippines is fast becoming a focal point for 
world travelers. This has been emphasized by the arrival 
of Pan American Airways' giant Clippers which main- 
tain excellent service from Manila eastward to San Fran- 
cisco and westward to Hongkong, and are preparing to 
push southward to Singapore. N.Y.K. and the American 
President Lines, the Dutch K.P.M. and the Canadian 
Pacific Lines, offer a wide range of surface accommo- 
dations, bringing the most out-of-the-way parts of the 
world within easy reach. 

Access to the Philippines, which for so long was inade- 
quately served and in consequence received little con- 
sideration from the intending traveler, has converted 
these beautiful, healthful, tropical islands into a first- 
rate tourist attraction. Furthermore, the Commonwealth 
is the only country outside the Western Hemisphere 
which Americans are free to visit today. 

Here is novelty; a fascinating native charm; a gra- 
cious way of living surviving from the days of old Spain. 
Here is variety. No land offers more. 

First of all, there is Manila, a growing port and capi- 



« WORLD 

By £. Wallace Moore 

tal of the ambitious young Philippine Commonwealth, 
a city of modern convenience that retains its medieval 
charm and the tempo of native life. Furthermore, hotel 
facilities are famous throughout the East; the Manila 
Hotel is talked about wherever world travelers con- 
gregate. 

In northern Luzon, the traveler sees mountain people 
living as most men lived 2,000 years ago, building mirac- 
ulous rice terraces and storing precious mountain water. 
Native cloth of great beauty is woven from pineapple 
and maguey fibers as it was done in Moses' day. 

In the southern islands he visits the enormous sugar 
"centrals" and abaca plantations, the coconut groves 
and rattan forests. Still another mode of living prevails 
here, the nipa hut built high above the ground on bamboo 
stilts, with a bamboo ladder in lieu of steps. 

Still farther south are the Moros — Mohammedans who 
came from Sumatra in the remote past and brought 
their culture and belief with them. Here, in and about 
picturesque Jolo, are pearl divers, gorgeous brasswork, 
fine steel blades, hand-wrought goods of the most primi- 
tive and delicate sorts. Here the Sultan of Sulu lives, 
surrounded by his 300 or more wives. 

Of variety, there is no end for the adventurous traveler 
who comes to the Philippines. 

Travel to and from the Islands is no longer difficult or 
complicated. Arrangements can be made by any reliable 
tourist agency. Once arrived at Manila, the visitor can 
depend on the Philippine Tourist Bureau, a semi-official 
agency of the Commonwealth Government, to facilitate 
his travels to any part of the 7,000 islands that com- 
prise Las Filininas. ^ 




At Manila's Piers, Ships of all Nationalities Dock. 



• 16 • Philippines 



THE ISLANDS WATCH 

&ongl.e±± -fiction* 

By Julius C. Edelstein 



1 HE PHILIPPINES, like other areas under the Ameri- 
can flag, will watch Congress during the coming year 
for actions having a direct or indirect impact upon their 
national life. It is sometimes forgotten that 16.000.000 
Filipinos are as immediately affected by congressional 
legislation as the citizens of Wisconsin or Rhode Island. 

In a closely knit world, where economic relations span 
oceans and continents without regard for distance, even 
locally-directed legislation, designed to affect only the 
sharecroppers of Louisiana or the migrant farm workers 
of Colorado, may have a direct and powerful effect in 
the most distant barrios of the Philippines. 

The legislature of the Commonwealth Government, 
under its Constitution, has complete power over the 
internal economy and affairs of the island nation. But 
Congress retains and often exercises a power to legislate 
on matters of tremendous concern to the Philippines. 
It was for this reason that the Tydings-McDuffie Act 
provided that the Philippines should be represented in 
Congress by a Resident Commissioner, who should have 
the privilege of participating in debates and deliberation, 
but not the right to vote. In practice the Commissioner 
concerns himself only with legislation which has an effect 
upon the Philippines. The range of such legislation, how- 
ever, is tremendous. 

Legislation to renew or replace the present sugar quota 
control system must inevitably affect the Philippines, 
since the Islands supply approximately one-seventh of 
the sugar requirements of the United States. Any at- 
tempt to reduce the Philippine quota would raise the 
entire subject of the mutual obligations entered into by 
the I nited States and the Filipino people under the 
terms of the Independence Act. Nevertheless some sugar 
interests have discussed the possibility of curtailing the 
Philippine quota at the current congressional session. 

Any revisions of the present monetary structure of 
the United States would have the most immediate reper- 
cussion in the Islands. The Philippine peso is tied to the 
American dollar and any readjustments in the gold con- 
tent of the one would reflect on the buying power of the 



other. Moreover, the Philippines has been supplying large 
amounts of gold to the I nited States, and any shift in 
the value of gold would be a matter of intimate concern 
to Insular economy. 

Through its copra and coconut oil industry the Philip- 
pines has a tremendous interest in measures afTeeting the 
fats and oils market of the I nited States. Proposals to 
increase or decrease the internal revenue or processing 
tax on coconut oil, or to give a competitive advantage 
to cottonseed oil would have an immediate reaction in 
the coconut plantations of the Philippines. 

Previous Congresses have provided that processing 
taxes collected on Philippine sugar should be repaid to 
the Commonwealth treasury. There is also an authoriza- 
tion on record for the payment to the Philippines of 
approximately $24,000,000 to compensate for the losses 
suffered by the Philippine Government when its cur- 
rency reserves, deposited in dollars in the United States 
treasury, were reduced through devaluation of the Ameri- 
can dollar. Both these authorizations may figure in pro- 
posals for defense expenditures in the Philippines. 

The entire subject of national defense, which will most 
certainly preoccupy the next Congress, and probably 
several subsequent Congresses, is of immediate interest 
to the Philippines. The Commonwealth is on the outer 
rim of the American defense establishments in the Pacific 
Ocean. The Asiatic Fleet is stationed at Manila, and 
American troops man the main strategic points in the 
Islands. Defense measures contemplated by the American 
Government have as great significance for the Common- 
wealth, for its security and future relations with both 
the Far East and the Western Hemisphere, as for the 
security of New York and San Francisco. 

A move to fortify Guam — or to abandon Guam — has 
as great meaning for Manila as for Washington. 

Similarly, the Congress with its broad power to levy 
embargoes, affect foreign policy and. in the last analvsis, 
to declare war, has a supreme and ultimate influence on 
the lives and fate of all Filipinos. The deliberations of 
the 77th Congress will be as closely watched in Manila 
as in any city of the I nited States. ^ 



« 18 • Philippines 



Professor in Government 



RUPERT EMERSON— or Dr. Rupert Emerson— has 
been director of the Division of Territories and Island 
Possessions of the Department of the Interior since May 
2. 1910. having succeeded Dr. Ernest Gruening, who was 
named Governor of Alaska a year ago. Emerson is still 
a stranger to many of those interested in Philippine and 
territorial affairs, mainly because he is a modest unos- 
tentatious figure who prefers getting work done to being 
seen. 

Secretary of the Interior Harold L. Ickes brought Emer- 
son directly from Harvard University where Emerson 
was — and is — a Professor of Government. Emerson has 
taken a leave of absence from Harvard, where he had 
taught for 13 years, to try himself at this new job. 

The Director of the Division of Territories and Island 
Possessions has administrative jurisdiction, as the func- 
tionary of the Secretary of the Interior, over the Philip- 
pines las long as the Commonwealth remains under 
United States sovereignty), Puerto Rico. Hawaii, the 
Virgin Islands, and Alaska. The exact duties of the Di- 
rector, and the exact nature of his administrative juris- 
diction are problems which are daily being worked out 
by rule-of-thumb. giving added zest and importance to 
Emerson's job. 

Before his appointment. Emerson had never held a 



public post, nor had he been 
involved in politics. He spent 
considerable time in the Far 
East, during 1932 and 1933, 
collecting material for a book 
on British administration in 
Malaya and Netherlands gov- 
ernment in the Dutch East 
Indies. The book. "Malaysia. 
A Study in Direct and Indi- 
rect Rule.** is a standard 
book on the affairs of that 
region. 

Emerson himself is a phys- 
ical stand-out because of his 




Dr. Rupert Emerson 



extraordinary height, and 
his lean and friendly demeanor. He looks very much like 
a campus figure, dressing plainly and in keeping with 
his scholastic background. He has a sharp face, a drawl, 
and the plain engaging personality of a man interested 
in people as well as in personalities. 

Starting virtually from "scratch" in Philippine affairs. 
Emerson has become extraordinarily well acquainted with 
Philippine politics and economics, and now plays a vig- 
orous role in Insular developments in W ashington, 



Spain in the Philippines (from Page 11) 

which flourished until the Jesuits were expelled in 1768. 
In 1611 this university was incorporated into the Uni- 
versity of Santo Tomas, giving courses in medicine and 
pharmacy. The Pontifical University of Santo Tomas, 
founded by Pray Miguel de Benavides with a bequest of 
1.500 pesos, offered instruction in theology, philosophy 
and the humanities, as well as the learned professions of 
those days. The university today is the oldest under the 
American flag, and its influence throughout the centuries 
has been tremendous. 

Nor was the missionaries' work restricted to spiritual 
or literary fields. They built Manila — with their own 
hands in many cases. Chirino, recalling the work of 
Father Antonio Sedeno, a Jesuit, tells us that Father 
Sedeno not only * "moved stones by his eloquence** but 
also inspired the archbishop to build the first stone house 
in Manila. Personally directing its construction, he taught 
the natives to hew stones, to burn lime and to plan build- 
ings. So popular did he become because of his skill and 
so anxious was he to help the people with their problems 
that practically all of his time was given to building. 
Chinese decorators and painters were hired to adorn 
churches and monasteries. The first fort constructed in 



Manila, El Guia. was done under the padre's direction. 
Largely because of Father Sederia's work, Manila today 
is. architecturally speaking, one of the pleasantest cities 
of the East. 

As for the government of the Islands, the main change 
brought about by the Spaniards was the creation of a 
strong central regime. They did not abolish the existing 
local governments. It was not Spanish policy to trample 
underfoot and completely disregard existing native ad- 
ministration, no matter how poor it was. At the head of 
each barrio or local unit was a cabeza de barangay. As 
these minor barangayes were grouped into larger units 
or towns, the former datos were elected captains and 
"little governors.** Gradually the several social classes 
were suppressed. 

The policy of the home government toward the ""In- 
dian.** whether Aztec or Malayan, was always one of great 
concern for his spiritual and material welfare. There is 
no doubt that some governors disregarded completely 
the famous Leyes de Indicts I Laws of the Indies), but 
most seem to have done their best to improve the condi- 
tions of the native. Santiago de \ era. one of the most 
enlightened Philippine governors, commissioned Father 

(Turn to Page 23) 



February, 1 94 1 • 19 • 



Filipino Women Make IS etc World (from Page 14) 

the Philippines. Their stories are the history of the 
feminist campaign in the Islands, and their achievements 
are those of all Filipino women. 

No one in the Philippines has worked harder for the 
poor than has Asuncion Arriola Perez, executive secretarv 
since 1923 of the government-supported Associated 
Charities. In recognition of her work, President Quezon 
appointed her to the official committee to study ' and 
revise the Eight Hour Labor Law. and recently Mrs. 
Perez was given a place on the National Security Board. 
She is the only feminine member of either of these groups. 
The National Unemployment Council, which she organ- 
ized, was forerunner of the National Unemployment 
Board (now called the National Relief Administration). 

Mrs. Perez' work is not confined to social welfare. 
She contributes articles to magazines regularly and has 
written "Love. Courtship and Marriage/' a book based on 
actual marital cases brought to her attention. She lec- 
tures on social work at the University of the Philippines 
and at the Union College in Manila, and is an active 
leader of the feminist movement. Mrs. Perez is the wife 
of the director of the Bureau of Science Library and is 
the mother of three children. 

In 1936. Mrs. Perez represented the Philippines at the 
National Conference of Social Workers at Atlantic City, 
and the same year she made a study of social conditions 
among Filipino laborers in America. On this trip she 
also represented the Methodist Chuch of the Philippines 
at the General Conference of the Methodist Church in 
Columbus. Ohio. 

A militant suffragist, leader of half a million Filipino 
women in the suffrage plebiscite, president since 1931 of 
the National Federation of Women's Clubs, an efficient 
housewife and the mother of five children — these are a 
few of the accomplishments of Pilar Hidalgo Lim. Genial 
and energetic. Mrs. Lim has become as prominent as 
her husband, Brigadier General Vincente Lim of the 
Philippine Army, the first Filipino to be graduated from 
West Point. 

An honor graduate from the State University in 1913. 
Mrs. Lim spent 10 years of quiet married life before she 
accompanied Major Lim to the United States in 1924. At 
that time she distinguished herself by a series of lectures 
before American women's organizations. On their return 
to Manila, Mrs. Lim became active in club work and in 
1931 was elected president of the National Federation 
of Women's Clubs, a post to which she has been re-elected 
five consecutive times. 

It was during her third term that the women's suffrage 
drive reached its climax. Mrs. Lim headed the National 
Council of Women which mapped the 1937 plebiscite 
campaign; she and other leaders stumped the provinces 
and remote towns to appeal to the feminine population. 
As a result, the suffragettes polled 447,725 votes, greatly 
exceeding the number required by the Constitution. 

But this was only the beginning. Mrs. Lim. through 




Mrs. Perez Mrs. Lint 



her 900 women's clubs all over the Philippines, under- 
took feminine political education, too. She and 1km* help- 
ers organized nursery classes, set up diet kitchens to 
train housewives, established homecraft classes and began 
a sweeping campaign against illiteracy, sending teachers 
into the field to instruct illiterates. Now, the NFWC is 
training women in a wide variety of "emergency" activ- 
ities, such as first aid and home hygiene, making band- 
ages, sewing clothes, child nursing, food conservation, 
and recruiting for volunteer work. 

For organization work and administrative ability. 
Josefa Llanes Escoda is supreme. She organized the first 
Boys' Club in 1937, initiated a National Girls' Week in 
1936 and founded the Girl Scout Movement of the Philip- 
pines. 

As field secretary of the Anti-Leprosy Society and as 
social organizing secretary of the anti-tuberculosis sec- 
tion of the Bureau of Health, Mrs. Escoda has visited 
almost every corner of the Philippines. She organized 
the first leper rehabilitation service for the Philippine 
Anti-Leprosy Society in 1929.; a report on her findings 
was considered most important by the Leonard Wood 
Memorial. 

Mrs. Escoda is never without friends. A year ago. 
while abroad to study Girl Scouting, she charmed many 
an American audience with her talks on the Philippines. 
On her return she organized the Girl Scout Movement 
of the Philippines, which was incorporated and chartered 
in May, 1940, by the National Assembly. She is presentlv 
training a corps of leaders who will organize troops in 
all parts of the Philippines. 

Largely through her ability as an organizer, the 
NFWC has steadily grown in scope and activities. Mrs. 
Escoda is still connected with the Bureau of Health as 
editor of the Health Messenger, and she maps annual 
child health day celebrations in the Philippines. She is 
a member of the Textbook Board and the only woman 
member of the advisory committee of the Community 
Assemblies for the Promotion of Adult Education. But 
her life ambition is to organize Girl Scout troops 
throughout the Philippines. Despite her activities, how- 
ever, this petite woman still keeps an attractive home for 
her husband, Antonio Escoda. a Manila newspaper man. 
and two lovely children. Antonio Jr. and Maria Teresa.^ 



® 20 o Philippines 



The Story the Magazines Missed 




Samuel (laches 



(from Page 9) 

merit. Diesel engines (chiefly 
American) at Insular mines 
raised t h e d e m a n d for 
fuel oil to $2,641,506 that 
year. Altogether, the Philip- 
pines ranks as one of the best 
overseas markets for Ameri- 
can motor vehicles and 
equipment, and as one of the 
best gasoline and oil mar- 
kets except under the extra- 
ordinary opportunities of 
war. 



The Commonwealth is America's premier overseas cus- 
tomer for cotton textiles, too. Approximately 300,001) 
acres of Southern land are required to furnish the raw 
cotton used in the production of textiles and thread sold 
every year in the Islands. The demand for the finest 
cotton fabrics grows alongside the purchases of such 
staple goods as sheetings, khakis, denims and prints. 

Philippine imports of iron and steel products — chiefly 
from the United States— top $1,000,000 a month. They 
totaled $12,471,058 during 1939. The trend is steadily 
upward. In common with all Commonwealth trade, it is 
strictly on a cash basis; no forced exchanges, blocked 
currency or barter deals complicate this commerce with 
the Philippines, whose public works program is construc- 
tive and substantial. 

American flour sales to the Philippines last year took 
the output from an estimated 310,000 acres of wheat 
land. The total was 4,076,769 bags, with an invoice 
value of $2,638,510. American flour used in the Philip- 
pines fully loads ten 10,000-ton ships a year. Cargoes of 
thousands of tons arrive at Manila and Cebu at frequent 
intervals. Growth in the number of bakeries is large, both 
in Manila and in the provinces. The Islands form Amer- 
ica's best wheat-flour market overseas, and the demand 
promises to grow. 

The same is true of electrical goods; the Philippines 
buys 85 per cent of its requirements of such material 
from American factories. Sales came to $2,444,000 in 
1936, $3,534,000 in 1937, and $3,259,000 in 1938. Im- 
ports in 1939 were invoiced at $3,824,921 and came 
mainly from American factories. 

Insular industry has been featured by a growing use 
of power in small factories. Home building is active in 
the Philippines, increasing the demand for electric lights. 
The country has more than 50,000 licensed radio receiv- 
ing sets and four broadcasting stations — three in Manila 
and one at Cebu. 

Popular American cigarettes, sold in every Philippine 
town and village, pay only Philippine revenue taxes and 



therefore are cheaper than they are in the I nited States. 
Consequently the Philippines (although it consumes 
millions of domestic cigarettes) bins more tobacco 
products from America than it sells to the United States. 
The Islands are, in fact. America's leading overseas mar- 
ket for cigarettes, cigar leaf and plug tobacco. 

America furthermore finds in the Philippines a good 
market for canned sardines, pilchards, salmon and mack- 
erel. Transpacific imports in 1939 included 22.589 cases 
of canned mackerel, three times as much as Japan sold. 
Of sardines and pilchards, America sold the Philippines 
215.649 cases in 1939. against 40,854 cases from Japan 
and 7,102 from Europe. Thus the American business was 
more than live times Japan's, and about 30 times 
Europe's. The tariff (from which American goods are 
exempt) is low: business is competitive. 

The Philippine milk market is a good one and it is 
rapidly expanding. Some 88.000 cases of evaporated milk 
were imported in 1921; 1939*s figure was 737.280 cases 
— nearly eight and a half cans in 1939 for each can in 
1921. In the interim, single year increases were more than 
45 per cent. As the country lacks succulent meadow- 
grasses for dairy herds, imports of milk seem sure to con- 
tinue indefinitely in larger and larger annual shipments. 
The same is true of canned foods generally. The Filipino 
has become one of the American grocer s best customers. 

The Philippines buy $120,000 worth of fresh fruits 
and nuts abroad every month. Most of this Si. 440. 000 
annual business is with California and the Pacific North- 
west. New highways and commercial truckli nes have made 
American apples and oranges staples in shops through- 
out the provinces. They are stocked in every town. Grapes 
are in the same demand. Thanks to refrigerator ships and 
cold storage facilities in Manila and Cebu. this fruit 
reaches Filipino customers in prime condition. 

American meats sold in the Philippines in 1939 were 
invoiced at $526,637. A typical single order of pork — 
whole carcasses frozen and shipped in cold storage — 
placed by a Manila butcher shop meant the sale in some 
mid- western town of four carloads of 250- pound hogs. 
Such orders are frequent throughout the year; despite 
the increasing production of both beef and pork in the 
Philippines, the demand for prime American meat in- 
creases. 

The quantity of canned meat bought annually in the 
Philippines probably still exceeds that of fresh meat, 
however. The growth of such industries as mining has 
given the business a material fillip, as has the cosmopoli- 
tan life of Manila. 

American trade in the Philippines runs wholly on its 
own power, without governmental loans or subsidiaries. 
Because it has increasing population behind it. this com- 
merce comprises one of the lew bright spots in the for- 
eign trade of the United States. That is the stor) the 
magazines forgot.^ 



February, 1941 • 21 • 



Blast Furnaces Needed (from Page 6) 

per cent. The result is an alarming increase in ocean 
shipping charges, which in turn means a serious cut in 
the mine's profits. 

Although exceeded in potential importance by the 
Surigao deposit, the operations of the Samar Mining 
Company are today the largest in the Commonwealth. 
Approximately 170.000 tons was produced in Septem- 
ber, 1940. Since operations started in February, 1938, 
the entire output has gone to Japan under contract. 

Geologically speaking, Samar Island is only half ex- 
plored, even today, so it is not surprising that the dis- 
covery of commercial iron deposits had to wait until 
1934. When investigation showed an immediate reserve 
of about 1,800,000 tons of hematite ore, averaging 60 
per cent iron, development work was organized at once. 
Operation is relatively simple and inexpensive, being 
accomplished with open cuts, a short railroad and end- 
less-belt conveyor that drops the ore directly into the 
hold of the ship that carries it to the blast furnace in 
Yokohama. 

Another important working deposit is at Larap, near 
the prosperous Paracale gold mines in southeastern 
Luzon. Repeated efforts to develop this property have 
given Larap a peculiar international history. In 1918, 
Japanese interests obtained a lease on part of the area 
and mined nearly 50,000 tons before the post-war col- 
lapse of steel prices terminated operations. Then, in 1923, 
a Chinese mining company hired F. R. Tegergren, a 
Swedish geologist, to make a survey. Although his report 
was favorable, the Chinese did not follow it up, so Teger- 
gren made a second survey in 1930. His report this time 
resulted in the organization of Philippine Iron Mines, 
Inc., by American industrial interests. 

October shipments to Japan from Larap totaled 31,000 
tons. Ore, which occurs in "lenses" ranging in thickness 
up to 60 feet, contains more than 85 per cent of iron and 
consequently commands a comparatively good price. 

Insular Mines shipped 30,850 tons to Japan during 
October, an increase of about 5,000 tons over the pre- 
vious month. This mine more than doubled its output 
in 1940. Similarly, Gold Star Mining reported a steady 
increase in its shipments throughout the year. However, 
October exports came to only 12,000 tons. Both of these 
latter mines are new developments and additional ore 
resources are constantly being discovered. 

The outlook for Philippine iron miners is not rosy, 
despite the ease with which they can sell their output. 
The price they can get from Japan is not high fit aver- 
aged about $2.25 a ton last year) : return is further 
reduced by the necessity of paying shipping charges on 
the 1,500 to 2.000-mile haul to Kokura or Yokohama. 
There is no other practical market for the present. North 
China might be interested at some future date, but not 
today. 

The Commonwealth itself is almost out of the ques- 
tion. Not only is the demand for the hypothetical output 
of an Insular steel industry unimportant, but there is 



no good supply of the coking coal so essential for the 
operation of blast furnaces. 

For more than a century, it is true, small smelters 
have been operated in the vicinity of Angat and San 
Miguel, Bulacan Province. A few are still at work, pro- 
ducing native-style plowshares and points of cast-iron. 
But they constitute the only local utilization of Insular 
ore. If these operations have proved anything, it is that 
a Philippine iron and steel industry will require millions 
of dollars to establish. 

But the Commonwealth is not without those anxious 
to try. The suggestion has been made that hydro-electric 
resources be exploited to provide power for smelters, as 
is done to some extent in Japan. One mining official has 
proposed that the Commonwealth take the initiative, 
utilizing Maria Cristina Falls in Lanao Province, Min- 
danao, as a source of cheap power. The lowest electric 
rate prevailing in the Islands at present is about tw r o 
cents per kilowatt; proponents of this plan believe a 
Maria Cristina Falls plant could produce power for about 
2/3 of a cent. 

Even without electricity, the project may not be im- 
possible. In the Mambulao district of Camarines Norte 
Province, gold mine officials overcame a difficult prob- 
lem in refining bulky gold-and-copper ore by erecting 
their own smelter. The resulting drastic reduction of 
shipping costs made it possible to market the output suc- 
cessfully in the United States. Similarly, in the event 
that blast furnaces were erected to handle Philippine iron 
ore, an economic market for pig iron might be found in 
the Western Hemsiphere. Eventually, however, a native 
steel industry would be necessary to absorb the pro- 
duction. 

For the predictable present, however, the Philippine 
iron miners are helpless. Either they must continue to 
dispose of the output in Japan, or they must close down 
their plants, discharge their workers and go out of 
business, -jr 



TrlE national finances of the Philippine Islands are 
administered under a budgetary system instituted in 
1917, which antedates by several years the budgetary 
system of the United States. 

• • • 

LONG before Magellan came to the Philippine Islands 
in 1521, the Filipinos had established social and com- 
mercial contacts with the peoples of China, Japan, Borneo, 
the East Indies and India. 

• • • 

TrlE Philippine Islands lie in the Pacific Ocean, slightly 
north of the equator. They can be reached from Cali- 
fornia in 21 days by boat or 4% days by Clipper. 



• 22 • Philippines 



P. I. HEWS 



The Commonwealth Treasury eites as a healthy feature 
of Philippine finances the consistent decline in the gov- 
ernment's bonded indebtedness. During the last 11 years 
the total has fallen by nearly 827.000,000. Without de- 
ducting sinking fund payments made by the government 
annually, the total public debt in the same 11 years fell 
more than S17.000.000. The Treasurer reports that the 
total Philippine public debt as of June 30, 1940 -was 
873,153,500. Deduction of 835,970,099.72 in the sink- 
ing fund, however, leaves a net indebtedness of 837- 
183,400.28— the lowest in the history of Philippine gov- 
ernment finances. 



President Quezon recently awarded the Distinguished 
Service Medal of the Philippines to Major Hugh J. Casev 
of the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, who has been 
assistant to the Commonwealth military adviser. The 
citation lists among Major Casey s contributions: aid in 
the development of the Corps of Engineers of the Philip- 
pine Army, an original survey of the hydro-electric re- 
sources of the archipelago, and the planning and execu- 
tion of harbor and flood control projects in the Islands. 
Major Casey has been assigned to a new post at Fort 
Lewis, Washington. 

• • • 

High government officials, headed by Secretary of 
Finance Manuel Roxas and Judge Vicente de Vera of 
the Public Service Commission recently inaugurated dou- 
ble-deck bus service in Manila. The new vehicles, oper- 
ated by the Manila Motor Coach Inc., have steel bodies 
and cost $6,000 apiece. 

• • • 

The Commonwealth government has undertaken a sur- 
vey to determine the exact prospects of the Insular rubber 
industry. Both production and manufacturing will be 
investigated. Most raw rubber now used by rubber shoe 
manufacturers is imported, although the existing plan- 
tations in Mindanao export their output to the United 
States. 

• • • 

Major General Basilio J. Valdes, Chief of Staff of the 
Philippine Army, recently assured students of the Uni- 
versity of the Philippines that the military authorities 
are fully aware of their responsibilities and are doing 
everything in their power to provide an adequate national 
defense within the government s limited finances. 



U. S. High Commissioner Francis B. Savre and Presi- 
dent Quezon, accompanied by Davao and Cotabato pro- 
vincial officials, went to Parang, on Mindanao Island, 
recently to open the new Davao-Bukidnon highway. The 
road not only facilitates travel between southern and 
northern Mindanao, but also opens vast tracts of agri- 
cultural land to settlers and homesteaders. The project 
cost the National Land Settlement Administration $500.- 
000. Road construction and public land subdivision will 
be pushed in Mindanao with government aid to increase 
the number of settlers and homesteaders. 

• • • 

Spain in the Philippines (from Page 19) 

Juan de Plasencia to study and report on native social 
organization, customs and laws so that he might govern 
more intelligently. This report, when finished, was dis- 
tributed among officials charged with the administration 
of justice, so that they might base their decisions on na- 
tive customs and unwritten law. 

On the other hand, friction between the military and 
the clergy was everlasting. Letters poured into the Span- 
ish throne from the missionaries, protesting against harsh 
treatment of the Filipinos by military and civil author- 
ities. The accused would usually answer these charges 
by blaming their accusers. They complained that the 
friars were always meddling in non-religious affairs. 

"The Indian recognizes no superior but the friar, and 
he is much more attentive to commands of the friar than 
to those of the governor," Governor Dasmarinas declared 
in one of his letters. The friars for their part threatened 
to leave the Christian villages if their pow r er was taken 
away. 

The Laws of the Indies promoted the agricultural side 
of Philippine life, since governors and alcaldes (mayors) 
were required to encourage land cultivation and the 
planting of fruit trees. Most land grants definitelv stipu- 
lated that the new Spanish owner must cultivate his land 
within a certain time, or lose it. The Spaniards brought 
horses and cows from Spain and Mexico, and imported 
new breeds of cattle from China and Japan. Many plants 
that we now consider indigenous to the Philippines were 
brought from America by the Spanish. Tobacco, corn, 
cacao, cotton, pineapples, maguey, peanuts, tomatoes, and 
squash are only a few. 

The language of Spain still lives in the Islands. Several 
newspapers are published in Spanish, while Spanish cul- 
ture is perpetuated in the main church colleges, such as 
the University of Santo Tomas. directed by the Spanish 
Dominicans. The Royal Spanish Academy of Madrid has 
a corresponding branch in the Islands, the Aeademia de la 
Lengua de las Filipinas. These strong cultural ties 
wrought by the friars will endure for years, for they have 
become integral parts of the life of the people. Spain 
has good reason to be proud of her exceptional work in 
all phases of Philippine life and culture. 



February, 1941 • 23 • 



Can the Commomvealth 

Buy Public Health? (from Page 15) 

Occidental Xegros' recorded deaths occurred in the 
barrios and haciendas. Only one out of every five had 
any medical treatment whatever. On the other hand, 
less than one-third of those dying within town limits 
were without attention. 

Looking at the other end of the life span, we find 
that Silay had 1,713 births during 1939. Physicians 
attended 62 confinements, nurses 123, and midwives 443. 
The remaining 1,025 occurred with benefit of unlicensed 
midwives or were unattended. 

When, at certain points in the United States, the record 
of deaths showed that 30 per cent of the dead were with- 
out medical a-tendance, the citizens raised such an out- 
cry that the government was forced to take remedial 
steps. We in the Philippines seem to be less vocal. Verily, 
health is purchaseable. 

There is still much room for improvement in health 
matters. To prove that diligence and public spiritedness 
can get results if encouraged and supported with funds, 
we need only point to the Philippine record in particu- 
lar fields. For one thing, smallpox has practically dis- 
appeared from the Islands since 1932, although it still 
constitutes a problem in some parts of the United 
States. 

Were the average health appropriation in the Com- 
monwealth to be raised to 50 cents per capita, Filipino 
scientists feel that truly great strides could be made in 
lengthening life expectancy. More training schools for 
nurses and sanitary inspectors could be opened, per- 
sonnel could be paid better, full-time service could be 
obtained, and health work would become more attractive 
as a career. 

A step in this direction was taken recently when the 
Philippine National Assembly passed a law authorizing 
the President to create a Department cf Health, charged 
with coordinating the work of the present Bureau of 
Health, the Bureau of Public Welfare, the hospitals, the 
Nutrition Institute and similar activities affecting health 
and welfare. Philippine physicians look forward to a 
marked improvement when this branch of the government 
gets into operation. 

But our most important need is still "just a little more 
money." ^ 

• • • 

The Philippine Archipelago is composed of 7,033 is- 
lands, the largest of which is Luzon. The population of 
the Philippines is 16.356.000, which is greater than the 
combined populations of the New England states and 
California. 



Where Does the U. S. Stand 

in the Philippines? (from Page 3) 

the American flag, but Congress is morally bound t<> 
observe the terms of the Independence Compact in all 
economic and political legislation affecting the Philip- 
pines. The President of the United States is vested with 
sovereign power over the archipelago, and is authorized 
to maintain contact and observation over Philippine 
affairs through the medium of the American High Com- 
missioner, who is now Francis B. Sayre, former Assis- 
tant Secretary of State. 

The United States President has the power of veto over 
all Philippine legislation affecting currency tariffs, im- 
migration, and other matters involving international 
obligations. Should grave national or international emer- 
gency arise, the United States President has the ultimate 
power to suspend Philippine laws and act at his discre- 
tion, subject to the general legislation of the American 
Congress. 

The Department of the Interior, for its part, is charged 
with administrative jurisdiction over the conduct of re- 
lations between the Philippines and the United States 
Government. In actual practice that means exchange of 
information, communications, and contact between the 
Philippine Government and the United States Govern- 
ment. 

In general, the Interior Department acts as local "cor- 
respondent" for the High Commissioner and is the "offi- 
cial advocate" before the American people of American 
interests in the Philippines. 

This Department serves, in conjunction with the De- 
partments of State, Treasury, Agriculture, Commerce, 
War and Navy, to determine administration policy on 
Philippine questions through the medium of an interde- 
partmental committee on Philippine affairs. The inter- 
departmental committee acts to correlate the actions, 
attitudes and broad policies of the Federal government 
toward the Philippines. 

The Department of State looks after the foreign rela- 
tions of the Philippines. A division of Philippine affairs, 
under John Ker Davis, keeps close contact with the De- 
partment of the Interior and the Philippine Government 
for the supervision of this all-important phase of Philip- 
pine-American relations. 

The actual amount of detailed inter-communication and 
day-to-day exchange of affairs between the two govern- 
ments is tremendous, but the legal contacts, regardless of 
their extent, give only a fractional picture of the true 
depth of Philippine-American relations. 

We may thus easily draw a graph of Philippine- Ameri- 
can statutory relations, but the much broader picture of 
basic relations cannot be drawn within a few pages. That 
relationship is based on a community of culture, institu- 
tions, language and forms of government, and a mutual 
history for the past 43 years. Changes in legal structure 
will have very little effect upon this basic pattern, 



• 24 • Philippines 




You 
Manil 
in cell 



CIGARS of UNEXCELLED Quality 
SMOKE of UNSURPASSED VALUE 

Smoking good Manila cigars means 

enjoying the rich pleasant aroma and the sweet 
} mellow flavor of famous Philippine Tobacco, 
rown in the valleys of eternal summer and 
sunshine. 



Manufactured entirely by hand under the strictest governmental 
regulation and sanitary control, MANILAS give you more smoking 
satisfaction for the price than any other cigars on the American 
market. 

These are the reasons why MANILA CIGARS are the choice of millions 
of smokers — why doctors recommend them and connoisseurs prefer them. 

Ask for MANILAS . . . The "Peerless Cigars 



PHILIPPINE TOBACCO AGENCY 

2362 Massachusetts Avenue, N. W. 
Washington, D. C. 



