
NEARLY 400 RESIDENTS of the Tondo district of MEMBERS OF THE WOMEN'S AUXILIARY SERVICE 

Manila were transferred to prepared evacuation in Manila practice caring for a "wounded" FMi- 

centers in the suburbs within an hour during a pino soldier during recent maneuvers, 
recent practice. 




MANILA FAMILIES participate in a practice evacua- PHILIPPINE AND AMERICAN DEFENSE CHIEFS in 

Hon of crowded sections of the Philippine capital. the Commonwealth were present a! the recent 

All children were "tagged" by the Red Cross. launching of the first Island-built motor torpedo- 

boat. Mrs. Quezon was the sponsor. 




PHILIPPINE DAY at the California State Fair was celebrated in Sacramento on September 6th. 



Six Years of the Philippine Commonwealth 



An Editorial 



SlX eventful years have passed since the sweltering 
day in November. 1935. when the democratic world 
celebrated ihe inauguration of the Government of the 
Common wealth of the Philippines. Those six years have 
been full of chaos aod disappointment for manv nations. 
They have brought enslavement and death to freedom- 
loving people in Europe. They have meant hardship and 
privation to others who have escaped actual invasion, lo 
the Filipinos, those six vears have brought confusion as 
one after another of the foundation stones upon which we 
hope to build our new nation have been submerged by the 
tide oi war. The prospect is one that might easily generate 
despair in a less hardv and determined people. 

It is significant that we have not despaired, True, the 
first six years of ihe Commonwealth have brought us a 
new understanding of the responsibilities of national 
identity, and a deafer realization of its dangers, but there 
lias been little inclination to abandon the program. The 
16,000*000 Filipinos are as determined as ever to carry 
through the schedule that was inaugurated with such 
high hopes and ideals on November 15. 1935. 

It is fitting, therefore, that we pause on the sixth anni- 
versary of that history -making occasion and take stock of 
ourselves. What have w r e done with the intervening years? 
Have we made substantial progress as an enlightened 
people? How are we preparing ourselves for eventual 
independence and reliance on our ow r u resources? 

In the first place, our program of public education has 
made substantial progress under the Commonwealth. 
More Filipinos than ever before in history are attending 
schools — from kindergartens to universities and night 
classes for adults. Our rale of literacy has been climbing 
steadily to a point where we are second in the Far East 
only to Japan, We are building an ever mote important 
body of Filipino literature in English, Spanish and our 
own native dialects. In ihe cultural sense, the Philippines 
is preparing rapidly to accept its national responsibility. 

Six years have seen many economic advances, loo. 
Real progress has been made in our program to diversify 
crops and to make the Commonwealth more nearly self- 
sufficient in foodstuffs. We are beginning to manufacture 
textiles and light industrial products. Although the 
economic consequences of the war have made serious 



inroads into our commerce, we have made every effort 
to adapt our business life to the prospect of separation 
from the protected United Slates market. Admittedly, we 
have losl ground in many ways since 1939. thanks to the 
economic devastation in the wake of the war: nevertheless, 
we have gained experience and fortitude that will stand 
us in good stead in later years. 

Our progress has not been entirely material. By our 
often-expressed determination to stand with the United 
Stales in whatever course it may take in this world crisis, 
we have gained immeasurably in the spiritual sense. 
The decision has given us greater internal strength, as 
well as winning for the Commonwealth a place among 
the democratic, freedom-loving people of the world. Far 
from weakening our position in the Far East, where we 
occupy a geographical position of some peril, we have 
won the respect and cooperation of our democratic neigh- 
bors. At the same lime we have made it clear to any 
potential aggressor that we will fight for our independ- 
ence and our free institutions. The Commonwealth is 
not making the mistake of other small nations who thought 
that timidity would win immunity from aggression. 

Because of the problems we face together and which 
we are all working to solve, the Filipino people are 
min e united loda; I ban ever before. The six vears of 
the Commonwealth have given us new' confidence in 
ourselves. We are better prepared for the job of running 
our country in the democratic tradition. We see more 
clearly our national goals and ideals, and are unified in 
our determination to attain them. Our experience as a 
Commonwealth has fitted us better for the job of defend- 
ing democracy in the Pacific. 

Under the inspired leadership of President Manuel L. 
Quezon the Phili ppine Commonwealth has made sub- 
stantial progress during six years of increasing! \ difficult 
world conditions. Ahead of us we see the warning signs 
of still more serious troubles. This anniversary of [he 
inauguration of our own government, therefore, should 
be the occasion for red edi eating ourselves to the task 
that was begun in 1935. We Filipinos— 1 6.U0O.00O 
strong — will act upon our determination to find a jusL 
responsible place in the world community. Ever loyal to 
ihe United Stales and ihe democratic institutions for which 
it stands, we will press forward to onr cherished uoal. ^ 



Philippines 



Vol. 1 



(November, 19411 



Outlook on the Pacific, Dr. Ernest Gruening 

American Sovereignty, John /. Dempsey 

The Filipino Fighting Man. Colonel F. A. Blesse 
Advance in Public Health, Dr. Sixlo Y. Orosa 

Sergio Osmena 

Funds for Defense, Sebastian Ugarle 

Women and the Commonwealth, Pilar iV. Ravelo _ 
$40,000,000 Nugget, Quirico A. Abadilla 
Filipino Footnotes 
Two Flags 

The Visayan Islands, Ernesto I lustre . _ 
Philippine Air Lines 
Philippine Commerce Charts 
Critical Awakening, P. C. Morantte 



Photo Credits: Underwood and Underwood; 
Department of the Interior; U. S. Army Signal 
Corps; Fenno Jacobs from Three Lions; Palmer 
Pictures, and Blarkslmie Studios. 



Back Cover: Farad.* of historic Binondo Church, Manila. 



No. 8 

3 

4 
6 
8 
9 

_ 15 
10 

- 17 
18 
1 9 
21 
22 

_ 23 

_ 24 



^..SE e . ttW iH mvfcrfetiul. Proper 



en-flit t»r M^nr- rhili^l. 




The front of arms of the Philippine Common- 
wealth reproduced on the front cover is in 
honor oi the sixth anniversary of the in- 
auguration of the Coin in on wealth, on Novem- 
ber 15, 1935. 

In This Issue 
DR. ERNEST GRUENING, the Governor of 
Alaska, was formerly Director of l lie Division 
of Territories and Insular Possessions in the 
Department of the Interior, 

• • • 

JOHN J. DEMPSEY, Undersecretary of ifc 
Interior, is a friend of the Philippines of 
many years' standing Formerly a Congress- 
man from New Mexico, he was a member of 
the Maritime Com mission prior to his ap- 
pointment to the Interior Department. 

■ B * 

SEBASTIAN UGARTE is legal assistant to the 
Philippine Resident Commissioner in Wash- 
ington. 

• * • 

QUIRICO A, ABADILLA is director of the Bu- 
reau of Mines in Manila. 

• * * 

P. C. MORANTTE, a Filipino writer and critic 
of note, is now in New York completing S 
book on life in the Philippines. It will be pub- 
lished next year. 

o c e 

ERNESTO D. ILUSTRE is a member of the press 
relations staff of the Philippine Resident Com- 
missioner's Office, 

• • m 

DR. S1XTO Y. OROSA, vice president of the 
Philippine Medical Association, is a p**c- 
ttring physician in the city of Bacolod, Ncgros 
Occidental Province. 

• m • 

COLONEL F. A. BLESSE, after three years of 
service with the United States Army in the 
Philippines, is now attached to the Surgeon 
General's Headquarters in Washington, D- C. 



FHILU'I'IM'S t>"*>Mu+<i l,y i| M . tti ? trr l|f t \ u . pftfiijtnittC RittfcjtaiH Cm m milium t- to ilio In I sim<^, 

Kitfiurial and i'iri>ul«tiim oOic^ qt 2362 lilaflS^ttKufftttlH Avmim*-. Norihtvwi, Washington, !>♦ C. I>iMril>ulriJ 
ivitlHmi shunts Kim- red ™ lliirtl Hns* i.mttrr in Wnsliingtuii pG&l vlYivv on UtwmW K 19 JO. iVrmli No. 

5015, FrhMiil lu 0. S, A, Situirl Ulltau. fetfjlftP, 




4 



o^ie pacific 



By Dr. Ernest H- Gruening 

Governor of Alaska 




WhEN. in 1513, Balboa stood in awe and wonder 
on a Panama mountain peak and looked out upon the 
great Pacific, lie had no way of knowing it was the wid- 
est ocean upon the earth's surface. Geographers subse- 
quently established that as a fact. But it remained no more 
than a geographer's fact for centuries. 

Not until centuries later did the width of the Pacific, 
as well as its very existence, begin to play a decisive role 
in the history of the United States. Today, after 430 
years, the Pacific Ocean has been shrunk to channel 
width by the developments of history. 

Today we face the fact that our western rampart is 
not the breakers that sweep the Leaches of California 
nor even the waters that wash Waikiki. Our frontier in 
the west reaches to the China Sea. just as in the east it 
extends to the English Chan nek These are facts of both 
geography and realistic world politics. These facts haye 
been crystallized and brought home to us by the swift 
pageant of events in Europe and Asia which, we are now 
being shown, are of an identical pattern. 

The Pacific is not narrower today because a poten- 
tially hostile power has moved geographically closer to 
us. Mainly it is so because we now see that against a 
world system of aggression we cannot wait to defend 
ourselves at Hawaii, at San Diego, or at any other 
proximal point. That is exactly what aggressor nations 
want us to do. They hope to pick the lime, the place and 
the occasion for the attack. We must understand that 
purpose and prevent its real iza lion. We must not permit 
either the Atlantic or the Pacific, as broad as tliey are, 
to become our Magi not Line. 

In the west, we now look out from Alaska, from 



Hawaii, and from the Philippines upon sea and air lanes 
that might some day become roads for attack upon us. 
We have accepted a grave responsibility in undertaking 
to protect the Western Hemisphere in all of its great 
expanse. Our charge includes not only the United States, 
Canada, and Mexico, but also the long coast of South 
America, from the Panama Canal to Tierra del Fuego 
over 100,000 miles of coastline. 

It becomes obvious even to the layman that this huge 
coastline cannot be protected by a line of ships- waiting 
in territorial waters for an attack. Such a plan of 
defense is obviously ridiculous. From Hawaii we could 
not prevent an attack upon the southern coast of South 
America, for instance, or upon Alaska, or upon the 
Philippines. Static defense is a demonstrated failure. 

Defense of democracy is not a military question, but 
a human one, and there is only one answer. We cannot; 
afford to permit aggressor nations gradually and pro- 
gressively to acquire llie bases from which to attack us. 
We must not permit them to take the Philippines, he- 
cause that would make easier an invasion of the Dutch 
Fast Indies, which would facilitate the conquest of 
Australia, which in turn would give our enemies every- 
thing they need to move against South America. The 
aggressor technique is plain and open to all who will 
read. The examples of Czechoslovakia. Norway, Holland. 
Belgium. France, and all I he rest are fresh in everybody's 
mind. In the Pacific the process has been slower hut 
unmistakable — first Manchuria, then China, Hainan. 
French Tn do-China and Thai land. 

The Philippines constitutes a barrier, past which an 
aggressor must move in any further advance southward 

[Turn to Page 19} 



• 3 • 



STILL II INTEGRAL PART 

of the 



LUTED STATES" 



A lie view «f American Sovereignty 
iti Hie Philippines 

By John /. Dempsey 

Undersecretary of the Interior 
nf the United Stales 



iPP^KAT is the status of the Philippines?" 

That inquiry is received almost every day in this De- 
partment. Recent events have focused attention on the 
Commonwealth and have made it necessary to give care- 
ful consideration to the question. This is because I he 
Islands are becoming increasingly important from a 
defense standpoint and it is necessary to make sure that 
our defense efforts there are not hampered by inadvert- 
ently wording proclamations and administrative regula- 
tions in such a way that they are not effective in the 
Philippines. 

It is a fact that many people in the United States, who 
remember rather vaguely reading a few years ago about 
an Independence Act having been passed by Congress, 
are under the mistaken impression that the United States 
Government retains little or no control in Philippine 
affairs. Even well-in formed people are often confused 
on the extent of this control, and it is not surprising that 
tins is true, as even prior to the passage of the Inde- 
pendence Act in 1934 there were many unusual features 
which might mislead a casual inquirer. The people of 
the Philippines have always bad their own Customs and 
internal revenue laws, collections being deposited in the 
Insular Treasury, They have had their own currency 
and j jos Lai aj stems and our experiments with the loth 
Amendment were never ex tended to the Philippines. 

But when it comes to the question of basic sovereignly 
there has never been any doubt. President Roosevelt's 
order of Julv 20 placing the armed forces of the Philip- 
pine Commonwealth under ibe direct command of 
Lieutenant Ceneral Douglas Mae Arthur was a dramatic 
demonstration of this fact. It was a forceful reminder to 
I he whole world that Ameriran sovereignty over ibe 
Islands \\\\\ continue w il In ml modification until the da\ 



Jul> 4, 19-16— that the projected Philippine Republic 
is actually inaugurated. 

The President's action was specifically author ized by 
Section 2(a) ( 12 I of the T> din^s-MeDuflie Act of 193 U 
the famous Philippine Independence Act. This legisla- 
tion, which established I he method by which the Filipinos 
n i 11 take over the ir own government, is the general basis 
for our present-day legal relations with Manila. 

Those of us who have had n facial dealings with the 
Philippine Commonwealth and its rep resent alive in Con- 
gress, the Resident Commissi oner of the Philippines to 
the United States, J. M, Eliza hie. are fully aware of the 
close legal ties between Washington and Manila. These 
ties are generally well-defined. Many were set down 
specifically in the Tydmgs-McDufFie Act: most of the 
rest have been worked out by trial and error in the 
past six years. 

I might cite a few instances of the power over impor- 
tant Philippine affairs exercised by the United Slates as 
evidence of bur don tinned sovereignty. The calling of 
the Philippine Army into Federal service is only one 
exam pit". Mere are a few more : 

All citizens of the Philippines owe allegiance to the 
United States. 

Common wealth officials, before beginning their 
duties, must subscribe to an oath recognizing the 
supreme authority of the United Stales. 

By the terms of the Commonwealth Constitution the 
United States retains complete control over Philippine 
foreign affairs, exports, imports ami coinage. 

The righl lo expropriate properh for public uses, 
and to maintain military reservations unci armed forces 
in ihe Islands is express]) given lo the United Slates. 

Philippine legislative action must hp reported to 
Congress. 



• 4 



The Supreme Court of the Untied States has the 
right to review derisions of Commonwealth Court?. 

Tlie President ran intervene any time he thinks that 
the government u f the Commonwealth is in dangcr. 
t!iat life, property or individual liberty need protec- 
tion, or that government obligations are not being 
disebarired. 

Such farts demolish ate hcttcr tli :i 11 anything else diat 
the Commonwealth of I ho Philippines is by no means 
a foreign nation. 

No less a body than the Supreme Court of the United 
States has confirmed this relationship in legal terms. 
In the case of Cincinnati Soap Company v. U. S. in 1937. 
Mr. Justice Sutherland, who delivered the opinion of the 
CourL points out that "the sovereignly of the United 
States has not been, and, for a long time? may not be, 
finally withdrawn. So far as the United States is con- 
cerned, the Philippine Islands are not yet foreign terri- 
tory: 7 

Following the organization of the Office of Production 
Management nearly two years ago, with its first efforts 
to direct production toward defense needs, considerable 
uncertainty prevailed regarding the exact responsibility 
of the Philippines Lo the L niU'd Stales, and vice versa. 
The confusion was confounded with the passage of the 
Export Control Law, which did ttot mention the Philip- 
pines specffically. Should priorities be applied to Insular 
business? Where should I he Islands slaiul in die ^mut- 
ing of preference ratings? Should shipments Lo Manila 
be classed as exports or as domestic commerce? Should 
exports from Manila be controlled or left free? 

The solution to these questions was long in coming. 
Formal extension of the Export Control Law to the 
Islands was an important step forward. Answers were 
delayed in certain cases by the fact that many oflicials 
had never considered the Philippines seriously before. 

Gradually it is being established to the satisfaction of 
all concerned — and by "all" I include the Filipino 
people — that while the Independence Act was a prelimi- 
nary step toward the withdrawal of sovereignty, the 
Islands are still an integral part of the United Stales, 
The defense agencies of our Government in their admin is- 
ti alive procedure recognize this fact. 

It is only reasonable thai this should be so. The Islands 
are our first line of defense in the Far East. We are 
pledged to defend them and the Filipino people are dis- 
posed to support us in every possible way. We cannot 
afford to allow red tape to statu! in the way of accom- 
plishing our common purpose. On all questions which 
come up as a result of our defense program, it is the 
fixed policy of this Department to urge that the Philip- 
pines be accorded exactly the same treatment that is 
given to all other territories under the American Flag. ^ 



Three definite interpretations of preference rat- 
ing orders, designed to avoid any misconception of 
the status of the Philippines, were issued by Donald 
M. Nelson. Director of Priorities, on November 5, 
They refer respectively lo the needs of industries, 
utilities and mining companies* 

The first two bring the Philippines within the 
application of Preference Rating Orders P-22 and 
relating to priorities on material intended for 
the repair, maintenance and operation of utilities 
and industries. The third states that "mines located 
in the Philippine Islands are "domestic mines" 
within the limits of 4 the United States, its territories 
and possessions* as these terms are used" in Prefer- 
ence Rating Order No. P-56. 




LIEUTENANT GENERAL DOUGLAS MacARTHUR, 
Commander of the United States Army Forces in 
the Far East, with headquarters at Manila, symbol- 
izes America's continued sovereignty in the Philip* 
pines. The entire Commonwealth army is now a 
unit of the United States Forces. 




y H 



THE FILIPINO 
FIGHTING MAN 

By Colonel F. A. Btesse 

An Appraisal nf the Men 
Charged with Defending the 
Philippine Commonwealth 



JFVjll more than three years, it was my good Fortune 
to serve the I'nited States Army in the Philippines. M\ 
particular duty was the organization and training of a 
Medical Service for the promising young Philippine 
Army. That fact gave me an exceptional opportunity to 
see and appraise the average Filipino soldier, the man 
who today is an integral part of the United States Army 
under President Roosevelt's order calling the entire 
Philippine Army into Federal service. By the time I left 
thoSe rich islands in the Far East last Spring. I had gained 
a great admiration for the Filipino as a citizen and as a 
potential fighting man. 

Primarily, my experience taught me that the average 
Filipino xddier has a high sense of military duty. Once 
his instructions are clear, he can he depended on to 
carrj them out fully, I found little tendency to he con- 
ten! with half measures. Of course, we had to he careful 
that our instructions — delivered in English — were under- 
stood by the Filipino soldiers, whose knowledge of that 
language is often sketchy. 

Leadership is still something of a problem in the 

Philippine Army. I believe, however, that this is a 
lemporar\ condilion that time will correct. In this new 
army, il is necessary to train officers and enlisted men 
al the same lime. Leadership musl be developed through 
experience and thorough training. I have met a number 
of Filipino graduates of the I nited States Military Acad- 
emy al \\ est Point, and many from the old Philippine 
Constabulary Academy at IJaguio. who are now serving 
With their new army. In general, they are a superior 
group of officers. They are conscientious and capable 
and clearly demonstrate that, when properly trained, 
the Filipino can be developed into excellent officer mate- 
rial. Some of the others y\ ho had received their advanced 
military I raining in the Islands, either al the Philippine 
Military Academy or in the uni\ ersites. also showed 
splendid possibilities. This is especial!) true of the Philip- 



pine Military Academy, where the Curriculum, standards 
and requirements are closely patterned after the United 
States Military Academy at West Point. 

My experience left with me a great respect for the 
ingenuity of the average Filipino soldier. Time and again, 
on arriving at an overnight bivouac. I would assign an 
orderly to prepare my quarters while I supervised the 
work around camp. On my return an hour later, it Was 
not unusual to find my quarters completely set up. with 
a whole array of such minor "conveniences"' as clothes 
hangers, wash stands and even a mat beside mv bed. all 
constructed by hand from material growing around the 
camp site. There seemed to be no limit to what those 
men could produce in an emergency . 

On one occasion I turned a squad of medical enlisted 
men loose in a manuever area without special equipment 
and with instructions to do the best they could for a 
dozen "wounded" soldiers I had scattered through the 
field. Each "casualty" bore a tag describing his injuries — 
this man. a shattered leg; that one, a shrapnel wound 
in his chest, and so on. The ingenuity that these men 
showed in caring for the "wounded"* was remarkable. 
Splints, dressings, and bandages of all sorts were quickly 
fashioned out of sticks, banana leaves, jungle grass, vines 
and the ordinary soldiers' personal equipment. Within a 
very short time every one of these "patients" was in a 
condition to be transported to the nearest hospital. 

Fart of my tour of duty in the Philippines was spent 
with the famous Philippine Scouts. As the reader un- 
doubtedly knoyvs, this is a division of Filipino soldiers 
serving under American officers and has always hecn an 
integral part of the I'nited Slates Army. These men 
serve enlistment terms of three years, as compared with 
the five and a half months of training received by 
"draftees" in the Philippine Army. Partly because of 
this fact ami parti) because the Scouts have a tradition 



• 6 • 



of more than 30 years as compared to about five years 
for the national army, the Scouts consider themselves to 
be vastly superior to ordinary soldiers. One result of 
this is keen < 'om petition to fill any vacancy in the ranks 
i if the Scouls that may occur. In the usual Scout unit, it 
was apparent that the large numbers of applications re- 
ceived for enlistment were frequently disregarded* and. 
instead, brothers, cousins and nephews — even sons — of 
the men already in the ranks appeared to take the exami- 
nations for enlistment whenever vacancies occurred. 
Many of the units were proud of the way vacancies were 
passed from one member of a family to another. As far 
as I could tell, the efficiency of the Scouts did not suffer 
in the least from this practice, and the tradition prob- 
ably improved both discipline and morale. However, a 
higher educational standard was often available from 
other sources. 

In the medical units the replacement system was. there- 
fore, rearranged to include applicants of higher educa- 
tional qualities, with all vacancies filled from among 
the best qualified applicants and in accordance with an 
arranged priority. Nevertheless, in these units, when- 
ever we had a vacancy the nephew of one of our sergeants 
would appear at my door, asking to be allowed to take 
the examination. Each time I refused him because of 
lack of education, explaining that we were accepting only 
approved applications filed in the regular way, This 
applicant refused to be discouraged and appeared rou- 
tinely as each vacancy occurred. Finally, in desperation. 
I gave my consent to his taking the regular phyiscal and 
mental examination for an opening. He passed handily, 
and became one of the best soldiers I ever encountered. 

In the early days of the Philippine Army Medical 
Corps, our appropriation was not large enough to finance 
proper medical field training for the young doctors, 
dentists and veterinarians who had enrolled in the Medi- 
cal Officers' Reserve Corps. Eventually we obtained 
facilities for this training by the establishment of the 
Medical Field Sen ice School Funds not being available 
at that time, it was necessary to ask Medical Reserve 
Officers to take this six weeks' basic course of training 
without any monetary compensation at all. The response 
to this normally unattractive offer was surprising. At 
no time did we have any trouble finding enough qualified 
men for this course of training. Many of these appli- 
cants stayed on with the corps for a full year or more 
of active service as army doctors* Of course, they ben- 
efited by the experience and practice, but it was obvious 
that this was not the reason for their willingness to be 
of service. They wished to serve their country and did 
not hesitate to make personal sacrifice in doing so. Most 
of the 160,000 trainees who have passed through the 
Philippine Army since it began to function in 1936 were 
also impelled by a genuine desire to be of service to 
their Commonwealth and to the United States. My ob- 
servation was that their attitude toward compulsory 
training was, in general, excellent and morale very good. 

Perhaps in closing, I should say a few words about the 
Medical Corps of the Philippine Army- since I was pri- 



marily concerned with its organization and development. 
As is the case in most components of the Commonwealth 
defense forces, the Medical Corps is patterned after that 
of the United States Army* In a few respects, however, 
this was modified to take advantage of Philippine condi- 
tions. Each Infantry Division contains a medical bat- 
talion — there are no medical regiments. Each infantry 
regiment contains, as an integral part of its organization, 
one medical company. Medical detachments are limited 
to the smaller units. This organization was thoroughly 
tested during maneuvers with extensive evacuation of 
simulated casualties. In each case, it accomplished its 
mission efficiently* In my opinion- its organization is 
sound and, in any emergency^ will properly care for 
and evacuate its casualties. Its equipment is reduced 
to the minimum necessary and, wherever possible, this 
equipment has been produced from Philippine sources. 
Such articles as splints, litters- wheeled litters, first aid 
packets- and medical chests are reproduced locally. These 
not only meet every requirement as to standards, but 
result in a considerable saving of time and cost. 

My three years of contact with the Filipino soldier 
were happy ones for me. I felt that I was working with 
an alert and patriotic people who were genuinelv inter- 
ested in national defense. Among them I left many friends 
and I retain very pleasant memories of their kindness 
and cooperation. The Chief of Medical Service of the 
Philippine Army. Colonel Victorio Luna, and his capable 
assistant. Major Olynipia, are maintaining a high stand- 
ard of efficiency in the Medical Service. They are worthy 
examples of the highest type of experienced Filipino 
officers. I left the Islands with the conviction that in the 
Philippines we Americans are setting up a lasting monu- 
ment to our democratic way of life. ^ 




A medical unit demonstrates a Tropica! 
Ambulance during recent field maneuvers 



• 7 • 



IN PUBLIC HEALTH 

By Dr. Sixto Y. Orosa 



0_\E of the things for which Filipinos are most grate- 
ful to the United States is for the introduction and devel- 
opment of a real health service in the Philippines. The 
embers of the Insurrection were scarcely dead in July, 
1901, when the United States Government organized a 
Bureau of Health in the Islands. The function of this 
body was to stamp out epidemics, reduce infant and adult 
mortality, improve morale, and generally to promote 
the health and welfare of the Filipinos, The first Direc- 
tor of Public Health under the military government was 
L. M. Maus. who continued under the civil government 
until 1903. 

Oar public health program received its greatest im- 
petus from Dr, Victor G. Heiser, Director of Health from 
ApriL 1905 to February, 1915. During Dr. Reiser's 
administration, laws were enacted to establish a perma- 
nent income for the health service from funds contributed 
by Insular, provincial and municipal governments. After 
Dr. Heiser's retirement, Dr. Vicente de Jesus became 
Director of Health, the first Filipino to hold this posi- 
tion. The present director is capable Dr. Eusebio D, 
Aguilar. who received his medical education in the 
United States. 

From a small and modest beginning, the Bureau of 
Health has grown into one of the largest bureaus of the 
Philippine Commonwealth. Its activities reach every part 
of the Islands* The number of physicians employed by 
the Bureau as health officers for the provinces increased 
from 11 in 1904 to 393 in 1938. The total number of 
physicians under this Bureau in 1938 totaled 680. 

Cholera and smallpox, which during the Spanish 
regime and in the early years of the American occupa- 
tion were responsible for a great number of deaths, have 
been almost entirely eliminated, Bubonic plague, for- 
merly c ommon, has became a medical curiosity. 

There are, however, important health problems ahead. 
The most common diseases in 1938 were malaria, tuber* 
culositv influenza, diarrhea and enteritis, bronchitis, 
broncho- pneumonia, lobar pneumonia, dysentery and 
typhoid fever. But the fight against them is being in- 
tensified* For instance, tuberculosis is being brought 
under control by the work of the Quezon Institute for 

■ 8 • 



Tuberculosis, considered the most up-to-date in the 
Orient, and the mass examination and treatment of tuber- 
cular patients by means of four travelling X-ray units. 
Experiments in malaria control have gained recognition 
both within the Philippines and outside, and Filipino 
research in leprosy has received world-wide acclaim. 

Among the factors contributing to the progress of 
our public health program, and which have been given 
special attention, are the installation of safe water works, 
the drilling of artesian wells, the sanitary disposal of 
waste, the operation of public health laboratories in 
practically every province, extensive immunization work 
against contagious diseases, a sanitary program for the 
schools, public health education, food inspection, hos- 
pital and dispensary service, care of the insane, the open- 
ing of special clinics (maternity, child health, etc,) and 
the increase of public and general hospitals. Health 
service is rendered the public schools by Red Cross 
dentists and nurses; the United States Treasury Depart- 
ment furnishes quarantine service. 

The improvement in Philippine health conditions is 
reflected in Philippine vital statistics. The death rate has 
decreased— in 1904 it was 18-62 and in 1938, 16,53 — 
while the birthrate has increased — from 27.39 in 1904 
to 32.34 in 1938, 

From ]930 to 1938 the annual death rate of persons 
without medical attendance did not change materially, 
the average yearly rate being about 230,500. The recent 
organization of charity clinics throughout the country, 
however, is expected to extend the public health pro- 
gram greatly. The charity clinics are under the direc- 
tion of young medical graduates and are located in out- 
of-the-way barrios where there are no practicing physi- 
cians. This plan not only brings doctors to the small, 
heretofore neglected towns and villages, but also helps to 
prevent the overcrowding of the large towns with physi- 
cians. The salary is small, but the job is part-time, so 
that the "country" doctor may devote a good part of his 
lime to private practice, By the end of 1939, 470 such 
clinics were functioning. In addition, in 1939 public 
dental clinics were established with an average of three 
clinics in each province. ^ 




* As 

OSMENA 



Vice-President of 
the Philippines 



TYlE career of Vice President Sergio Osmena in the 
service of the Filipino people extends from the day in 
1896 when the revolution against Spain interrupted his 
studies in Manila under the Paulist Fathers. Too young 
to bear arms, he wrote behind a pseudonym in the liberal 
paper edited by Romero Salas. 

Sergio Osmeiia was born 63 years ago in the city of 
Cebu, of humble parents. He was educated in his early 
youth in the Seminario de San Carlos in Cebu. later finish- 
ing the secondary course in the same institution. During 
his student days in the province, he was entirely self- 
supporting, except for occasional help from an uncle. 
The story is told that young Osmena, when he came to 
Manila for his higher education, used to peddle eggs 
from Cebu in order to earn money for his matriculation. 

The lives of President Manuel Quezon and Vice Presi* 
dent Osmeiia complement each other to a remarkable 
degree, and it is impossible to dissociate one from the 
other. In the year 1894, Manuel Quezon and Sergio 
Osmena, both 16 years old, were enrolled in the University 
of Santo Tomas, at Manila. Bolh took the law course. 
Poor but brilliant, both were assisted by a grant of free 
tuition in the University. 

In those early years of scholastic companionship there 
developed between the two a friendship that was deep- 
seated; they seemed to have a premonition of a common 
destiny. The law class of 1394 at Santo Tomas Univer- 
sity was described by one professor as "the most distinc- 
tive and the most rebellious" he had ever known. 

Quezon was then and still is the man of action. Osmena 
became the calm thinker and planner, the philosopher of 
political movements which would lead his country toward 
a greater destiny. Their different natures caused Quezon 
and Osmena to become separated when the revolution 
broke out, Quezon joined the Philippine Revolutionary 
Army for the fight against, first, the Spaniards, then the 
Americans. Osmena became a revolutionary propagandist 
fighting with his pen for his country's liberty. The two 
met again eight years later, when peace was restored be- 
tween the Americans and the Filipinos. Osmena had be- 




come a crusading Manila reporter and political writer. 

With peace, neither was satisfied. Quezon, demobilized 
and penniless, found employment as a clerk in the Monte 
de Pied ad Bank. Osmena. with Rafael Pahna and Jaime 
C, de Veyra, organized in Cebu a newspaper called El 
Nuevo Din. But the main ambition of the two young men 
was to become lawyers, so they prepared themselves ac- 
cordingly. Soon Osmeiia passed the bar examinations- and 
accepted a post as provincial fiscal of Cebu. During this 
period Osmena first showed his legal caliber. An Ameri- 
can ship-owner of Cebu, who had kept a number of native 
laundry women isolated 7 was convicted through his ef- 
forts. Punishment of an American malefactor was with- 
out precedent in Cebu then, Osmena next directed the suc- 
cessful prosecution of a United States Army officer who 
had killed a municipal policeman. 

As a reward for his brilliant record as fiscal, he was 
soon elected governor of Cebu Province. As governor, 
young Osmena put down the banditry and fanatical up- 
risings that were scourging the island. On one occasion 
he went — -alone and unarmed— to the mountain hideout of 
the two bandit leaders, the Quint in brothers, and per- 
suaded them to give themselves up to the authorities. 
Through this feat, the young governor leaped from com- 
parative obscurity to national prominence. 

From Cebu, Osmena went again to Manila, this time 
to take a seat in the Philippine Assembly, the newly cre- 
ated legislative body of the Islands. Osmena was elected 
Speaker unanimously and retained the chair until 1916, 

In 1907 the party in power was the Partido Federal. 
Osmena helped organize the Partido Nacionalista as the 
opposition. In the general elections that year, OsmenVs 
party swept the country triumphantly. 

From 1907 to 1921 Osmena reigned supreme, But in 
1916, Manuel L, Quezon, fresh from his conquests in 
Washington, D. C, as Resident Commissioner and flushed 
with justifiable pride at having secured passage of the 
Jones Law, began to challenge OsmenVs power, Quezon 

( Tu rn to Page 1 9 ) 



« 9 « 



Filipino IjOomen and the Commonwealth 



By Pilar JV. Ravelo 



A PREDICT a great future for Filipino women 1 , Mrs. 
John Nance Garner, wife of the former Vice Presi- 
dent of the United States, told me in an interview six 
years ago. Mr. Garner ^vvas in the Philippines representing 
the United States Government at the inauguration, of 
the Commonwealth of the Philippines, and Mrs, Garner 
had accompanied him. 

I was reminded of Mrs. Garners prediction as I be- 
gan a resume of what Filipino women have done during 
the six years that the Commonwealth has been function- 
ing. They have advanced in almost every field. 

For instance, ministering to the needs of sick animals 
was once considered a man's job. Today, it is no longer 
a strange sight to see a woman shoeing a horse or battling 
with anthrax. Two years ago, the first three women grad* 
uates of the college of veterinary science of the University 
of the Philippines were promptly offered research posi- 
tions. All rejected the jobs; instead, they preferred active 
participation in the profession itself. 

Our women are becoming air-minded, too. Declaring 
that they were going to join the Philippine Army air re- 
serve for emergency service, 30 coeds from the University 
of Santo Tomas recently entered the Flying Club of the 
Philippines. 

"It s all right to serve as nurses, but we'd rather be 
combat fliers", these courageous girls declared. No one 
really expects them to participate in any fighting, but the 
experience of England shows that women fliers can do 
important work behind the lines, 

Philippine opposition to women in medicine is slow- 
ly waning. Women physicians have clearly demonstrated 
their competence. Where we had only a handful of women 
doctors a decade ago, today about 400 practice in all 
parts of the Philippines. Women have even been appointed 
to the Board of Medical and Dental Examiners, positions 
formerly given only to men practitioners. 

The Philippine .National Assembly is helping to im- 
prove the position of Filipino women by amending many 
of the obsolete laws unfair to women and children. Last 
year- for example, the Maternity Law came into effect, 
providing two-months maternity leaves with pay for 
women employed by the Government. A subsequent bill, 
still pending, is designed to extend the benefits of the 
Maternity Law to women employed by private concerns. 

Four years of feminine suffrage has been fruitful, Most 
of the 500 women who hold elective positions in the Com- 
monwealth have made civic and social welfare work their 
major concern. Today the Philippine? boasts of sanitary 
markets and slaughter houses, cleaner streets and better 
parks for children, water systems in almost every Lown, 
more adult eduealioiu and more hospitals and health cen- 
ters. Even unemployment has diminished because of a 



housewives 5 campaign to give every possible employ- 
able man or woman a job. 

The new emphasis on defense has not escaped the at- 
tention of Filipino women. Women, individually and in 
their many clubs and organizations, are zealously and 
effectively working on Red Cross projects, food conser- 
vation, nursing and allied services for the nation, 

Mrs. Francis Say re, wife of the United States High 
Commissioner to the Philippines, and Mrs. Manuel Que- 
zon, our First Lady, are co-chairmen of the Red Cross 
Volunteer groups. In Manila, the stately ballroom of the 
High Commissioner's residence has been converted into a 
sewing hall. Three days a week women gather there to 
prepare bandages for soldiers, to sew for evacuees and 
indigent families, and to perform other useful tasks. This 
same work is done by members of the different clubs. 
The National Federation of Women's Clubs, with its 900 
affiliated groups throughout the country, the National 
League of Women Voters, the Young Women's Christian 
Association, the Girl Scouts of the Philippines, as well 
as the coeds in public and private schools and univer- 
sities, are all participating in this important work. 

In line with the food plans announced by the Civilian 
Emergency Adminstration, Filipino women now culti- 
vate home vegetable gardens. Fruits and vegetables are 
preserved on an ever-larger scale, too. Furthermore, the 
Division of Plant Utilization of the Department of Agri- 
culture and Commerce is urging women to exploit such 
plentiful Philippine products as the coconut and cassava, 
upon which they may fall back in the event of a food 
shortage. 

Preparations are being made to take over men's jobs. 
Women are now learning to drive cars and ride bicycles; 
to plant crops and harvest them; to make ordinary house- 
hold repairs, and to perform clerical work in provincial 
and municipal offices. Simultaneously, our women are 
studying nursing and allied services. First-aid classes 
under competent doctors and health officers are now 7 be- 
ing conducted in every town in the Philippines. ^ 



MEN OF THE COMMONWEALTH 

(opposhe page) 

UPPER RIGHT: Jose Yulo, Vice President Sergio Osmeno, 

Qumt in Paredes onef Maximo NoeL 
ASSEMBLY: Jose Yulo addressing Nacionalista Parly con- 
vention, 

LOWER CENTER: President Quezon signs State papers, sur- 
rounded by Jorge Vargas, Jose Yulo, Benig- 
no Aquino, Manuel Roxas, Enrique Maga- 
iona and Vincente Stngson Encornacion, 
BORDER PORTRAITS (downward from left) ; Teofilo Sison, 
Rafael Alunan, General Paulino Santos, 
Manuel' Roxas, Quintin Paredes, Benigno 
Aquino, Jorge Vargas, Ramon Avaneena, 
Chief Justice Jose Abad Santos, 




• 13 • 



FUNDS for 
PHILIPPINE 

DEPOSES . . . 

By Sebastian Vgarte 

Fl NDS for financing Philippine defense efforts are 
involved in a hill now pending before the House of 
Representatives- Worked out by the Common wealth 
Government and the War Department in W ashington, this 
legislation is being pushed by American defense experts 
and by President Quezon, 

The object of H.R. 5825 is to make available from two 
specified funds money for the defense of the territories 
and people, of t lie Philippines. The legislation in otic part 
takes the form "f nn amendment to the Philippine Inde- 
pendence Act. 

What particular funds are involved? 

There are two sums — the Sugar Excise Tax Fund and 
the so-called Gold Devaluation Profit Fund, Together, 
they amount to some S53.000.000. Previous Congresses 
have authorized the establishment of these funds, but no 
move has ever been made actually to appropriate the 
money. 

The Sugar Excise Tax Fund began to accumulate in 
1937, when the Sugar Act authorized the Federal Gov- 
ernment to collect half a cent a pound on sugar pro- 
duced from Philippine cane and marketed in the United 
States, and to transfer the proceeds to the Commonwealth. 
The Independence Act specifically provides that this 
money can be used only "for the purpose of adjusting 
Philippine economy to a position independent of trade 
preferences in the United States and in preparing the 
Philippines for the assumption of the responsibilities of 
an independent State." The proposed legislation would 
permit the use of these funds for defense purposes. 

According to the Sugar Act, these collections will con- 
tinue until June 30, 1942. During the period from No- 
vember 1, 1937, when the Act went into effect, to De- 
cember 31, 1941, approximately §35,000,000 in sugar 
excise taxes will have been collected. Between the latter 
date and June 30, 1942, an additional $4,000-000 will 
probably accumulate. The original bill submitted to Con- 
gress by Secretary of War Stimson made all sugar excise 
tax collections available for defense, H.R. 5825 limits 
appropriations to the money received prior to the enact* 
ment of the law. 



In addition to the sugar excise tax money, the so- 
called Gold Devaluation Profit Fund is made available 
for defenses under the pending legislation. Congress in 
1934 passed a law authorizing and directing the establish- 
ment on the books of the United States Treasury, "when 
the funds therefore are made available", of a $23,362.- 
750,78 credit in favor of the Philippine Treasury, It rep- 
resented the increase in value of the gold deposits of the 
Philippine Government in United States banks when the 
weight of the gold dollar was reduced. Although author- 
ized, none of this money has been actually appropriated; 
nevertheless, several efforts to repeal the Act of 1934 have 
been blocked by Congress. 

The history of this pending legislation extends over 
approximately a year, but its basis is in the program 
of military training that the Philippine Commonwealth 
has pursued since the day of its inauguration. This pro- 
gram costs approximately $8,000,000 a year. When, in 
the summer of 1940. it became apparent that the Islands 
were facing with the United States an emergency of far 
greater proportions than had been generally anticipated, 
efforts were made to find additional funds to speed up 
this training program and to pay for material of all 
sorts. The §53,000,000 in the Sugar Excise Tax Fund 
and the Gold Devaluation Fund was the only money avail- 
able. Early this year, therefore. President Manuel L. Que* 
zon, in his annual message to the Philippine Assembly, 
declared. ~T have made representations to the W ash- 
higton authorities requesting that [these] funds . . . 
be appropriated to be spent exclusively for our national 
defense under the direction of the United States. I have 
assurances that this matter is being given serious con- 
sideration/ 3 

During July, 1941, the situation in the Pacific became 
so tense that President Roosevelt decided to use his au- 
thority under the Independence Act to call the Philippine 
Army into the service of the United States. Subsequently, 
the Commonwealth questioned the use of this money to 
pay for the maintenance of its forces called into the 
service of the United States. Upon receiving assurances 
that the War Department proposed to use the entire 
S53.000.000 for military works of a permanent nature — 
air fields, strategic roads and bridges, naval defense in- 
stallations and strategic material reserves — the objection 
was dropped, 

The Commonwealth Government's approval of H.R. 
5825 has been based on its realization of three factors: 
that all other considerations must be subordinated to the 
immediate need for adequate defense; that our financial 
resources are unequal to the extraordinary expenses which 
the present emergency demands, and these funds are the 
only ones available to us at the moment; thai most of the 
proposed expenditures would be for permanent and semi- 
permanent improvements, and that these will redound 
to the lung-term benefit of the Philippines ^ 



• 15 * 







Surface workings of a Philip- 
pine lode mine in Mindanao 





Above: lgorot miners 
operate drills in a north- 
ern Luzon gold mine. 

Left: Modern equipment 
transports gold ore to the 
surface. 

Right: Miners* homes in 
the Paracale district of 
southern Luzon. 

Lower left: Gold bricks 
are weighed before ship- 
ment to Manila, 

Lower right: The longest 
aerial tramway in the 
Orient connects the Da- 
vao Gold Mines with tide- 
water. 



Po <"ing molten gold into 
mgot molds at Baguio. 




• 16 • 



t 




SUPPOSE, in the spring of 1931, you had asked a 
competent mining engineer about the mineral resources of 
the Philippine Archipelago. He would have given you a 
pretty gloomy report. 

"Well," he would probably have drawled- obviously 
trying to make the best of a poor subject. "I hear they 
have some gold and a few base metals like iron and cop- 
per. But — so far as I know — nobody's made enough 
money out of any of them yet to buy a new hat." 

It was thought, ten years ago. that the Philippines 
had been pretty well prospected. Some important Ameri- 
can mining interests had sent scouts to the islands. l\o 
one seemed to have found anything worth a heavy in- 
vestment. Mining was not an important Philippine in- 
dustry in 1931, however you looked at it. 

True, geologists could point to the Surigao iron de- 
posits as one of the most interesting in the world, but 
no blast furnace was buying that type of ore. Manganese 
had been found at several points, but there were no mines. 
The same was true of chrome. One deposit had been found 
in Zambales Province, north of Manila, and in the first 
flush of enthusiasm over the discovery, the area was set 
aside as a special government reserve. Disillusioned at the 
low grade of the ore, however, officials released the 
deposit in 1931 and for three years no one even bothered 
to stake a claim on the property. It is typical of the 
new position of mining in the Philippines today that the 
Zambales chromite deposit is now known to he one of the 
largest arid most valuable in the world. 

At the beginning of 1930, the Philippines boasted of 
six gold mines, three of which had at one time or another 
paid dividends. The outlook was so gloomy that the Ben- 
guet Company began to liquidate its assets until only five 
cents a share remained unpaid* Citizens of Manila still 
talk about the days when a handful of gold mining stock 
bought a good cup of coffee along the Escolta! 

Ask the same mining man today what he thinks of 
Philippine mineral prospects and he will literally burs! 
into song, 

"Do you realize," he demands, grabbing you by the 
lapel, '"that in 1940 we dug $38,000,000 worth of gold 



. . . the Output of 
Philippine Gold Mines 
Every Year 

By Quirico A. AbadiUa 



out of the Philippine hills, that mining is threatening 
sugar as the pillar of our economy, and that the Common- 
wealth is the sixth most important gold-producing coun- 
try in the world? Did you know, sir, that, under our 
American flag, only California digs more gold than we 
do? Alaska? We've been ahead of that cold storage plant 
ever since 1936." 

You are justified in asking what caused this change 
from poverty to riches. Devaluation of the dollar was un- 
doubtedly a factor, although production began to increase 
several years before the gold price was raised. The re- 
lease of local investment funds due to the contraction of 
the sugar industry was also important, but again this 
followed and accentuated a movement already under way. 
As profits began to be reported and the probability of 
securing profits from other properties increased, money 
was attracted. For a time there was a roaring local stock 
market which, as is usual in new gold mining regions, 
led to unhealthy speculation and finally to deflation, all 
without any marked influence on the steady increase in 
output. By the lime the speculative fever passed, gold 
mining was well established in the Philippines, although 
several newly formed and incompletely financed com- 
panies had difficulty continuing operation. It is worth 
noting, in passing, that the new industry was almost en- 
tirely financed by local Philippine and American capi- 
tal. In contrast to most gold mining booms, little money 
came from outside. London invested a small amount and 
individuals in the United States have bought some shares, 
1 1 1 1 L nu big foreign mining house has established itself in 
the Islands and no mines are owned abroad. To a large 
extent the mines have supplied their own capital. 

The increase in the price of gold was probably the 
most influential factor in the rapid increase in gold pro- 
duction, but the adoption of advanced technique also 
played an important part. The so-called Butte system, 
calling for a daily mapping of working faces, for in- 
stance, quickly piled up geo logical data and provided 
a solid foundation for ore reserve estimates, previously 
lacking. This in turn permitted safe investment in under- 
ground development and surface plant which lowered 
costs, increased profits, and led to more prospering. 



o 17 • 



$40,000,000 iSugget 



(from page 17) 



starting an upward spiral in mining operation. 

There were other contributory factors. Mining became 
active in the Philippines when the industry was generally 
depressed elsewhere In the world. As a result, abundant 
technical talent was available for even such minor posi- 
tions as shift boss. Contrary, too, to earlier expectations, 
Filipino labor proved well adapted to mining. Patient and 
intelligent supervision built up a satisfactory working 
force much more rapidly than had been anticipated. 

As a result of all this expansion, 23 mining and mine 
management companies paid dividends aggregating $11,- 
545,797 in 1938. Three paid more than SI ,000,000 each 
and one distributed S5T00.0G0. The bulk of the profit was 
from the Baguio district, but Paracale- Masbate and Suri- 
gao also surged forward, and other minor districts were 
represented among the dividend payers. 

Philippine gold mines are generally shallow, and as 
a rule little mining has been done below 1,000 feet. There 
are exceptions, however. One is in Bala toe, where min- 
ing has continued to 2,000 feet, with workings planned 
below that level. The bulk of the gold so far mined has 
come from the type of deposit known to the geologist as 
"epithermal," characterized by richness rather than depth, 
However, this type has yielded some of the great bonanzas, 
such as that at Goldfteld in Nevada. 

In the Philippines, tonnage yielding a half ounce or 
more of gold is mined as well as some work ore containing 
two and three ounces. The veins extend exceptional dis- 
tances horizontally, the Balatoc-Itogon exceeding 12,000 
feet. Individual sloping lengths are shorter but recur- 
rent, and individual ore shoots are mined for as much 
as 1,600 feet along the strike. Ordinary stoping widths 
range from five to 20 feet, but widths up to 80 feet are 
found, 

One large low-grade mine, Masbate Consolidated, is in 
operation treating 4,000 tons a day with plans to increase 
to 5,000. Four placer mines are operated, the largest being 
the Coco Grove at Paracale on the Pacific shore of Luzon. 
Coco Grove's two modern dredges during 1939 handled 
3.793.291 cubic yards with an average value of 26 cents. 
There is one small smelter in the Paracale district for 
treating concentrates and the Lepanto Consolidated Min- 
ing Company is operating another for making copper 
matte at its property in Northern Luzon. 

Largely under its own steam, the Philippines has thus 
forged ahead among gold producing countries until to- 
day it holds a position of great importance. The change 
in the past decade has done more than bring prosperity 
to a few mining promoters. Last year, 40,000 laborers 
were employed at wages considerably above the average 
for the Commonwealth, The government received approxi- 
mate! y $3,750,000 from the industry. With ihe advent of 
independence in 1946, our new nation will have a sounder 
financial basis because of its great expansion in mining — 
this despite the gloomy outlook in 193L it 




The first popularly accepted description of the Fili- 
pinos by a ''foreigner' 5 was written in 1250 by a Chinese 
geographer named Chao Ju-kuo. However, the Oriental 
Library at Tokyo has found that a Chinese, Ma Tunn-Lin, 
wrote about "the country of Ma it [now known as Min- 
doro], some people of which came to I he coast of Kuan- 
Chou [Canton] with goods and treasures on board, in 
the 7th year of T'ai-p'ing-hsing-kuo [a,d. 982]." 

• • * 

OFFICIAL reports of the Philippine Labor Depart- 
ment estimate that approximately 4,037.000 persons are 
actively employed in the Commonwealth. In the face 
of our country's present population of some 16,000,000. 
that indicates that 11.963,000 Filipinos are living off 
their relatives. At least, we have no bread lines. 

• mm 

Our forefathers used to employ the John Alden method 
of proposing marriage. The best friend of the prospective 
groom was sent to the girl's house to make the proposal. 
Carrying a spear which he thrust through the ladder at 
the girFs house, the "best man" offered her a dowry as 
well as promises, and explained his mission not only to the 
girl but also to her father. If her father accepted, a wed- 
ding day was set. An old woman administered the marital 
oath. At the wedding feast, relatives of the bride were 
guests, whereas those of the bridegroom acted as hosts 
and hostesses. In entering her new house, the girl was 
carried on the shoulders of the men (not the bride- 
groom J . Inside, she was waited upon by the bridegroom's 
father and close relatives* Not until she had been offered 
a present by the bridegroom's father, would she sit or eat 
or enter her nuptial bed. 

• mm 

Unlike the system in America, Philippine traffic fol- 
lows the Continental pattern. Since vehicles move on the 
left side of the road, the steering wheels of Philippine 
autos are on the right side. Gears are shifted with the 
left hand. But Filipino pedestrians are as individualistic 
as New York's "stupidestrians " 

• mm 

X HERE arc a number of theories about the origin of the 
80 catalogued Filipino languages and dialects. Some trace 
our tongue back to Sanskrit, others to Malayan, For what 
it may be worth, we offer to researchers the following 
words which share a certain commonness with Hindu- 
Malayan-Aryan-Indiau-pure Sanskrit-Chinese-Polynesian : 
hukiun (judgment or decision); champaha (a kind of 
flower); pwasa (fast); tao (man or figure of being); 
nana or nanay (mother!; ulan or uran (rain); saksi 
(witness) ; hart or jajji (head or chief). 



• 18 • 



TWO FLAGS 



w HEX EVER Un- flag of the 
Philippine Coiumnonwcalth is 
im furl pel in the Far Eastern winds, 
the Stars and Stripes, represent- 
ing the United Stales, which still 
exercises sovereignty over the 
Islands, flies above it. BuL al- 
though it enjoys no independent 
life yet, the Philippine Rag is of 
near half a century standing; 

The Philippine flag assumed its 
present form (except for minor 
modifications I early in 1898, when 
it was designed and adopted by the 
Inula Patriotica. a council of exiled 
Filipino leaders in Hongkong. Af- 
ter the Baltic of Manila Bay. Gen- 
eral Emilio Aguinaldo. leader of the Filipino Army, re- 
turned to Manila. On June 12. 1898* the Hag which he 
had brought with him was unfurled over the Philippines. 

During the first years of the American occupation 
<>f the Philippines, displaying of the Filipino flag 
aroused so much excitement that, in 1907, the Philippine 




Commission was forced to pass a 
Flag Law which forbade its dis- 
play even in native homes. From 
1908 to 1919 there was great agi- 
tation for the repeal of the Flag 
Act. A ietory came when a bill of 
repeal was signed by Governor 
General Francis Harrison on Octo- 
ber 22. 1919. This date, in effect 
marked the recognition of Filipino 
nationality. 

The colors and designs of the 
Philippine flag are symbolic. The 
red. white and blue- which are pre- 
dominant, were adopted in honor 
of the United States. The three 
stars represent the union of Luzon, 
the Visayas and Mindanao- the three major regions 
of the Philippines; the eight rays of the golden sun 
stand for the provinces of Manila. Bulaeam Morong 
iRizal). Laguua. Pampanga. Neuva Eeija. Baton gas and 
Gavile- — where the first battles against Spain took 
place, it 



Outlook on Pacific (from Page 3) 

and eastward . Despite the technical difficulties of defend- 
ing Lh e Philippines— and they are being repaired — it is 
essential that Lhe Islands be defended. We cannot yield 
the Philippines to an aggressor without giving him an 
added weapon against ourselves. That is imperative 
today. There will be time when peace is reestablished to 
return our minds to purely political objectives. 

President Manuel Quezon and the Filipino leaders well 
recognize the real factors of the situation. They know 
their interests today are identical with our interests. They 
cannot look forward io real independence in a world 
where small nations exist only at the temporary pleasure 
of aggressive, greedy neighbors. The Filipinos liavc re- 
iterated their loyalty to the American flag, which is 
proof to Axis nations that the perils of democratic life 
are preferable — to one people, at least— to being under 
totalitarian '"protection." 

In Alaska, a growing military development has made 
it possible for this Territory to play its proper role in 
the defense of the Pacific. Today there is general realiza- 
tion that the United States must be defended from Alaska, 
from Hawaii, and from wherever else is necessary, 
Alaskan residents, who include a considerable number 
of Filipinos, will do their part in whatever dangers may 
come as a result of our enlarged role in national defense. 
People of every locality, territory, or nation must realize 
al last that the defense of one is the defense of all. ^ 



Sergio Osmena (from page 9) 

organized the Collectivist Party, which, after five years of 
rivalry, won the election of 1922. 

Despite this apparent opposition, however, the Quezon - 
Osmena alliance continued until 1932. when it split on the 
bitter controversy over the merits of tile Hare-Hawes- 
Cutling law. This was the first Philippine Independence 
Act. which passed the House of Representatives in 1932. 

Osmena supported the measure; Quezon fought it. Os- 
mena broke away from the Nationalists Consolidado 
Party, of which Quezon was boss. The strife lasted three 
years. During that period the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law 
was rejected by the Filipinos- But. after all, the two dif- 
fered only on methods, not on fundamental principles. 
A new coalition was proposed. They got together again 
and have worked harmoniously for the good of the nation 
ever since. 

When the first Commonwealth elections were held in 
1935. Manuel Quezon was chosen President and Sergio 
Osmena, Vice President. They are running for reelection 
in the national polling November 11, 

For more than five years now Osmena has discharged 
the duties of his office with distinction. He has always 
been a valuable adviser to the President, an active cob 
labor ator in the successful prosecution of governmental 
affairs. Fie embodies the ideas of a great statesman, and 
is reluctant to jump al quick conclusions without careful 
deliberation, it 



» 19 * 



USA Y A S ISLANDS 



SI <p \I8 BOWL 

THE PHILIPPINES 




w. 



IIKV on March l(>, 1521. Ferdinand Magellan* fffter 
crossing the broad Pari lie Ocean froni South America, first 
sighted tlit 1 little islet of Hnmonhon at the southeastern 
lip of Samar in the renter of live Philippine cluster of 
islands, he thought that lie was al the end of his long 
voyage to discover the wealth of the Indies. Unfortunate- 
ly, Magellan did not live to enjo\ the rewards of his cour- 
age arid daring. Nor did lie ever know thai the lands he 
discovered were not part of the fa hid o us Spice Islands, A 
little over a month after he brought his galleons into the 
liar Ivor of present -day Cehu_ Magellan lost his life in a 
ha tile with the natives of Maetan Island, just a few r miles 
away, A monument iodav marks the spot w r herc the first 
man to cross the Pacific died. 

Historians and economists who enjoy analyzing the 
14 ifs" of history feel that, had Magellan lived and known 
that the islands he discovered were not part of the Indies, 
he would have been just as glad. For these islands, part 
of what we now call the Visayan group, were already 
noted, as they are now. for the fertility of their soil and 
the industry of their people. For the next three centuries 
they contributed not a little to Spain's pro liable Aeapuleo 
galleon trade that shuttled yearly between the Philippines 
and the western coast of Mexico, 

Today the Visayan group, with a total land area al- 
most six Limes greater than the whole Territory of Hawaii, 
is not only the most densely populated section of the 
Commonwealth, but also is so fertile that it is often 
called the "granary of the Philippines," From its well- 
cultivated farms come corn, tobacco, abaca I hem])), rice, 
peanuts, bananas, mangoes and pineapples. Even more 
important, more than 75 per cent of Philippine sugar ex- 
ports during; main years of the past two decades has 
originated in the Visa) as. This, despite the fact that actual- 
ly only a small percentage of the land is tilled. In many 
places, particularly in Samar and Leyte, jhree-quarters 
of | he land is covered with virgin forest and dense jungle. 



By Ernesto D. I lust re 



Samar — the fourth largest island in the Archi- 
pelago — has the distinction of being the lirst of the 
7.063 Philippine Islands on which the Spaniards 
set fool. Its rugged landscape, dominated by wild 
forest -el ad mountains, gives Samar a forbidding 
character. Samar is still largely undcr-de\ 'eld] >ed_ 
except in the immediate vicinih of the towns that 
fringe its coasts. 

Nearby Le\ le. one of the largest and most fer- 
tile in the Visayan group, is a hemp and coconut 
( enter. It also abounds with mineral deposits. Coal, 
asphalt. oiL gold, iron and sulphur are also found. 
Prosperous Cebu Island is one of the most important 
hemp centers in the Philippines, Cebuanos— noted for 
their industry and thrift — grow extensively such tropical 
commodities as coconuts, sugar cane, hemp, bananas, 
pineapples, mangoes, tobacco and corn. The capital of the 
province, Cebu City, is the metropolis of the \ isayan 
Islands and the oldest European city in the Philippines. 
Here Magellan made his first converts to Christianity, The 
harbor, an important center of inter-island and export 
trade, is proLectecl from storms by the island of Maetan* 
Iloilo City, in the island of Pa nay, ranks next to 
Manila as a port of entry for foreign commerce. Located at 
the mouth of the Iloilo River, it is famous for its pine- 
apple-fiber cloth, pottery, shell articles, cutlery and cigars, 
The island of Negro s is the sugar-bowl of the Philip- 
pines. Its two provinces. Txegros Occidental and Negros 
Oriental, produce over 75 per cent of the sugar exported 
annually In the Philippines to the L nited States. The 
capital of Negros Occidental. Baeolod. is a miniature 
American city with neatly la id -out and paved streets, 
stately buildings and modern go\ ermnental offices, 
Dumaguete. the capital of Negros Oriental, is the seat 
of Silliman University, founded in 1901 with a gift from 
Dr, Horace B, Silliman of New York, The famous school, 
alma mater of many present-da\ Filipino leaders, is main- 
tained by the Presbyterian Roard of Foreign Missions. 

Masbate Island boasts of a ric h gold mine, the only 
open-cut gold deposit in the Philippines, The Arrorov 
district, in northwestern Masbate, contains one of the 
largest gold ore reserves in the Co mmou wealth. Cattle 
ranching is also carried on here on an extensive scale, -fa 



'Hi?" map ol the Visayan Islands im pa-ic 21), a 
companion hi lire scciiim published in VnL L No, 7. 
was rl i awn specially for Piiilitpivks by Frank 
Manning, Mindanao will he picimrd lain\ 



• 21 • 



Trails in The South Pacific Sky 

Philippine Air Lines Reports on Its First Six Months 



j^ ERIAL transportation in the Philip- 
pines made an important advance in 
February, 1941 when a group of Manila 
businessmen decided to create Philippine 
Air Lines, Inc., a corporation to develop 
passenger- mail and express package 
transportation throughout the Common- 
wealth. Operations were inaugurated 
on March 15 and have continued with- 
out interruption since then. 

A six- times- a- week run from Manila to Baguio, the 
Philippines 7 famous mo Lin tain resort and one of the 
most important gold mining centers in the Islands, and 
a three-runs-a-week service to the towns of Paracale, 
\aga and Legaspi in Southern Luzon were the first to 
he undertaken. Thus, Manila was linked more closely 
to two important mining districts and to two of the most 
progressive provinces in the country, 

Philippine Air Lines services were popular from the 
start, due to the saving of time involved. Ordinarily, 
the trip to Baguio by railroad and bus requires eight 
hours; the P.A.L. ships cover the distance in 45 minutes. 
The journey to Paracale and Legaspi lakes almost a full 
day by railroad; with P.A.L. service, Paraeale is only 15 
minutes from Manila, and Legaspi is 90, 

The success of the two first schedules induced P. AX. 
to increase its fleet. Within a month of the inauguration 
of service* a new plane was received from the United 
States, P.A.L. is now planning additional routes to the 
sugar districts, to the tobacco provinces and to Moroland. 
More planes have been ordered and will be put in opera- 
tion as soon as they are delivered, the necessary govern- 
ment permits having been obtained already. 

The P.A.L. lines in operation at present, besides serv- 
ing the resort city of Baguio , Paracale, reborn during 
the gold mining boom, and Legaspi, at the base of beauti- 
ful ML May on. also reach Cebu, the oldest town in the 
Ph ilippines, founded by Magellan, Mash ate, in a very 
rich mining district, and Taclobam an important market 
for copra. The Jines in preparation will link Manila with 
Pehnonte and its rich pineapple plantations. Davao, the 
hemp capital, and fertile Cotabato, all in the rich island 
of Mindanao. Soon, thanks to P. AX., all these towns- — 
scattered among the 7,000 islands of the Philippine 
Archipelago — will be on the outskirts of Manila, 

A resume of the activities of P.A.L. in its first six 
months of operatitm shows [he great improvement Ms 
services means to passenger, mail and express transpor- 
tation in the Philippines, The statistics show lhat P.A.L. 
planes made Ml hips during those six months, carry- 
ing 2*295 passengers In all parts of the Philippines, and 
rovcring I 27. 1 III miles in 3*J4 living hours. The ManiJa- 
liaguio route i\as liisl ivilh LI 20 passengers and 211. 
trips. Miles covered totaled 53, H10, and hours Noun. 




191. The others showed: 

Manila- Paracale -Legaspi route: pas- 
sengers, 907; Lrips, Ml; mileage, 
49.2*2; hoius flmvu, 317. 

Manila-Cehu mute (20 da\s of opera- 
lion): passengers. I 10; Lrips. 17; mile- 
age, 7-524; hours flown. 17. 

Chartered Lrips: passengers, 119; 
trips, 42; mileage. 15,921: hours 
flown, 104 

Most of these chartered trips were to meet emergen- 
cies. In some cases doctors, special serums ami medical 
supplies were: down to distant mining camps or eilies. 
On others, injured workmen or sick persons were carried 
to Manila for hospitalization. Maritime accidents were 
also attended to. P.A.L. planes were used to spot the 
exact position of grounded ships or to carry specialists 
and crews in salvage operations. 

Hie Philippine Air Lines operates with twin-motored 
Beech craft planes, manned hy experienced pilots and 
co-pilots, who are in constant contact with their base 
through two-way radio* Pilots arc former members of 
the United States Army and Navy Air Corps and the 
Philippine Army Air Corps. P. I. Gimn, a veteran of 
naval and commercial aviation, is chief pilot and opera- 
lions manager. He is assisted by H. 0. Lott, formerly 
chief pilot for Western Air Express Co., Colonel Arnaix. 
hero of the Manila-Madrid flight, and Lieutenants Ramos 
and Tirona, outstanding officers of the Philippine Army 
Air Corps. 

Philippine Air Lines rates compare closely with charges 
made by American airplane companies. The 45-minutc 
flight from Manila to Baguio. for instance, costs SI 2.50; 
a ticket from Manila to Cebu costs 835. 

Previous to the appearance of P. AX., a number of air 
services had been organized and operated in the Philip- 
pines. The first such venture was stalled in PJ.TI. Operat- 
ing and financial difficulties, however, resulted in ihe 
abandonment of all earlier services, 

Philippine Air Lines is a Filipino corporation, with a 
well-known Filipino businessman, Ramon Fernandez, as 
president. Manuel Elizalde of Elizalde & Co. is first vice 
president; John SehuUz is second vice president and treas- 
urer. The company is managed by A. Soriano y Cia., with 
administrative offices at the Soriano Building in the heart 
of Manila's business section. Traffic and operating offices 
and workshops are situated at the Nielson Airport, on the 
outskirts of the capital. ^ 



The graph id report of Philippine trade on page 23 
will be brought up in date For each future issue. 
Figures are ihe latest available two weeks befure 

publication. 



22 



Total Philippine Commerce for Five Month Period 

January-May, 1939-1940-1941 



^L^iUr EACH COMPLETE 


SYM60L » 


$10,000,000 












IMPORTS 


COUNTRIES 




1939 






1940 




1941 






$24, £65,605 




64 £0% 


$47,352,375 




78.90% 


$43,787,372 
' ^^^^J ^^^^ ^ 


80,68% 
■ ■ y 


UNITED 
















STATES 


















ORIENT 


$ 7,498.495 

Ufa 




19.84% 


$ 8,263,029 




13.77% 


$ 8,815, 470 

ub 


16.24% 


EUROPE 


$ 4,976,252 




13.17% 


$ 3,025, 552 

k 




5.04% 


$ 975,399 


1.81% 


OTHERS 


$ 1,057, 107 




2. 79% 


$ I, 375, 249 

J 




2.29% 


$ 694,34 6 


L2B% 


TOTAL 


$37,799,459 


$60,016,205 




$54,272,587 




EXPORTS 


COUNTRIES 




1939 






1940 




1941 




$ 43, 622,558 


briki 


78.907* 


$37,441, 673 




75,64% 


$59,939,503 


80,18% 


UNITED 


















STATES 


















ORIENT 


$ 4, 536, 760 




8. 16% 


$ 4,925,926 

M 




9 98% 


$ 12, 919, ISO 


17 28% 


EUROPE 


$ 5,796, 134 




10 . 45% 


$ 5, S50, 746 

mi 




10. 43% 


$ 1,08 0,778 

1 


1 . 45% 


OTHERS 


$ 1,383,006 

i 


2, 49% 


$ 1,346,683 

i 




3.74% 


$ 617, 863 

1 


1 0 9% 


TOTAL 


$55,540,458 


$49,365,030 




$74,757,324 




SOURCE: BUREAU OF CENSUS AND STATISTICS, MANILA AfoD MONTHLY TRADE REVIEW OF 


THE PHI LIPPINE ISLANDS. 





* 23 • 



IN THE PHILIPPINES 

By P. C. Mor unite 



JL OR the past ten years there have been vigorous dis- 
cussions, in print as well as on the platforms, ahout 
Filipino writers and their writings. More broadly, this 
talk has eoneerned Philippine literature in general. It 
is an interesting fact that Filipino writers in English* al- 
though a comparatively recent development, have been 
leading the Tagalog and Spanish writers in their critical 
attitude toward Filipino life and letters. Nowadays, all 

are awakening to the faet that literature lias a social re- 
gponsibilit) and that belles lettres do not touch deep 
enoiigh the native life to insure it progress toward human 

betterment. 

Such writers as Federico Mangahas, editor of the Herald 
Xfid+Week Magazine, and Salvador l\ Lopez, editor of 

The Philip pints He raid, have done much to give social 

direction to the works of Philippine writers. But literary 

productions b) a great many of their contemporaries, who 

presume to be modern critics of Filipino life, are moti- 
vated too much bj social dilettantism to carry genuine 
conviction and integrity. Consequently, whatever sincerity 
of purpose the) ma\ have in championing the cause of 
the masses is more often than not nullified by their pri- 
mal \ concern for identifying themselves with tin- intellec- 
tual fad of the moment. 

On the other hand, we have some critical writings in 
English thai seek merely to catalog our literals prog- 
ress of the past 15 years or so. The most important of 
these critical writings are by Jose Garcia Villa (who 
uses the pen name of Doveglion). He is considered the 
foremost critic of poetry and short stories in the Philip- 
pines today. Before Mr. Villa made his debut as a critic 
about 1 027, literarv criticisms had been published spor- 
adically by the late Fernando Maramag. bv Carlos P. 
Romuto I now general manager of flic Manila Herald >. 
and by Professors (aistino Jamias and Ignacio Manlapax. 

Jose Garcia Villa look up literary criticism with a 
Messianic passion. Since 1027 he has been devoting a 

great deal of his time to the task of selecting the best 

Filipino short stories of the year, Whenever the poetry 

production Warranted the selection, he has nominated 
the besl Filipino poems of the year Or of the several sears 

under his purview, Despite Ins apparent personal bias in 

judging a piece <>f writing on the basis of its esthetic 
value, rather than its utilitarian responsibility, Villa's pot* 
tificalions on I Reran works have been large!) responsible 
tor waking up ihe critical facultx in Filipino writers. 

\ Mother important crilic is Sabador I*. Lope/, who 
differs from Y ilia in man) respects. \ ilia has esthetic con* 



science. Lopez has only a liberal faith in art. He is more 
concerned with social scenes and doctrines than with 
esthetics. His book of essays on life aqd letters. Literature 
and Society, which won a Commonwealth Lilerarv Prize 
last year, was written "in terms of people ami of the 
dignity and the responsibility of human personality and 
particularly of the artist as a conscious force in the bet- 
terment of society."" Edgar Snow, a noted American liberal 
and student of the Far East, characterizes Lopez as a 
worthy successor of Rizal. Mabini and Aglipav. in the 
general context of his appeal, 

"He does not yet possess the critical faculty of those 
great leaders of his people", Mr. Snow admits. **bul there 
are Signs that he may not lack their courage." 

A. E. Litiaco. literals editor of the Manila Graphic 

is also a responsible critic His mosl important field, how- 
ever, is as literary editor of the magazine in which prac- 
tically all our best short stories of the past few years 
have been printed. 

A well-known Filipino writer, who does not pretend 
to be a critic but, nevertheless, is one in the sense that his 
works are definitive of Philippine life, is Manuel E. 
Arguilla. ( ncjuestionably. he is the foremost short stor\ 
writer in the Philippines; some of his stories have been 
accorded special mention by the late Edward J. O'Brien 
famous anthologist of short stories. A book of his short 
stories. "How My Brother Leon Brought Home a Wife."' 
won for Arguilla a Commonwealth Literary Contest prize. 

\rguilla*s stories are living commentaries. They pro- 
vide subjects for critical discussions. He has no doctrinal 
preoccupations; he seeks only l<> portray life in a frame- 
work that is at once realistic and artistic. His characters 
open up fresh insights for more active critics and lhe\ 
remain for them a source of analysis. From his tales the 
critics, no less than the readers, learn the essence of 
native life, for his stories are also valid explanations of 
the contemporary scene. 

Literary criticism is already beginning to engage the 
interest of other Filipino writers. Arturo B. Rotor, author 
of the book. 'The Wound and the Scar** | Philippine Hook 
Guild). 1. V. Mallari. Jose ML Hernandez and Teodoro 
Agoncillo are in this group. 

Despite this progress, Filipino criticism i s still too 
inhibited to enjoy a respectable standard of quality. It 
suffers from too much moralism. It is obsessed with 
counterfeit intcllectualism. Its standard stresses ethical 
truths, always inferring that a work of ar t cannot exist 
unless it conforms to conventional ideals. It lacks human 

personality and betrays sadly a want of both philosophy 

and discipline in esthetic thinking, 

Allegorieally speaking, literary criticism in the Philip- 
pines is about ready for its birth. Filipino writers in 
English. Tagalog and Spanish are attending | () ji s par . 
ttirition with something like parental concern. Jnst now. 
however, there is much speculation as to what kind of 
»nima1 the thing will be when it is eventually born. Hut 
more important than the thrill of expectant \ is the 
knowledge thai in due time it will take a definite place 
in Philippine life and letters. ^ 



• 24 • 




BLOOD COMPACT 
30 Centavos Orange-Red 
1939, surcharged tv i t h 
small "Commonwealth." 
Scott Xumbcr: 442 162(b) 



BABASOAIN CHURCH 

I Peso Orange £ Black' 
I*>;i*>, surcharged «• i t h 
small "Citmmonivealth.*' 
Scott \umber: 4 13 463(b) 



GEORGB WASHINGTON 

5 Pesos Green & Black 
1 9 4 0, surcharged with' 
small "Commonwealth.** 
Scott y umber: 446 A66(b) 



BATTLE OF MAM LA BAY 
2 Pesos Bistre Brown & 
Black 1939, surcharged 
with small "Common- 
wealth.** 

Scott yumbes: 444 464(b) 



MONTAIBAN CORCE 
4 Pesos Blue & Black 
1 9 4 O . surcharged with 
small "Commonwealth.** 
Scott y umber: 445 A65(b) 



I STATES OF AMERICA 



PHILIPPINE ISLANDS W 



J 



t a. a a *l < | 

&4 FlLiPiyt 

6 Cent a vos 
Dark Brown 
1939, sur- 

charged with 
small "Com- 
monwealth* 
Scott Number 
435 455(a) 



STAMPS of the PHILIPPINES 



PHILIPPINE PHILATELIC Agency 

2362 Massachusetts Avenue, N. 
Washington. D. C. 




UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
COMMONWEALTH OFTHE PHILIPPINES 




" A VfV&^* v m) MAILS (fl*vtktfklW^M ^ 

' 1»1HUPI»INK1SLA\1>S 



ABOVE* 

8 Cental its 

Red 1941 

Air Mail. 
Scott y umber: 



fOSE P. RIZAL 
2 Centavos 
Light Green 
1941, Regular. 
Scott j\ umber 
161 



JUAN DE LA 
CRUZ 

20 Centavos 
Light Olive Green 
1939, surcharged 
icith small 
**Commonwealth.*' 
Scott y umber 
440 A 60(a) 



■ /■ 



£* 



COMMONWEALTH 



1: 




5 IJLT SPRiyCS 
12 Centavos 
Black 1940 
surcharged 
with small 
"Coni monweallh.*' 
Scott Number 
138 A58(b) 

20 CENTAVOS 

Special Delivery Blue Violet 

1939, Type of 1919. Special 

Delivery surcharged tv i t h 

''Commonwealth.** 

Scott y umber: E7 SD2 



M 4 G E L L 4 N \S L A NDtNC 
16 Centavos Dark Blue 1939 
surcharged with small "Com- 
ntonucalth." 

Scott y umber: 439 459(b) 




PKAHL FtSHiNG 

8 Centavos—— 

Violet 1939 

surcharged with 
small * Common' 
wealth 

Scott y umber 
436 486(b) 

FORT SANTIAGO 

10 Centavos Rose Carmine 
193*>, surcharged with small 
"Common icenlth.** 
Scott y umber: 43? 437(b) 



WOMAN AND ( ill ill to 

4 Centavos — yellow-green. 
1940, surcharged with small 
"Com monwealth.*' 
Scott y umber : 434 A54( b ) 



UNITEl) STATES OF AM ERICA 
^HTILIPPINE ^ ISLANDS 




For Further Information Address PHILIPPINE PHILATELIC AGENCY Washington, D. C 



