^Philippines 




President 4£nezoii 
IKeports on Defense 

A Xew Vocabulary 

By WeJdon Janes 

Strategic Hemp 

By Rep. Fred L. Crawford 



Philippine History On 
a Postage Stamp 




Vol. I 



The Roosevelt Administi*ation and the Philippines 

An Editorial 



FOR FORTY YEARS the United States has ruled the 
Philippines with wisdom, justice and benefit tti all. The 
four decades have been marked by phenomenal advances 
along the road to democratic freedom for the Filipinos. 
Lniversal education, women's suffrage, impro\cd public 
health, the democratic system itself — in all these and 
dozens of other lines we have made swift progress under 
American rule. But it is significant that not until the elec- 
tion of Franklin Delano Roosevelt as President of the 
United States in 1932 did we really come within reach 
of political independence, the lode-star of Philippine 
thought since the Islands came under alien rule in the 
Sixteenth Century. For this reason— and because most 
Filipinos have great personal admiration for the Presi- 
dent — the Commonwealth was gratified at Mr, Roosevelt's 
inauguration for an unprecedented third term. 

President Roosevelt's interest in. and understanding 
of, Philippine problems during the past eight years has 
been of the utmost human importance and historical 
significance. He has made possible the inauguration of a 
program that is without precedent. Only once before in 
modern history — in the case of Norway's separation 
from Sweden 35 years ago — have two nations come to 
the parting of the ways by mutual agreement and demo- 
cratic processes. For a great Power freely to give up a 
colonial possession and assist in setting it up as an in* 
dependent nation is entire!) without parallel. 

It would be inaccurate to maintain that President 
Roosevelt alone is responsible for this. Unquestionably, 
it has been the will of the American people. But the fact 
remains that your Chief Executive is the leader and spokes- 
man for a profound movement toward a better, more 
equitable way of life. Above all, he clearly understands 
the background and exact nature of Philippine aspira- 
tions. 

The Admin is L rat ion *s interest in finding an equiLablc 
solution to Philippine problems did not cease with 
passage of the Independence Act in 1 934 and the in- 
auguration of the Commonwealth the following year. 
Twice during the first half of the ten-year transition 
period, the President facilitated changes in organic laws 
to keep pace with changing world conditions. 

In the light of this long record of sympathy and under- 
standing, it is small wonder we Filipinos were gratified at 
President Roosevelt's reelection, A host of problems of 
vital importance to our national life await solution in the 
four years ahead. The entire future of liberal democracy 
may be changed by events over which we have no con- 



trol. At such a time we are fortunate to have wise, firm 
administrators in Washington as well as in Manila. 

For instance, an answer must be found to the ques- 
tion : what Mill be the exact future relation of the Philip- 
pines to the United States? It is perfectly obvious that 
the ties between these two States can never be com- 
parable to those existitig between America and China. 
Portugal or Bolivia. Tradition, trade, politics, mutual 
interests, defense considerations — such cogent factors will 
for years prevent Philippine-American relations from 
assuming a conventional character. But what form will 
future relations take? That can be determined only 
th rough sympathetic negotiation and a thorough study of 
the human and political factors involved. 

How will the Commonwealth be defended? Final re- 
sponsibility for that answer falls on the shoulders of the 
President, It is becoming increasingly clear to the world 
that the Islands will be defended — by the American Army 
and Navy, and by the Filipinos themselves — but deter- 
mination of the role that each force shall play has not 
been made. In the years ahead— perhaps sooner than we 
anticipate — that decision must be reached * and we 
Filipinos are thankful that leadership in solving that 
question is in the hands of a man who has shown great 
ability and understanding in the past. 

There are important decisions to be made on the eco- 
nomic front. War in Europe and Asia has wrecked all 
the plans — apparently so well laid in 1934 — for freeing 
Insular agriculture and industry of their dependence on 
the United States. As a result. 1940 saw an even greater 
than normal proportion of Philippine trade flowing to 
American markets, as shipments to Europe dwindled al- 
most to nothing. Such a trend could hardly have been fore- 
seen; some new arrangement is essential if Common- 
wealth economy is to survive. Here, again, is a place for 
wise, understanding leadership in the While House. 

Come what may, the Filipino people will always have 
an inherent admiration for the United States. Our gov- 
ernment is modeled after yours: our constitution con- 
tains your Bill of Rights: our people today face the 
same problems and perplexities your forefathers did in 
shaping a course for their new nation. For the example 
your nation has set, Filipinos are grateful. We are grate- 
ful, too, that during our vital transitory years since 1933 
there has been at the head of your State a wise and 
sympathetic administrator. We feel that his presence in 
the While Mouse for the next four years will be of the 
utmost importance to every Filipino. 



Philippines 



Vol. 1 



No, 3 



The Roosevelt Administration and the Philippines 1 

A New Vocabulary, /. Weldon Jones 3 

**0Ur Course Is Clear," President Quezon _ — ^ 4 

Philippine Advertising, M. Farolan 6 

Strategic Manila Hemp, Rep. F red L. Crawford 7 

One Language for All Filipinos, Dr. Leopoldo Y. Yahes , . 8 

The Battle For Greece, Julias C. Edelsteia . ... . _._ 9 

The Story of the University, Dr. Melqaiudes J. Gamboa 11 

History on a Postage Stamp, Victor ino Paredes 14 

Lady Politico*, Pilar N. Ravelo — . - - 17 

Order of the Carabao, Col. Joseph M. Heller _ 19 

Coconut Oil, John B. Gordon ■ 21 



Photo credit: Fen no Jacobs from Three Lions; 
Tome! den, Washington; U. S. Army Signal Corps; 
Harris & Ewing; Philippine Tourist Bureau: Chap- 
lains' Aid Association; and Office of the President of 
the Philippines. 



Back Cover: San Aguslin Church in BaGolod, Negros Occidental. 



Permission to reprint ttiatcrJnl oppearinp 
in "Philippine 1 " H gladly gr.Tnlrcl (-xcpfit In 
co-rvA wht-rt' use In 9|it-cUl cutty rt.qlriclcd. Proper 
{-n<rilt Vi'UI In; i [ ■ p r .■ ■ i .. t •■ i ? . 



¥1 

Students ai the Philippine Military Academy 
in Bagnio Fallow a curriculum modelled after 
that of West Point, In tin* eovi-r photo this 
issue, mem hers of ihe graduating class, in pa- 
rade uniforms, participate in fir Id mass. 

In This Issue 

j. Weldon Jones was financial adviser to the 
IL 5. High Commissioner in Manila until last 
November, when he returned to Washington to 
accept his present post as Assistant Director 
of the Budget 

• • i 

Fred L. Crawford, who views sonic interna- 
tional aspects of the Philippine hemp industry, 
is Congressman from Michigan and a member 
of the House Insular Affairs Committee. He 
visited the Islands in 1935. 

m • m 

Modesto Farolan is secretary of the Ad- 
vertising Cluh of the Philippines and editor of 
Commerce, published by the Philippine Cham- 
ber of Co m m e r ee. 



John B. Gordon is secretary of the Bureau 
cd Raw Materials For Ann riean Vegetable 
Oils and Fats Industries, with headquarters in 
Washington, D. C. For 20 years the bureau 
has been the source of statistical and economic 
information for the score of industries using all 
types of oils and fats. 

* * # 

Melquiades J. Gamboa is registrar of the 
University of the Philippines, in Manila. 

* m § 

Leopoldo Y. Yabes, wbo discusses the pos- 
sibility of a national language for the Philip- 
pines, is technical assistant and chief clerk of 
the Institute of National Language, in Manila. 

* * • 

Victorino Paredes is in charge of the Phila- 
telic Agency in the office of Lhe Philippine Resi- 
dent Commissioner. Washington. Material on 
early history in his article came from '"The Postal 
History of Philippine Stamps/" bv John Murray 
Barrels. 



PHILIPPINES its published hy the olVu-f oF tK*i PJiLlipphu- K*'HlriVril Crirtimfehluurr t „ UnttvJ St;iii-*. 

Editorial ami olrtruUtlon nJlicus at 2il<*2 >lu«i»achusetls Avi>nuc NoHhwusi, WnshinRiuri, U. C. Entered 
»n third rliiv*. inuttrr tn iln- Wu.Hhiritf l*»n p«j.t ufFliv nil lli-reni lu-r I. I IVrmll CVo. 50 IS. Prlult'd In l),S.A T 




A NEW VOCABULARY 



Are Philippine-American Dealings 
Handicapped by Worn-Out Words? 

J. Weldon Jones, Who Knows the 
Commonwealth, Thinks So. 



J, WELDON JOKES* Assistant Director of the Budget 
of the United Slates, speaks willi a background of seven 
years as an American administrator in tlie Philippines 
when lie inures a "new \oeahulury" to facilitate discussion 
of Philippine- American relations. 

"We are using loo in any words full of powder smoke 
and loo few based mi sound Common sense these days," 
Jones observes with a Texas drawl. "What is the mean- 
ing of 'manifest destiny". M in penal isin\ "exploitation* and 
'colonial policy* in tins day and age? Actually, terms like 
thai are outmoded, and onr thinking is hampered by a 
lark of new words to express new ideas, 

"The Filipinos suffer from the same inadequacy, Pat- 
rick Henry's 'Give me liberty or give me death* matched 
I fie feelings in their own hearts. In time, though, they be- 
gan in realize that they might be given liberty and death, 
but our vocabulary just doestf I contain the words to ex- 
press the proper solution. I think that a new vocabulary 
is the first thing we must look fin- in adjusting Philip- 
I > ilia- A m e r i ca n rel at i t ins." 

The new Assistant Director of the Budget is not one 
who believes that the Filipinos "really do not want in- 
dependence." 

"Most Filipinos/' lie insists, "basically and earnestly 
desire independence. They wouldn't he worthy of llieir 
heritage or of onr teaching if they didn't want inde- 
pendence,'' 

Jones' \ iews on the Pbiltppincs curry special weight 
because he has no ax to grind. He went to the Islands us 
an appointee of President Roosevelt ; he returned to take a 
new post just created by the same Chief Executive. He has 
no business slake in Manila, hence has no direct or in- 
direct financial interest in the future status of the Islands. 
His office has not been concerned with shaping policies, 
so he has no need to defend past or projected courses 
of action. Jones spent enough lime in the Philippines to 
understand its problems thorough!). \el he retained an 
American viewpoint thnt is at once statistical and sweep- 




J. Weldon Jones, 
Assistant Director 
of the Budget. 



ing. Above all- he has a genuine liking for the Filipinos 
themselves. 

h \l don't have the answers to all the questions that 
hedge the future of Philippine- American relations." Jones 
declares in his new Washington office, across the street 
from the White House. "However, i do doubt that an 
abrupt breaking of those ties, with the United States turn- 
ins Hs back on the Islands and walking away after 
nearly half a century of close and mutually profitable 
give-and-take, ts the proper solution. 

"The words we are using today to discuss the future 
come loo much from the past. Too main are hold-overs 
from the dead era of imperialistic expansion. We still 
hold the thesis that one option 'gi\ es~ am] the other 
'takes'; the acid response, 'you can't eat sour cake and 
have it too", is all too common. Such expressions hamper 
rather than simplify a solution of our problems. 

"It is assumed too often that the United Slates still has 
something priceless to give away, and is withholding it 
from the Filipinos, Personally. 1 don't know what it is. 

"I say these things pn]| as an individual looking at 
future relations between m> own country and the pro pie 
of the Philippine Islands. 1 ha\e no power to change our 
official policies in the slightest, even if I knew the answers. 
Nevertheless, it is inspiring In uie thai people of another 
race have found something in mj flag for which tho\ are 
willing to die, even as Americans are." 

The Philippines is not alone in facing an uncertain 
future. Jones believes. Every nation in the world is caught 
up in the same whirlpool, Consequent v , America Mould 
do well, he feels, lo hold all the frremU it can. 

"You remember that old childhood jingle: "He who has 
a thousand friends has none In spare, but he \\\u> has an 

i Ttn tt to /V/gc -2 I 



• 3 • 



f <■ 



In The Midst of This Great Crisis 

Our Duty 
Is Clear" 



A Survey of 
Philippine Defense Responsibilities 
by 

PRESIDENT 
MANUEL L. QUEZON 




President Quezon addresses the Philippine 
National Assembly* 



THE PHILIPPINE COMMONWEALTH is fortunate in 
that it is still free from the armed conflicts now raging in 
several parts of the world. Let us hope that we may be 
spared the destructive effects of such conflicts. But our 
fate in this respect is linked with that of the United Slates. 
We are placed in that position not only hy the very nature 
of our political relationship with that great nation, hut by 
our common faith in democracy and by every noble im- 
pulse that animates our people. 

In these limes of stress, our national security is natu- 
rally the greatest concern of our government, and we are 
doing all we can in this respect. But it must be admitted 
that with our own resources alone we are not now in a 
posilion to defend ourselves. 

The government of the United States has embarked 
upon a program of national defense which 7 wc earnestly 
hope, includes the Philippines; for the defense of our 
country remains primarily the responsibility of the United 
States, This is as it should be, because so long as wc are 
under the American flag it rests exclusively with the 
United Stales, and not with us, to determine whether we 
shall be at peace or at war. The Filipino people, desirous 
of cooperating with the United States in the execution of 
this defense program, are ready to bear their full share 
of that responsibility. To [bis end, T have assured the 
government of the United Slates in behalf of [he Common- 
wealth, that the entire Philippines — its man power and 
material resources — are at the disposal of the United 
States in the present emergency. 

Iri my eagerness to expedite the organization of our 
national defense in cooperation with the United States 
and in the absence of available funds in the public 



treasury for that purpose, I have made representations tt» 
the Washington authorities requesting that the funds, de- 
clared by the Congress of the United States to be pay- 
able to the Philippine Commonwealth from the sugar ex- 
cise tax collections and from profits derived from the 
devaluation of the American dollar, be appropriated to 
be spent exclusively for our national defense under the 
direction of the United States. I have assurances that ibis 
matter is being given serious consideration. 

Since the establishment of the Commonwealth govern- 
ment, we have pursued a definite program designed to 
prepare our country for independence. This program was 
well under way at the outbreak of hostilities in Europe. 

The scheme of national defense for an independent 
Philippines is being executed as planned. Preparatory 
military training has been introduced in all elementary 
and high schools. In college and universities, instruc- 
tion in military science for the training of reserve officers 
has been made compulsory. We have today a regular 
force consisting of 466 officers and 3,666 enlisted men. 
excluding the constabulary. This force has been organ- 
ized to undertake the training of the annual levies of 
trainees and to engage in the study and planning of the 
most effective employment of our trained man- power in 
an emergency. Our total reserve force numbers 132.000 
men organized into approximately 13 tactical divisions. 
The army and other national defense activities have been 
placed under the department of national defense, which 
was organized last year. 

The economic repercussions nf I he present world war 
are being felt more and more acutely in the Philippines. 
Our trade with many nations has been reduced, prires for 



4 • Philippines 



out export commodities haw* gone clown, ami freight and 
insurants rales have ine reused inure than 200 per cent, 
I he result has been a decline in national ineome and pur- 
chasing power. 

These changes are hound lo retard our progress towards 
some of I he economic and social objectives that we have 
set. But we eannnl abandon these objectives. We must 
pursue ihem with greater determination, even if their 
achievement should entail added sacrifice. 

W e eannot imu foretell the situation that will arise in 
the world after the war and it would he inadvisable to 
a(lo Pl economic plans based on future conditions that 
might never matei Udi*e. ] n { \ w nu *anlmu\ we should con- 
tinue to minister to the health and welfare of our masses, 
intensify our efforts h, S (dve the unemployment problem, 
speed up the execution of our program of national de- 
fense, stimulate the increase of our national ineome, in- 
sure a sufficient suppl) of food and clothing fur anv 



eventuality, promote social justice, push forward the ex- 
tension of our educational facilities and the advancement 
of our cultural life, and safeguard for all our people the 
proper exercise of individual rights. 

He\oud any question, these arc fateful days in which 
\ve live. Vital forces are reshaping political and social 
institutions the world over, Fear and want are afflicting the 
human face. Men and women e\ cry where are scanning 
the future for security and a more promising life. In the 
midst of this great c risis, our duty is clear. By a solemn 
covenant with America, the advent of our national inde- 
pendence is assured. We must prepare for it; we must not 
falter. Trusting in Divine Providence, we must nunc 
forward firmly and courageously to achieve our long- 
cherished ideal — the establishment of the Philippine Re- 
public — and to secure for our people prosperity happi- 
ness and freedom under the shelter of peace and de- 
mocracy, ^ 




By M. Farolan 

PHILIPPINE 

-@c(i/et th in j 
Takes the 
AMERICAN ROAD 



15 USLNESS in the Philippines is American business — 
American in trade-mark and American in mcLhod. 

Whether in a '"sari-sari" ? store in some remote rural 
community or in a department store on Manila's Escolta. 
the processes and effect of modern American business 
methods are clearly visible. With pride, storekeepers point 
to the American origin of their better quality merchan- 
dise. Furthermore, it is common practice among non- 
American importers and dealers to try to pass cheaper 
foreign goods as American, either by glib sales talk or 
by the simple expedient of changing labels. 

Philippine business is American, particularly in pro- 
motion and advertising methods. Nowhere else in the 
Far East does advertising so closely approach the tempo 
and efficiency of the United States as it has in Manila 
and throughout the Philippines— in newspapers and mag- 
azines, in neon signs and movie shorts, on billboards 
and moving vehicles; through catalogs, calendars and 
leaflets; over the radio, in shop windows and in house- 
to-house circulars. The popularity of advertised goods 
today shows the general acceptance of the American 
system of salesmanship. The public has confidence in the 
value and force of that particular system's outstanding 
instrument, advertising. Not infrequently people say, "I 
never see that advertised/" when refusing a brand offered 
al reduced | Hires. 

To what extent have the old-time Chinese storekeepers 
and peddlers — so important in the Philippine distribution 
system — been affected by American methods of busi- 
ness, particularly advertising? One need only look at 
ilie si reel peddlei today to see the difference in thn 
goods he sells and in the way he handles them. Whereas, 
at one time, be was content with his unsanitary system 
of dishing out foodstuffs, unmindful of dust or flies, 
now he finds it necessary to wrap his cookies and cakes 
with cellophane, not only for sanitary protection but 
because it improves the appearance. Instead of seeing 
goads piled indism minutely in Chinese stores, you now 
find them tastefully arranged in attractive window and 
shelf displays. Outside, you are dazzled by arresting, 



though generally gaudy, neon signs. The Japanese out- 
does bis Chinese competitor in advertising. 

Advertising is in such general use thai even l hose who 
used to scoff now resort to it to gain an advantage. For 
instance, dealers in low-price goods, in placing their ads. 
often do not identify their merchandise bv nationality or 
origin. Further, such ads are displayed along with those 
of American and Filipino firms and p rod nets. The ex- 
planation is obvious: the public prefers products with 
firmly established names and with American trademarks. 

Thus, it is not uncommon that, instead of previously 
displayed "Manhattan* shirts, the unwary reader finds a 
new ad for "Maukattan T! shirts. Of couse. that is still 
advertising, but is clearly a ease where method and aim 
ars illegitimate. However, this further proves the strong 
position American products hold in this market. 

Nearly everything manufactured and sold in America is 
today sold and used in the Philippines. Offhand, vou 
can not name half a dozen exceptions, whether they are 
tiny pins or bulky tractors and trucks. Furthermore 
th rough modern advertising, consumption of American 
goods is increasing, so much so thai, from nowhere no 
America's export list, the Philippines has steadily ad- 
vanced until today it is America's fifth best customer, 
the largest buyer of at least ten American products and 
the next best consumer of fifteen others. Free trade <>f 
course, is primarily responsible for this, but this writer 
wishes to assign to modern American advertising methods 
a large measure of the credit. 

It is important lo American manufacturers lhal Phil- 
ippine businessmen employ ihe same services and crafts- 
manship in their promotion work thaL they themselves 
know so welk for it simplifies market exploitation, lowers 
selling costs and facilitates the development of new fields 
for future expansion. Business methods at work in ihe 

(Turn to Page 2B I 




American scone on a Philippine highway* 



6 • Philippines 




****** 



Is America's Supply of Precious Abaca 
Fiber in Danger? 



By Rep. Fred L. Cranford 



TODAY the Filipinos sland upon the horizon of ihcir 
destiny. From our viewpoint I hey may either grow 
in importance or recede entirely. Yet no man can say 
tori ay in which d I reel ion their future lies. There are 
too many imponderables, loo many factors beyond the 
control of one man. one people, or one leadership. The 
final decision depends on the interaction of many fac- 
tors, such as the aggressive pressure of the land-hungry 
Japanese, the Filipinos" inter ual surge toward political 
independence, and the economic requirements of the 
[nited Slates" Good Neighbor policy, to mention just 
a few. 

While il is thus not possible to trace with assurance 
the future course of Philippine-American relations, il is 
possible lo ascertain some trends, and from these trends 
to gel some elue to the major developments themselves. 
Such observations can be important guide-posts in de- 
termining our own policy toward the Philippines. 

Jt is highly noteworthy, for instance, that some weeks 
ago. the Commonwealth Government sen I a special com- 
mission to investigate the laud-acquiring activities of 
I he Japanese settlers at Davao, the Nipponese-dominated 
province in southern Mindanao Island. Davao is poten- 
tially one of the richest areas in the Islands, and because 
of the j) rod net ion of hemp, in which it excels, is also 
one of the most strategically important. The new com- 
mission was established to decide a very controversial 
subject, whether and lo what extent certain lands in 
Davao have been acquired by the Japanese in defiance 
ol Philippine law. 

It has since been reported that the Commonwealth gov- 
ernment may inslilulc prosecution against Japanese who 
may be found to hold title or control of land in viola- 
tion of Insular law designed lo pre\enl the concentration 
of these lands in the hands of a nationality potentially 
hostile both to Filipinos and Americans. 

This particular problem is of special interest io me be- 
cause as far back as 193.S I made a first-hand, although 
necessarily brief study of this entire situation. It is a 
much more import ant question today than il was I hen. 
At that time I was a member of the Congressional com- 
mittee which visited the Philippines to participate 111 the 
inauguration of a Commonwealth Government. All of 
us who witnessed that great occasion, climaxed by the 
ad mi nisi eiing of the oath to Manuel Quezon as the first 
President ot I lie Commonwealth, had a serine of the 




Fred L. Cranford of Michigan 

historic significance of the event. But we had (silly the 
barest foreboding of some of the developments then still 
in the inscrutable future. 

We all had heard of the concentration of Japanese 
immigrants I who were then — but are no longer— ad- 
mitted to the Philippines without restrict ion ) on the 
island of Mindanao, The Japanese at Davao had already 
grown proficient and famous for their cultivation of 
abaca — Manila hemp— of which the Philippines is the 
world s main producer. Dominating abaca production, 
the Nipponese thus became an important bottleneck nl 
a \ ilal insular industry . 

Attracted b\ this cinumsl ancc. two of us visited 
l)a\ ao. loured its abaca plantations, and made in- 
quiries concerning the ownership of I lie land. The Phil- 
ippine government had already acted to limit further 
acquisition of land except by Filipino or American ctt- 



. 7 . 




4j 



Moro 



Bicol 



Bontoc 



tagalog 



One JIanGU&qe For All Filipinos 



By Dr. Leopoldo Y. Yabes 



movement for a Philippine national language^ hitiit 
out of native material, was born of a desire by the 
Filipinos to achieve fuller cultural and spiritual solidar- 
ity. Dr. Jose Rizal was among the first to realize the need 
for such a language. The movement culminated in a pro- 
vision of the Constitution of the Commonwealth requiring 
the National Assembly to take steps toward the develop- 
ment and adoption of a common national language based 
on one of the existing native tongues. The creation of the 
Institute of National Language in 1936 was the first 
step to carry out this mandate. 

"It is needless to elucidate the proposition that a people 
constituting one nationality and one state should possess a 
language spoken and understood bv alb" President 
Quezon pointed out in urging the establishment of this 
institution. "It constitutes one of the strongest ties that 
bind the people and foster the unity of national ideals, 
aspirations and sentiments. ... It will take time, perhaps 
a very long time, but by painstaking and thorough study. 
wa\s and methods can be found for developing such a na- 
tional language/' 

The President has repeated! y made it clear that the de- 
velopment of a native national language is not aimed at 
the liquidation of English and Spanish. 

"English is a practical necessity for us." he once stated. 
"It is the language by which we can make ourselves best 
understood by the Anglo-Saxon countries: it is the 
language which is helping us, and will help us, better to 
understand democratic principles and practices. . , . 

"The Spanish language si ill binds us to the Latin- 
American peoples, and the Spanish language will bind 
us to those peoples eternally if we have the wisdom and 
patriotism to preserve it/' 

In pursuance of his policy of promoting the literary 
use of all three tongues* the President has created a fund 
from wlii eh prizes will be given annually for the best lit- 
nar\ Hoiks in Knglish. Spanish, and Tagalog. The first 
nf these < union wealth Literary f Contests was rondufcted 



by the Office of the President last fall with commendable 
results. 

Tagalng was ehosen as the basis nf the national 
language because, of all the native rli alerts in I ho Philip- 
[lines, it most nearh fulfills the requirements sel forth in 
the organic law of the Institute of National Language. 
It is widely spoken, has the most voluminous literature, 
is the best de vet oped, and. by reason of its central geo- 
graphical 1 neat ion. has the best chance for growth. The 
aim of the Commonwealth Government is to develop ibis 
language into one that may truly be called national and 
Filipino, 

The organic law of the Institute provides that the basic 
language should be enriched from the other native dia- 
lects, from Spanish and English, and from such classical 
languages as Greek and Latin. The assimilation into Taga- 
log of words froni these languages will come in the 
natural course of its development: in fact, even without 
the aid of legislation, Spanish and English have already 
found their way into Tagalog and the other vernaculars 
to a considerable extent. 

The present concern of the Government is to spread 
this basic language throughout the country. If Tagalog 
has any capacity for growth land it undoubtedly has. 
otherwise it would not have attained its present degree 
to development I , it will assimilate words from the other 
vernaculars once it is widely spoken throughout the 
country. The national language will not remain today's 
Tagalog- Iliad English. French or Spanish refused to 
grow, the) would have remained I lie undeveloped, purelv 
local languages that they were in their infamy.) 

Tagalog will in due time become Filipino. As language 
is the expression of a people's soul, it will express the 
soul, not of the Tagalogs alone, but of the whole Filipino 
people. It may lake a long time and arduous effort to 
achieve this end* as the President pointed out. but the 
project is worthy of all the expense and the sacrific e neces- 
sary to push it through. H\ exei-ulne order, therefore. 

i Turn fa Page tH I 



li * Philippines 




THE strategic implications of the prolonged battle be- 
tween Greek and Italian forces in the mountains of 
Albania have not been hist upon the men in Washington 
and Manila who are responsible for the defense of the 
Philippines. The Greek example has encouraged those who 
have long felt that I ho Islands could be held against an 
invader, provided that certain conditions were met. 

This problem of defending the Philippines has a back- 
ground of skepticism which has in recent years taken the 
form of a contention that the Commonwealth is an "in- 
defensible salient," a hostage which the United States has 
been forced to yield to potential Far Eastern aggressors. 
From this viewpoint, the Philippines has constituted a 
Vital weak link in the American defense chain. 

The Battle of Greece has exploded this line of reason- 
ing among informed Americans and Filipinos, Under the 
leadership of the United States, and with unreserved 
Philippine-American cooperation, the Islands are now 
seen as a potential buttress of strength rather than an 
element of weakness in the Far East. For the Filipinos, 
this change may mean freedom from fear; for the United 
States it may mean a rampart where aggression in the 
Pacific can be challenged and halted. 

To pass from the very general to the more particular, 
the Filipinos now have before them an example — com- 
fiarahle in many pertinent points — of how a small na- 
fifth, fighting on favorable terrain, can successfully meet 
a force superior in number and equipment, but inferior 
in incentive and organization. 

The experience of Holland, Belgium and France makes 
it obvious that mere determination and courage cannot 
halt a highly-trained, superbly equipped, mechanized 
force with command of the air and operating on simple 
terrain. Norway likewise showed that courage can be 
negated by guile and treachery, and that unprepared 
forces (the British Expeditionary Force in Norway) are 
at a hemendous disadvantage against an army that has 



DOES THE BATTLE 
FOR GREECE 

Have a Lesson 
PHILIPPINE STRATEGISTS? 

By Julius C. Edelstein 



rare fully foreseen emergencies anil lias painstaking!) 
planned every step of a campaign. 

The Com moil wealth, for example, combines the rugged 
terrain of Norway with the insular position of Great 
Britain. It has a loyal, unified population of 16.000.000. 
of whom 132.000 have already been trained in the rudi- 
ments of military science. And I lie Islands have the finest 
natural fortifications in the Far East, These advantages 
are available for whatever use and strategy American and 
Filipino leaders devise. 

The question then becomes, what specific conditions 
are necessary to give the Philippines the defensive powers 
which Greece has utilized with historic effect against 
Italy? What forces must be marshalled to present the 
same impregnable front in the Far East that Greece has 
presented in the Mediterranean? 

Sea power stands out as the most important military 
factor that the Mediterranean and the W estern Pacific 
have in common. The British Navy has kept open the 
supply lines to Greece, while it has constantly threatened 
and harrassed communications between Italy and Albania. 
As regards the sea lanes to the Philippines- the United 
States has a naval problem which is admittedly difficult, 
but certainly not insoluble. American sea power seems 
capable of operating in the Far East with almost as 
much freedom as Britain's fleet has won in the Medi- 
terranean. 

Control of the air is a further factor. As long as the 
Philippine skies are unsafe fur enonn planes, defense 
forces on the ground can move lo meet an aggressor with 
relative freedom. Ample lighting rraft is the answer to 
this question. This, Loo. is a problem of procurement and 
supply which American officials must consider and decide. 

On the ground, trained Filipinos totaling more than 
132.000 men— a number increasing as the months go by 
— are ready for swift mobilization a! strategic locations 
throughout the Philippines. Preparations for ei\ il de- 

\ Turn to Pwp? 2Jf I 



9 




* 10 • Philippines 



... to give professional and technical training ... 

The Story of the 



^£\\K Philippine Legislature, 
recognizing the nerd for an in- 
stitution to provide ^'advanced 
instruction in literature philos- 
i» [ill y. I he sciences and oils, and 
to give professional and techni- 
cal training"- on Jane 18, 1908 
passed an act known as ihe University Charier, founding 
the University of the Philippines. Established with the 
two-fold objective of promoting culture and giving pro- 
fessional instruction, the University opened its doors to 
a handful of student in the summer of 1908. Faculty 
members included some of the pioneer American educa- 
tors in the Islands. Today, the I niversily. composed of 
17 schools and colleges, has an enrollment of about 8.000. 

The main campus covers approximately 25 acres near 
the center of Manila, while junior colleges have been 
established in the cities of Cebu and Raguio. The total 
fixer! assets of the University approach $-k00(X000. 

The University Library, one of the finest of its kind in 
the Orient, has the largest collection of hooks in the 
Philippines next to the National Library. Some of the 
University buildings, including Villain or Hall and the 
Library, are considered outstanding examples of Philip- 
pine architecture. 

The University of the Philippine? is to be moved to 
Quezon City, the new northern suburb of Manila, in 1942. 
The Commonwealth government ha? appropriated 
$8,750,000 for this project. The new site will not only be 
ample for the present University facilities, but will be 
large enough for any additional buildings hi the predict- 
able future — dormitories, an amphitheater, an enormous 
library building with an auditorium to accommodate 
2,500 persons, tennis courts, swimming pools and a 
gymnasium. 

The University of the Philippines is organized like an 
American university, Administration, the plan of study 
and methods of instruction are based on American 
models, modified to suit local conditions and the peculiar 
needs of the country. English is the exclusive medium of 
instruction, although courses are offered in Tagalog, the 
national language of the Philippines, Spanish, French, 
German, Chinese and Japanese. 

Studies at the University cover a wide range: agricul- 
ture, business administration, education, engineering, 
forestry, law. liberal arts, medicine and public health, 
nursing, dentistry, pharmacy, veterinary medicine, music 
and fine arts. 

Following the example of progressive .American uni- 



versities. iirst-\ear students en- 
roll in the College of Liberal 
Arts, giving them a year in 
which to decide upon a field of 
concentration. 

The University faculty at 
present has 715 members. The 
most import ant hold doctors* and masters 1 degrees from 
American and European universities, and a system of 
fellowships enables junior members of the faculty to 
pursue advanced studies in ihe United States. Specialists 
from European and American institutions are engaged as 
exchange professors. 

Characteristic of the democratic principles that are 
the United States" greatest contribution to the Philippines 
is a clause of the University charter which provides that 
"no student shall be denied admission to the University 
by reason of age. sex. nationality. I'cligious belief or 
political affiliation/' As a result, the student body is 
democratic in fact as well as in theory. Young men and 
women of many nationalities — Americans. Spaniards. 
Chinese, Japanese. Siamese, and Russians- — matriculate 
with Filipino students. Of different faiths and dhergent 
ideologies, their association is one of tolerance. Student 
councils have an important role in the government of the 
University and its constituent colleges. 

Co-educational, the University is a witness to the revo- 
lutionary change in woman's part in Philippine life. In 
some fields the girls have almost entirely crowded out 
men students. During the 1939-1940 scholastic year almost 
the entire enrollment in the colleges of Pharmacy and 
Education were women, who also outnumbered men in 
the study of music and dentistry, and in graduate work. 
Women studied in the colleges of Agriculture. Engineer- 
ing and Veterinary Science: in April. 1940. the University 
conferred upon a woman graduate the degree of Doctor 
of Veterinary Medic ine cum laude. 

Extra-curricular activities are emphasized in a well- 
rounded program for all students. Basketball, tennis, base- 
ball, soccer and swimming are popular. So is daneing. 
but it is regulated by the University administration. Or- 
gan twit ions may hold only one dance each semester, and 
only after having presented a literary program. No dance 
may be held within three months of Commencement, fco 
prevent interference with studying. 

A number of student publications are edited on the 
campus. The most important is ihe Philippine Collegian. 
the only college weekly in the Philippines. There is 
a seniors' annual and a literary annual, while main 

I Tu rti to Page J 'i i 

• 1 1 • 



University of the 
Philippines 

By Dr. Melqniades J. Gam boa 




» 12 * Philippines 




• 13 • 



PHILIPPINE HISTORY 



i 



on a 



POSTAGE STAMP 

By Victorino Paretics 



gt i lf IPIII f 1 

rWifEb states oFamkricv 

PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 

V G 




THE student of philately is also a student of history, 
whether he likes it or not- In no case is this truer than of 
the man who follows the progress of the postal system in 
the Philippine Islands — administered in turn by 
Spaniards, Americans a n d 
Filipinos— as it is reflected in 
its adhesive stamps. On the face 
of these tiny colored squares of 
paper, and in the circumstances 
that led to iheir appearance, is 
all the romance, tragedy and 
drama of the Filipinos* 400- 
year connection with Western 
civilization- 

So far as is known, the first mention of the word 
"'postage" in regard to the Philippines appears in a 
Spanish decree of June 16 7 1803, which referred to pay- 
ment for franking the carnage of letters to the Islands. 
Thirty-five years later a decree ordered the concentration 
of the administration of mails at Manila, and the receipt, 
direction and delivery of correspondence both for the 
interior and abroad. The proof that correspondence had 
passed through the central office was to be a cancellation 
stamp with MANILA ISLAS FILIPINAS and the date in 
a circle. 

These references, however, antedate the introduction of 
adhesive stamps, which appear to have been first at- 
tempted in 1847. Plates were made and stamps printed in 
four values, the design differing for each. Apparently 
these stamps did not satisfy the Spanish officials, for 
they were never used and are still supposed to be in the 
archives of the Bureau of Posts at Manila. From a histori- 
cal point of view, as the first stamps for the Philippines, 
however, they arc of interest and value to philatelists. 

By a royal decree of January 12, 1853, promulgated 
by a decree of the Captain General of the Philippines on 
December 7, 1853. the first postage stamps for the Philip- 
pines to be put: in actual use were ordered. Plates ac- 
cordingly were engraved at Manila and the stamps were 
released to ihe public on February J, 1854. The designs, 
crude copies of Spain's own issue, disappointed Spanish 
officials, for on September 1, 1854 (probably soon after 
the arrival in Spain of the first copies of the stamps) 
another Royal decree directed that all letters addressed to 




Spain or foreign countries should bear stamps made in 
Spain, Only those for interior use might be printed at 
Manila. 

A provisional one-reo/ issue became necessary in 1863 
owing to a temporary shortage of stamps for use abroad. 
The local authorities, unable to wait for a new supply 
from Spain, ordered plates made and stamps printed at 
Manila. The Spanish government was requested, in spite 
uT its ficfTfc. to arccpl ihis provisional issue. Fared w i L h 
a fait accompli, the authorities in Spain were obliged to 
agree, and the issue remained in use to ihe end nf No- 
vember, 1863. 

Spain had a revolt on September 28. IS 68, and Lwo 
days later the Revolutionary Committee ordered the 
legend "Habililado por ] a Nat-ion" surcharged on all 
postage, telegraph and other stamps. Twenty-seven of the 

necessary hand stamping dies 
were sent to Manila, where they 
arrived in December, 1 368. and 
were used Lo surcharge thr 
stamps on hand. Several types 
of this surcharge were used in 
Spain. It should be noted, how- 
ever, that those sent to the 
Philippines were all of the so- 
called Vis-cay a style, 
Spain's tangled politics during the next 20 years was 
reflected in the Philippines' stamps. These included is- 
sues celebrating the Provisional Government, the brief 
reign of King Amadco, the subsequent republic, and the 
selection of Alfonso XII, young son of the deposed Queen 
Isabella, as king, Alfonso's portrait appeared on suc- 
ceeding issues until 1885. His posthumous son was born 
May 17, 1886, and became Alfonso XIII, but. curiously 
enough, not until January 1, 1890 did he appear on the 
stamps of the Philippines, The portrait remained in use 
until the Islands passed to the United States after the 
Spanish-American War of 
1898, 

A Royal decree of June 
11, 1896, provided that, 
beginning with the next 
issue (series of 1898- 
99), there should be uni- 
form stamps for Cuba, 
Puerto Rico and the 
Philippines. Accordingly, 
a new design was issued, 
that for each colony 
differing only in the name 
in the upper label. As the war with the drilled States ex- 
tended to the Philippines, and was further complicated 
by trouble with the Filipino Insurgents, postal affairs of 
the 1898-99 period became chaotic. In addition to the 
stamps issued by Spain and the stamps of the United 
States used by the American troops in the Islands, there 




14 * Philippines 



were also those used by the so-called Revolutiouar> Gov* 
eminent under General Kmilio Aguinaldo. 

For al least ten months after Februarj I. 1899, the 
Filipinos were under the control of neither the Spanish 
nor the Americans. Their stamps, therefore, seem to be 

more or less on the same Footing as those of the Con- 
federate States of America. The general opinion is that 

the) were issued for legitimate purposes and that they 

were in use while the Aguinaldn government lasted. Thcv 

thus have a philatelic as well as historic interest which 
should appeal to American collectors. 

\merican troops in the Islands continued to use United 
States stamps until October I. 1903, when the Postmaster 
General of the United States, through die War Depart- 
ment, ended the practice. In 1889, some current United 
States postage stamps, diagonally surcharged PHILIP- 
PINES* were issued for use in the Philippine Islands. 
During the next two years, these were supplemented hv 
surcharging other values. Stamped envelopes, wrappers 
and postal cards of the I nited States were also similarly 
surcharged, as well as current Special Delivery and Post- 
age Due stamps. 

In September, 1902. a temporary shortage of one-cent 
stamps resulted in the use of the one-cent Postage Due 
for local mail, in and near Manila. This provisional use. 
however, was only from September 5 to 19. 1902. 




The first unsurcharged current issue printed purposely 
for the Philippines after the American occupation was 
released early in 1903. These stamps, "the Old Current 
Issue," are of ordinary size, elaborately designed with 
the eoat of arms of the Philippines. Above the crest are the 
words. PHILIPPINE ISLANDS running from left to 
right in an arch, with UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
directly beneath. This set has portraits of great Ameri- 
cans, the Filipino patriot. Dr. Jose Rizal. and early Span- 
ish navigators and explorers. This issue was in constant 
use until July 31. 1940, when the President of the Philip- 
pines, al the Suggestion of the Secretary of Public Works 
and Communications, withdrew it from sale to preserve 
its philatelic value. 

During early 1935. another current issue was released 
by ihe Philippine Government. Still in use. it is known 
as the New Current Issue or the Pictorial Issue. The de- 
signs of all fourteen stamps of the set. ranging from two 
centavos <1 cent I to five pesos ( $2.50). are both educa- 
tional and historical, show ing the growth of Filipino fine 



arts talent since the early Spanish regime. The one. two. 

four and fiye*peso denominations are painstakingly done 
in two colors, a system only a few countries have at- 
tempted because it requires slow and \ er\ careful handling 
of the paper anil presses. 

Shortly after the Pictorial I -sue appeared, the Com- 
monwealth Government was inaugurated in the Philip- 
pines. P>\ order of the newly elected President. Manuel L. 
Quezon, toward the end of 1935 all unsold pictorial 




stamps were surcharged horizontally with the word 

"Commonwealth." 

To commemorate the inauguration a set of five Stamps 
was issued portraying the Temples of Human Progress* 
In December. 1935, another set was released to mark 
the first trans-Pacific airmail flight. The two stamps of 
this set are believed to be the only gold-surcharged stamps 
in existence; 

On June 19. 1936, the Philippine Bureau of Engraving 
and Printing successfully printed three stamps in celebra- 
tion of the 75th birthday of Dr. Jose Rizal. Filipino pa- 
triot, i Prior to that date, all Philippine stamps were pre- 
pared in Washington.} 

The Philippine Assembly proposed another set on the 
first anniversary of the Commonwealth, and on November 
15. 1936. three stamps were released with the portrait oil 
the first President. Manuel L. Quezon. 

The thirty-third Eucharistic Congress held at Manila 
on February 3 to 7. 1937 was marked by a set of six 
stamps. These bore the map of the Philippines, with a 
white star representing Manila. The shining rays of this 
star, spreading over the entire archipelago, symbolized 
the light of Christianity in the Philippines. 

Since no special stamps celebrated tin* 1937 or 1938 an- 
niversaries of the Commonwealth, on November 15. 1939, 
a series of three sets, of three values each, was issued. The 
first set shows the Triumphal Arch scheduled t<> be 
built at Manila from proceeds of the sale of these particu- 
lar stamps. The second pictures show Malacanan Palace, 
official residence <>f the President of the Philippines, The 
third set shows President Quezon taking his oath of oilier 
before Ramon Avancena, Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court of the Philippines, ^ 

• o • 

further information on Commonwealth stamps is avail- 
able from the Philippine Philatelic \genc\. Washington; 

n. c. 



15 • 




r ILIPINO WOMEN have played an important mk in 
Philippine politics since they earned the right to vote in 
1937. The mud^slinging and broken homes predicted by 
lhe pessimists failed to materialize: instead women have 
been a consistent force for honest govern merit. The hand- 
ful who hold elective: positions have heen active in pro- 
moting public health and welfare, mass education, 
elimination of vice and the strengthening of family lies. 

More than half a million women went to the polls in 
1937, their first chance to vote. Forty-two of the 47 Philip- 
pine provinces elected 306 women to their councils: 13 
women won seats as vice-inayors: two unseated veteran 
politicians in mayorality races; and three candidates for 
provincial boards led all other candidates in number of 
vetes received, But the most spectacular victory for the 
lipstick brigade in 1937 was the election of winsome Miss 
Carmen Plan as I portrait above), a University of lhe 
Philippines co-ed, to the Manila city council. 

The December 19-10 elections confirmed this victory. 
Miss Plan as not only was re elected, hut she actually 
topped all the council c andidates. The opposition ran 24- 
year-old Miss Piedad Montenegro for the cnimrib hoping 
to undermine Miss Planas* feminine vote, To the dismay 
of lhe politicians, both women won seats. Miss Monte- 
negro, a trained accountant, aims to balance the eityV 
school budget during her incumbency. 

Women's entry into politics has put new life and color 
inlo local elei : ions. Wives of candidates stump the barr ios 
and remote villages on behalf of I heir hushnnds. 

"You sav m\ husband could be elected if he supported 
the majoril v parl\.^ the wife of one minority candidate 
for governor told a crowd. "Rut if he did. who would 
male* 1 up lhe minorilv that debmrls \ our rights and works 



for your welfare?" The candidate won in a landslide. 

Even the First Lady. Mrs, Manuel L. Quezon, 
astounded veteran politicians by publicly stating her 
preference for a candidate who was losing to a well-known 
utilities owner. The speech turned the tide, and Mrs. 
Quezon's candidate was swept into office. 

A governor seeking a third term was urged b> political 
bigwigs to withdraw his eandidae\ to aid ""part\ nnit\ * 

"We prefer an honorable defeat." his determined wife 
laid them. "We are poor, but we prefer lo continue 
lighting rather than be humiliated b\ a withdrawal. \\ e 
expect nothing more than justice and we are ready to 
light." The outburst, duly reported by the press, brought 
the husband an even greater majority than he had re- 
ceived in the two previous elections. 

Governors- mayors and other elective officials in several 
provinces who tolerated "jueteng" tone form of 
gambling) lost in the last elections because of an "unseat- 
corrupt-officials" drive carried out bv clubwomen, social 
workers and women teachers. 

Active feminine participation in politics and public 
affairs gained momentum during the 1940 election cam- 
paign as the number of registered women voters ap- 
proached the million mark. More women ran for office 
than ever before; two even tried for governorship*, hut 
lost lo more seasoned politicians. Three were elected 
mayors, three more won places on provincial boards, four 
were elected to city councils I in Manila. Bagnio and 
Davao) i several are now vice-mayors, and about 500 
gained seats on local councils. 

President Quezon, shortly after the December election, 
congratulated the women of the Philippines on the good 
showing made by their candidates, and said he would 
like to see more women run for elective posts. Such en- 
couragement from the Chief Executive immediately 
strengthened the determination of women's groups to 
name their ow n candidates for [he National Assemhh . 

While women do not yet go in for open lobbying, 
achieve their end indirectly by going after the officials 
they have elected to office and keeping tabs on their ac- 
complishments, Women frequently approach the wives of 
officials and, through them, get better legislation and law 
enforcement. The women's greatest force for better 
legislation is the combination of the Women's Club, the 
Philippine Association of University Women and the 
League of Women Voters. These three formidable or- 
ganizations are educating women in politics and training 
them for better citizenship. Men with political ambitions 
have suddenly found that their wives" affiliation to one 
of these groups is almost as important as their ow n part) 
connections. 

As yet, no women have reached the National Assemble 
but plans are afoot to nominate four women in time for 
the national election in December. Should they win pile 
or more seats. the\ can at last hope to change lhe obso- 
lete laws which for years have ignored their rigbls as 
individuals. Filipino women, armed with tin* vote, are * Mil 
to carve a permanent place for themsehes in public life. ^ 



• 17 ■ 



O ne La nguage for A tl (from Page 11) 

public and private secondary and normal schools in 1940 
began offering courses in the national language. The Uni- 
versity of the Philippines has had such courses for more 
than two years, and private colleges have followed suit. 
It has been proposed to make Tagalog the medium of in- 
struction in the primary grades in 1946 or soon after; 
whether the project will be carried out depends on the 
officials who shape our educational policies. Of course. 
English will remain indefinitely as the medium of instruc- 
tion in the secondary and normal schools and in the col- 
leges and universities, because the national language will 
be deficient for higher instruction until it has attained 
fuller growlh. By Philippine legislative enactment, Taga- 
log will become, side by side 
wilh English and Spanish, an 
official language on July 4, 
1946. The advancement will 
give official status to the na- 
tional language of a people 
on the day of their birth as a 
sovereign and independent 
nation. The action should 
also accelerate future de- 
velopment of the tongue. 

It must be admitted that 
some language experts of 
world importance doubt the 
workability of the whole 
scheme. H. L. Mencken be- ^ _ 
lieves that "there is not 1 a S alo g bo f 
much likelihood that any such artificial tongue [a na- 
tional language based on one of the existing native 
languages] will he perfected in the near future, or that it 
will be used by the generality of the Filipinos," Mencken 
is mistaken, of course, in assuming that the national 
language to be developed will be an artificial speech. 
The present plan is to disseminate the basic language in 
Its present form. The process of growth and enrichment 
will follows. 

^ As regards the objection that non-Tagalog-speaking 
Filipinos will find it as difficult to learn Tagalog as to 
learn English or Spanish, an important psychological 
point should be kept hi mind. Philippine languages are 
cognate, agglutinative languages, belonging to the same 
Austrnnesian family. English and Spanish are inflectional 
and not akin to any Philippine language. Experience 
shows that it is generally easier for a person born to one 
agglutinative language to learn another than to learn an 
inflectional tongue. Finally, if the Filipinos have suc- 
ceeded in mastering both English and Spanish, as their 
considerable creative literary work in these languages 
indicates, there is no reason why they cannot acquire a 
language indigenous to a great portion of them and 
cognate lo the rest without difficult?* ir 

* L8 • Philippines 



4< 




EFFORTS by the Oilier »f the Philippine Resident 
Commissioner in Washington to unify Filipinos in the 
United States, Hawaii and Alaska have resulted in the 
organization of Community Councils in every city and 
locality with a large Filipino population. Today, 26 
councils in the United States and one in Alaska maintain 
contact between these nationals and the Philippine Res- 
ident Commissioner in Washington. Through these or- 
ganizations, problems of general Filipino welfare receive 
official attention, 



West Coast Community Councils in the past two 
years have put particular emphasis on economic welfare 
and elevation of the living standard uf huge number? 
of Filipinos in that area. At annual inter-commu nity con- 
ferences, national, social and business pro him is con- 
fronting the communities arc considered. Fneou raged by 
a successful meeting last December. West Coast Filipinos 
now plan an even bigger convention at Oakland in June, 
Th is will be followed by a Middle Western conference to 
include Chicago. Detroit, Denver, Kansas City and St. 
Louis, and later by an Eastern meeting comprising Wash- 
ington, New York City, Newark. Philadelphia and 
Boston. 



r JLIPINOS along the Pacific Coast are campaigning 
for funds Lo establish community centers. This movement 
started in San Francisco, where plans to build a $30,000 
center are making steady progress. This building will 
serve as a commercial, social and cultural center for 
Filipinos in the Western States, as well as for visitors 
from the Islands. It may also house Philippine govern* 
ment agencies. To date, $3,000 has been raised. 



SEEKING to develop the cultural and intellectual back- 
ground of Filipinos in the United States, monthly round- 
table forums are now being sponsored by a number of 
Filipino professionals and students, with the support 
of Community Councils, The movement was initialed in 
Chicago, and mm later taken up by the Washington 
group. For tun subjects are voted upon in advance? so 
that members of the community can "study up.*" Prob- 
lems affecting Filipinos are considered, and a discussion 
of diversified national subjects, including arts and his- 
tory, usually follows. These round-table talks also foster 
Letter relations and understanding wilh the A merit a ri 
public, and Americans are invited to lake pfeft, ^ 



M eet THE ORDER OF T HE CARABAO 

By Coh Joseph M* Heller 



H ALF A DOZEN American annv officers, irked at the 
"fact/*' accruing to members of the Order of the Dragon, 
which Allied loader? had organized after the Boxer Up- 
rising in China earlier that year, niel in the Army and 
Navy Club at Manila hi 1900 and established their own 
Military Order of the Canihao. The name was meant to 
be a joke: the lowly carabao, hastily conscripted to drag 
artillery and supply wagons over jungle trails, was the 
mosl useful and damned animal in the Philippines. To 
the surprise of everyone involved, lire Order found almost 
instant support. Still growing in strength* today it Is the 
mosl important fraternal group in the United States 
armed forces. 

Proof of lis popularity is to he found in the annual 
"Wallows" at Washington. The guest list includes Army, 
TSavy and Marine Corps chiefs, mem hers of the Cain net. 
important Congressmen, ant! prominent writers. Marked 
by skits, songs and off -the- record talks, the Wallow is 
considered the outstanding social-military affair of the 
Washington season. 

The Carabaos are a distinguished group. Every chief 
of staff hut one since 1000 lias been a member. General 
Pershing and most of the corps and division commanders 
of the American forces in the World War belonged. 
The High Command of the Army. Navy and Marine 
Corps today is riddled with Carabaos. Secretary of War 
Henry L. Stiinson, by virtue of his former position as 
Governor General of the Philippines, is an Honorary 
Carabao. 

The Orders constitution a I firsL specified that member- 
ship should be limited to commissioned officers of the 
Army or Navy who served in the Philippines between 
1898 and July 4, 1902, the official dates of the Spanish- 
American War and the subsequent insurrection. Later, 
however, the requirements were liberalized. At present 
the Order is open to "any person who shall have honor- 
ably served in the Philippine Islands between May 1. 
1898 and July U 1 91 ,4. both dales inclusive, or who 
participated in any campaign or expedition in the Phil- 
ippines for which a campaign medal is authorized by the 
War Department, as a commissioned officer of the United 
States Regular or Volunteer Army, Navy, Marine Corps. 
Coast Guard, Public Health Service, or as a Naval Cadet 
or Midshipman, or as Acting Assistant Surgeon. Contract 
Surgeon. Contract Dental Surgeon, or any person who 
so served as an cnlisled man in (he United Slates Vrnn. 
Navy. Marine Corps, ("oast Guard, or Public Health 
Service and subsequently received a commission for 



appointment in any of the above named classes/' These 
men have the rank of Veteran Carabaos. 

A second category — Compariero Carabao — includes 
men who served in the Islands after July 4. 1913. 
Sons of Veteran, Companero or Associate Carabaos are 
eligible for membership as Ternero (calf) Carabaos. 
Carabaos of all classes totaled 991 at the end of 1940. 

The Main Corral of the order is at W ash i net on, D. C 
and a smaller Corral meets annually in San Francisco, 

The Military Order of the Carabao recognizes the 
serious nature of national defense, past and present, 
but it has so far refused Eo take itself or its ideals too 
seriously. The annual Wallows are happy a flairs- at 
which national leaders and their policies occasionally 
come in for unmerciful ribbing. The 1913 program, in 
fact, so ridiculed the international program of President 
Wilson and Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan 
that it drew a stinging official rebuke from the White 
House. 

Subsequent Wallows have never quite reached that 
level hut they are still popular in W ashington and 
are anticipated with great relish. The 1941 gathering %vas 
held at the Willard Hotel. Washington, on February 8. 
Speakers included the Secretary of the Navy and the 
Undersecretary of W ar. 

At the annual meeting late in December. 1940. officer* 
for the current year were elected. These included: 

Grand Paramount Carabao (National Commander). 
Brig. Gen- A. Owen Seaman. USA. 

Grand Patriarch of the Herd (First Vice-Com- 
mander), Rear Adm. Walton R. Sexton, USN. 

Bell Carabao {2nd Vice-Commander I . Maj. Gen. 
Thoma* Holemnk USMC 

Grand Councillor of the Herd (3rd Vice-Com- 
mander), Maj. William T. Davis. MX.. USA. 

Grand Jefe de los Bafios (4th Vice-Commander), 
CoL Joseph F, Siler, USA. 

Grand Jefe de los Bebidns (5th Vice-Commander I . 
Krai Ad in. Raymond Spear, USN. 

Grand Jefe de lo* Cargadmes (fith Vice-Com- 
mander), Col. Charles h\ Sanderson, USMC. 

Main Guard. Col. William It. Clnptom USA. 

Winder of the Honu Comm. Joseph ,b kaveney, 
M.C. USN. 

Carretonoro. Capt bother Sheldon. Jr.. MC. USN. 

Cambohitg Carabau. Brig* Genu James V Uttn- I S V 

Vcicrinario. Maj, Richard 1). LaGarde, USA. 

Jefe de la Cuadra. Oil. Charles C. Mortimer. 1 S \. 

Director de Fiesta. UeuL Col- Hart? l'\ Ciliming 
ham, LISA, Res, 

Grand bead & W heel Cm aba-" i Secret ar\ & Treas- 
urer), CoL Joseph \h Heller. \1JU< US \. 



• 19 * 



FATS AND OILS 

APPARENT CONSUMPTION IN THE UNITED STATES BY MAJOR CLASSES OF USE 

1939 



FOREIGN 



DOMESTIC 




LARD 



BUTTER 



SOYBEAN OIL 



MARINE ANIMAL OILS 



COTTONSEED OEL 



FISH OILS 



INEDIBLE 



TALLOW 



AND 



GREASES 



(EXCEPT WOOL GREASE 




LINSEED 



OIL 



100 



- 90 



ao 



70 



60 



50 



40 



30 - 



20 



- 10 



_L 



_L 



_L 



— 1 o 



ALL USES 



.FOREIGN ; 



DOMESTIC 



O 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 60 

HORIZONTAL SCALE; PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL CONSUMPTION BY MAJOR CLASSES OF USE 
VERTICAL SCALE PERCENTAGE COMPOSITION WITHIN EACH MAJOR CLASS OF USE 

SOURCE BASED ON DATA SUPPLIED BY U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND US- BUREAU OF CENSUS 



90 



IO0 



tfNtrSb STATES TAftyFF COMMtS&IQfi ~ CKtvbar. tj±0 



• 2ft * Philippines 



• # • By John B. Gordon 



does it compete with American agriculture? 



Consider ihe coconut and what it does for you. 
The soap you use in your kuli is better because of 
COCOiiut nil. The shatterproof glass in your new ear is 
clearer and safer, Your wife's evening gown is gayer, 
the buttons on her street clothes brighter because of the 
coconut. And on ihe less attractive side of life, big guns 
boom with increased force and bombs have greater 
destroying power as ihe result of the amazing diversity 
of products modern science has squeezed from the 
ubiquitous Philippine coconut. 

The American farmer onre looked upon the ^coco* 
nut cow" as a competitor. Hydrogen ated coconut oil, he 
feared, would drive his butter from the market. But. 
as the chart on the opposite page shows, the fear was 
poorly founded. The authoritative figures of the IL S. 
Department of Agriculture and the U< S. Bureau of Cen- 
sus demonstrate that coconut oil accounted for only 1.8 
per cent of the total edible oils and fats consumed in 
this country during 1939. Hardly a serious competitor 
for the cow, particularly in the light of the two and 
three-quarter million dollars worth of American dairy 
products sold annually to the Philippines! 

The graph divides the nation's consumption of oils and 
fat — it approached the amazing total of 10,000,000,000 
pounds in 1939 — into four eh ami els — food. soap, paints 
and miscellaneous. Food accounted for 67 per cent of 
the total; soap, 20 per cent; paints and varnish, 8.5; 
and miscellaneous (for making tin plate, rubber sub- 
stitutes, plastics, lubricating oils, etc.) about 5. 

Butter, lard, cottonseed oil and soybean oil are the 
most important oils and fats produced by the American 
farmer, and they arc consumed almost entirely as food. 
The coconut oil converted into food is negligible. Thus, 
the "coconut cow" is in reality no cam petit ion at all to 
the products of the American farmer. 

Coconut oil finds its chief American use in the soap 



kettles. It produces a hard, free-lathering soap that is 
useful in water of any hardness. This quality is due to 
its except [en all v high percentage of lauric acid, which 
does not occur at all in oils or fats produced in the 
United States, 

The Tariff Commissi' n fou.id that coconut oil com- 
prised 2 k L per cent of the oil and fat ingredients of the 
1939 output of American soap. Ah ho ugh it is the highest 
priced ingredient, it was used because no domestic fat 
or oil can replace it. Coconut oil provided the quick- 
lathering and free-rinsing qualities essential in any mar- 
ketable soap, while inedible tallow and grease supplied 
body and durability. 

While at the present lime no appreciable amount of 
coconut oil goes into other industrial uses, such as plas- 
ticisers and varnishes and the requirements of miscel- 
laneous manufacturing, interest is growing in its util- 
ization in many fields. For instance, coconut oil goes into 
the cellulose acetate molding powder that is pressed 
into steering wheels, instrument panels, radio parts, 
toothbrush handles and similar Items. Germany h mak- 
ing airplane wings and fuselages from plastics to save 
metal. Sulpha ted higher alcohols — in the preparation 
of which lauric acid plays an important part— are nee- 
essan fur modern silk, wool and rayon fabric produc- 
tion, pulp and paper making, leather dyeing, electro- 
plating and a multitude of other processes, 

In scores of fields of modern life, coconut oil plays 
an important part, Bath soap, explosives, dress materials, 
radio sets and airplanes — all benefit by the fact that the 
Philippines produee under the American flag the world's 
largest supply of this valuable and essential tropical 
product. Best of all, coconut oil does not compete with 
United Slates products. It is truly an aid to the American 
way of life. ^ 



The B filth* /or Greece (from Page 9) 

fense measures are going forward. Roads are being built, 
and material accumulated. Equipment is needed, of course 
— anus, tanks, trucks, munitions — but these can he pro- 
cured in lime, as the needs are fitted into the general 
American defense scheme. 

United States government leaders have acknowledged 
and restated America's responsibility for defending the 
Philippines until the advent of independence in 1946- 
The next five years, therefore, constitute a prolonged 
crisis for the Philippines and the world. But with courage, 
foresight and preparation, the Philippines like democ- 
racy itself is eminently defensible. 



THE Philippine Commonwealth is divided In in 49 
provinces, the governors of all hut four of which are 
elected by popular vote for ihrec \car terms, The un- 
developed non-Christian provinces of Go I ah a I o, La nan, 
Bukidnou and Mountain Province are governed by Presi- 
dential appointees. Philippine pro\ iuces. unlike Ameri- 
can slates, are not completely sovereign within their own 
borders. For instance, there are no provincial supreme 
courts, and all legislation is handled by the National 
Assembly. Each province elects and sends from ime In 
five representalb es I depending on ihe population I to 
I lie Assembly. 



21 



,4 New Vocabulary 



(from Page 3) 




enemy meets him everywhere'. In the Filipinos, we have 
1 6.00(1000 friends — genuine friends — and I do not favor 
sitting back, awaiting disaster, then commenting: 'Well, 
they asked for It.* Isn't a better solution possible? 

"It isn't as i£ we have been handing largesse to the 
Islands for 40 years. The United States has been given 
full measure in return — gold, export markets, safe 
sources of supply, a friendly base for our army and navy 
in the Far East. In the future, the Philippines may have 
still more to offer, L rider those circumstances, why de- 
stroy the usefulness of a long-time friend, particularly if 
a new vocabulary — a new 
frame of mind, perhaps — will 
remedy the situation?" 

J. Weldon Jones, a tail, 
soft - spoken, black - haired 
Texan of Welsh descent, rode 
herd on his fathers Texas 
ranch as a boy. In 1917. 
Jones left college to go to 
France with the United 
States army, which detailed 

him to truck driving. With the return of peace, however, 
he went back to college and resumed the study of ac- 
countancy. For seven years he was a public and corpora- 
tion auditor. In 1929. Ohio State University named him 
a professor of accounting, auditing and income tax 
procedure. Jones was in that post when President Roose- 
velt late in 1933 appointed him Insular Auditor for the 
Philippine Islands. 

Jones became financial adviser to the High Commis- 
sioner with inauguration of the Commonwealth govern- 
ment on November 15, 1935. Twice in the next five years, 
for a total of 17 months, he served as aeling High Com- 
missioner. Last fall. President Roosevelt offered him a 
new job in Washington as Assistant Director of the 
Budget, part of the Executive Office of the President, 

Manila's regret at Jones 5 departure was relieved by one 
happy thought. It was that the Filipinos would have an 
understanding friend in Washington, 

"Weldon Jones,' 7 declared President Quezon shortly 
before the financial assistant's departure, "has been one 
of the most efficient, fair and tactful officials ever to come 
to these Islands," 

In a farewell interview with one of the Manila papers. 
Jones suggested that "horse-trading" might produce a 
better relation between Manila and Washington. 
^ s i have the feeling that some Yankee traders and some 
Yankee- trained traders should get together and use the 
vocabulary of horse traders," he declared. 'Those old-time 
Yankee traders were not out to get each others' scalps so 
much as to trade again and again on succeeding Satur- 
days, to have a good Lime in the trading, and Lo find in ihe 
end I hat all had profited." ^ 



Better Understanding 



To the Philippine Resident Commissioner 
Washington. D. C. 

Having had the unusual experience as a young Amer- 
ican lawyer a decade ago of working for almost three 
years in govern menial service in the Philippines, it was 
with more than ordinary interest that I picked up the 
first issue of "Philippines/ 5 I immediately felt that I 
had journeyed back and was among old friends and 
familiar scenes. But I am enthusiastic about your mag- 
azine for a much more vital reason than its vivid remind- 
ers of a happy and stimulating period in my own life. 

Many of those Americans who had the privilege of 
working in the government service under the Governor 
General of the late 1920*5 and early 1930% left the 
Islands with some feeling of futility, We were all working 
for a sound solution of hoih Philippine problems and 
the mutual problems of the United States and the Phil- 
ippine Islands. The lack of understanding and even 
interest in these problems not only among ordinary 
Americans but also among legislative, administrative and 
executive personnel in the United States gradually built 
up a feeling of discouragement. We considered the prob- 
lems important, but many of those who should have 
been interested and informed, comprehended little and 
fared less about these distant Islands. Many of us de- 
spaired of getting a sufficient section of American opin- 
ion interested in the Islands and, without such interest, 
intelligent handling of the problems seemed a dim hope 
at best. This reaction led to the view, which I have heard 
expressed, that we should get the American flag down 
as quickly as possible and get out of the Islands, come 
what may. 

Due to the international spotlight being turned on the 
Far East, and the Clipper connections bringing the 
Islands closer. I have observed growing interest in the 
Philippines. Unfortunately- without having been there, 
the average person cannot easily achieve an adequate 
knowledge of either the Islands or the Islands in their 
relation to the United Stales. 

The first issue of your magazine ''Philippines" with 
its interest-catching pictures and informative articles is 
most timely, and has given me renewed hope that this 
educational campaign may now awaken a wider interest 
in our mutual problems, thus materially aiding towards 
the goal of an informed and intelligent solution of the 
joint problems of [he Philippines and the United Slates. 

Francis 0. A field, T1T T 

Philadelphia, Pa, 



* 22 • Philippines 



Philippine Advertising 



(from Page 6) 



University of the Philippines (from Page 11) 



Philip pint's arc preparing the ground for greater sales 
and consumption uf American goods. 

Business leadership in the Philippines is shared by 
Americans and Filipinos. The consuming public is pri- 
marily the HUMHUIOO Filipinos, who for a full generation 
have been learning American ways. The potential market 
awaiting American business methods is almost without 
limit. 

In advertising, the uiic held of American business that 
is new, but which is now being organized effect ivel v. 
leadership is again jointK American and Filipino. The 
two races work in iulimale cooperation seeking to pro- 
mote free Philippine trade with America- in the im- 
portance of which I hey unanimously agree. The presi- 
dent of the newly organized Advertising Club of the Phil* 
ippines, For instance, is L. G* W agner, of Midler and 
Phipps, importers and distributors of American phar- 
maceutical and loilel goods. The vice-president is Pedro 
E. Teodoro. of Flizalde & Co.. one of the biggest adver- 
tisers in the Commonwealth. The writer, secretary of the 
club, represents Madrigal & Company, an outstanding 
Filipino firm interested in shipping, textiles, coconut oil, 
lumber, cement and coal. Tlr? membership of ibis club 
includes all leading American and Filipino firms and 
businessmen in Manila. 

The club has already made its influence fell through a 
decisive drive to clean Manila of the pscudo- publishers 
and fly-by-night publications that threatened to absorb 
an important pari of the money that would otherwise be 
devoted to legitimate advertising and promotion. With 



determined government sup- 
port, it is also undertaking 
a campaign to curb such 
violations of advertising laws 
as misrepresentation, mis- 
labeling, illegal refilling 
of trademark-protected con- 
tainers, and the sale of in- 
ferior goods. The laxity 
of existing legislation has 
caused some difficulty, but 
everything is being done by 
the government to aid the 
drive until more teeth can be 
put in the law. 

These measures will have 
the effect of protecting 
American business, although, 
of course, no discrimination 
is possible against any busi- 
ness using legitimate meth- 
ods, regardless of nationality, 
ing circumstances, they should 




But 

insure continued Amer- 
ican domination of the Philippine market and keep the 
doors wide open for more business from the United 
States. + 



Quezon Institute^ Manila 
for tuberculosis patients. 

under I he exist- 



co lieges and schools of the Unh ersity publish their own 
bulletins and journals. 

Members of the University debating club take part 
in public debates in Manila during the school year and 
in the provinces during vacations. As the result, not only 
do the students receive practical training in public speak- 
ing, but the University also is brought closer to the people. 
The University dramatic club gives students technical 
training in the theory and practice of dramatic arts. 

Student health is constantly supervised through visits 
by University physicians, regular sanitary inspections of 
university restaurants and dormitories, and a program of 
physical training. Under the National Defense Act. men 
students receive military training. W eekly convocations 
arc held and there are regular addresses by prominent 
speakers. From lime to time the president of the L niversity 
consults with the families of students to offer suggestions 
regarding their welfare. 

A Student Loan Fund helps students pay their matricu- 
lation fees, about one- fifth of the student body receiving 
some aid from this source. In addition, freshmen who 
lack funds to buy textbooks may rent them from the 
University at low rates. 

A program to attract the best student material in the 
Philippines was recently inaugurated. The number and 
size of scholarships awarded to high school honor gradu* 
ates {and to college graduates who desire advanced work) 
has been increased. This new system permits a high school 
graduate to attend the I niversity free of tuition fees. 
Within four years, the l' niversity hopes to have at least 

15 per t ent of its students in 
this honor category. 

Graduates of the I niver- 
sity of the Philippines, num- 
bering some 12.753, are 
scattered throughout the 49 
provinces of the archipelago. 
Among the number holding 
responsible positions are the 
Speaker of the National 
Assembly. Cabinet officers, 
\atinnal Assemblymen, Uni- 
\ersil\ f) residents mid pro- 
\ incial governors. 

The fundamental aim of 
the I niversity of the Philip- 
pines is to promote the web 
fare of the Filipino people. 
This is accomplished by de- 
veloping clear and indepen- 
dent thinking- training the 
of democracy, acting as the 
handing 



Filipino youth in the ideals 

repository of knowledge of the Commonwealth, 
down the cultural legacy of the past to the present, and. 
finally, in developing to the fullest extent the native 
genius of the Filipino race, ^ 



23 



P. I. HEWS 



Strategic Manila Hemp 



(from Page 7) 



After five years of exploration and development, the 
Davao Gold Mines has finally been brought into produc- 
tion with a 150-ton mill constructed by the Southwestern 
Engineering Co. When Davao Cold started operations in 
1935 the property was accessible only by a narrow 
trail through the Mindanao jungle: after a landing field 
had been cleared, two airplanes carried men and mate- 
rials to the mines, (A Bellanca transported 2,290 men 
and 5,116,007 pounds of cargo, and a Waco carried 
1,315 passengers and 620,003 pounds of cargo.) Finally, 
the company installed a 41 .000-foot aerial freight and 
passenger tramway, the first of its kind in the Philippines. 
Ore has been leaving the mines over this route since 
last October, and milling began in November. 

• i g 

Arrangements have been made by United States and 
Philippine postal officials to transfer airmail bound 
for Java and Singapore to occasional private or official 
planes when their departure southward from Manila 
coincides with the arrival of Clipper mail from the 
United States. Airmail for the Netherlands Indies is 
usually routed through Hongkong and Rangoon, adding 
several days or even weeks to the delivery time. 

• • i 

The President of the Philippines has created a com- 
mittee charged with revising and codifying the existing 
substantive laws of the Commonwealth. The new code 
will "conform with the customs, traditions and idiosyn- 
crasies of the Filipino people and with progressive prin- 
ciples of the science of law," according to the execu- 
tive order. This move climaxes years of effort by bench 
bar and legislators, who have sought to revise Philippine 
substantive laws, the greater part of which are in Spanish' 
The penal code has been brought up-to-date by a similar 
committee created some time ago. 

• • • 

President Manuel L. Quezon has officially set the 
period from March 19 to 28 as National Defense Week 
for the Philippine Islands. Simultaneously Philippine 
Army headquarters has scheduled its annual program of 
active nji itary training for all reservists for late in 
March, The largest number of trainees in Philinnine 
history is expected to enroll. 

DATE OF THE MONTH 
Filipino Catholics celebrate March 19 as Saint Jo 
seplrs Day. It is considered a day of obligation, when 
everyone attends mass. Saint Joseph is the patron of all 
who want a happy home life and a peaceful death, 

• 24 • Philippines 



izens. This law was aimed directly at the Japanese control 
of abaca production. 

But the extremely clever Nipponese had bit upon 
new devices for acquiring additional land. They married, 
temporarily or otherwise, Pi J i pi no women in whose 
names title to the land was vested, or they bought land 
through corporations ostensibly owned by Filipinos, 
but actually controlled by Japanese. 

We observed many of these practices, ami subse- 
quently informally reported them to American and Fib 
ipino officials. In the following years, efforts were made 
to stir up interest in this problem, but little was actually 
done. The danger was generally discounted. 

Mow we observe a change, a healthy one. People 
have become aware of the economic clanger inherent 
in the control of a vital commodity by possibly hostile 
nationals. The Commonwealth Governments action in- 
dicates a new and praiseworthy awareness of the perilous 
factors involved, and this, in turn, indicates an aware- 
ness of the larger international and strategic consider- 
ations. 

In Washington, a government bureau lias made a 
special study of our natural resources and the extent 
to which the United States is dependent for essential 
raw materials upon outside sources. It found that this 
country relics on the province of Davao, dominated as 
it is by Japanese, fur 75 per cent of its hemp. It can- 
not be too strongly emphasized that rope and hemp 
could not he replaced for marine and naval use. It is 
an essential sinew of our national defense. 

We must continue to look to the Philippines for our 
supply of this vital commodity. It is one of the reasons 
Philippine trade is so valuable to us. No other part 
of the world raises abaca in any considerable quantity. 
Davao, of course, is not the only Philippine province 
where hemp is cultivated, hut Davao is the keystone of 
the abaca industry. As long as it remains so, Davao is of 
vital interest and concern to us. We cannot afford to be 
complaisant about a potential danger to our industry 
and defense. 

We must look to our sources. Furthermore, we should 
make every effort to assist and encourage Filipino moves 
toward cooperation in mutual defense. 



FOR I) WILKIINS. city editor of the American-owned 
Manila Daily Bulletin and Philippine correspondent 
for the New York Times, recently visited the United States 
on a three-months leave of absence. He is now hack at his 
desk in Manila, In Washington to interview administration 
nfTicials on behalf of his paper, Mr. Wilkins reported 
thai the Philippine capital is rapidly replacing Shanghai 
as the most important news center in the Far East. 




You 
Manil 
in ccllopl 



CIGARS of UNEXCELLED Quality 
SMOKE of UNSURPASSED VALUE 



Smoking a good Manila cigar means 

enjoying the rich pleasant aroma and the sweet 
mellow flavor of famous Philippine To- 
bacco, grown in the valleys of eternal 
summer and sunshine. 



Manufactured entirely by hand under the strictest governmental 
regulation and sanitary control, MANILAS give you more smoking 
satisfaction for the price than any other cigars on the American 
market. 

These me the reasons why MANILA CIGARS are the choice of millions 
of smokers — why doctors recommend them and connoisseurs prefer them. 

Ask for a MANILA with the pleasant aroma 



PHILIPPINE TOBACCO AGENCY 

2362 Massachusetts Avenue, N. W. 
Washington, D. C 



