THE PHIUPPE® AHSYi ITS ESTABUGEMaiT, ORGANIZATION 

AND UQAL BASIS 


Prepared 

by 

Philippine Research end Information Section, 
Advance leheloa, TJSA3TT. 

APO 601 


26 January 1945 


* 


FOREv/CBD 

The present study collects and compiles the Commonwealth statutes 

r 

affecting tho Philippine \rtny. fme of the important executive orders, 
and other legal source ra also contained in it. .Amendment* to the 
Rational ^ef erase Act are found in such widely scattered sources that 
the comp ilatioa of the lew in its present form, incorporating all amend- 
ments, will serve as a reference to the lsgel basis of the Army. A 
list of executive messages and irqaortant speeches of the President of 
the Cammonv^alth relating to national, defense and the Array is also 
included. A short account of the establishment of the Army, its develop- 
ment and organisation has been written. 


1 


'CABLE OF CQHTEJHtt 
PART I 

I 

The Fre^aamonwealth Period end the Constabulary, ••«••»<<•»<•>«»• X 

A. The Pre-Gonmonwsalth Period,.,...,, 1 

B. She Constabulary,, ........... 1 

PART XX 

The National Defense AAt MM ,„, 4 

PART XIX 

Organization of the Philippine Army, a#*.....**...,.,,....,,,.,,.., 6 

A, The Department of National Defense 

and the General Staff Corps*. 6 

B. She Regular Force.,.,........* 7 

C* The Reserve Force •••#•••*««*,.# 9 

D* Off Shore Patrol Reservo...,.,,.,.......,.,.,.,,. n 

B* The Philippine Army Nurse Corps Reserve*. ««• ...... ...... H 

F. Military Districts,*..*.. ....... ig 

G. Retirement, Veterans* Pensions, Govcraiaent 

Insurance and Disability Pensions.... ••..«« ............. 13 

PART IV 

The National %ergenoy and the Merging of the Philippine 

and United States Army... is 

PART V 

The Philippine Army after the Return of the Commonaealth 

Government to the Philippines... 19 

A. Executive Orders... 19 

B, The Secretary of National Defense and 

General Staff, Philippine Army go 

0. Reestablishment of the Constabulary* • ............ 21 

APPBRDXCES 

X* Cagapaeffrijft Aqfo 

A, No. 1, National Defense Act, as emended, 

December 21, 1935.. 1 

B. No. 150, Longevity Pay for Officers of Army of 

the United States, November 8, 1936 37 

- 11 - 


39 


C. No. 186, Government Service Insurance Act, 

November 14, 1936*........, 

©• No* 1C3, Liquidating the Philippine Constabulary 

Pension end itetiraaent Fund, November 14, 1936 48 

S. No. 190, Philippine Amy Retirement Aot, 

November 14, 1936. 46 

F. No. 237, Restoration of Constabulary Retirement 

Fund, September S3, 1937*. 47 

C. No, 321, National defense Zone Act, 

June 9, 1938.,..,.. 49 

H, No, 400, Indemnity and Pension for Trainees 

or Reservists, September 12, 1938.,,.,,.........,., SO 

I, No, 4C8, Ar tides of War, September 14, 1938,. •«•••••••« SI 

J, No. 430, Creation of the Department of 

Notional Defense, May 31, 1939,..,.,., 62 

K, No. 606, Pension foi* Veterene of Philippine 

Revdutions or Wars, August 22, 1940 53 

L, No. 660, Abolition of Interior 

Department, Juno 21, 1941.. 57 

.ft KflaKft. 66 

A. No. 163, Reorganizing the Philippine Constabulary 

into a National Police Foroo, June £3, 1938....... ...... 61 

B. No. 225, Quarters Allowance for American Officers 

in Philippine Amoy, September 30, 1939... ...... ......... 65 

0. No, 230, Organizing the Department of 

National Defense, October 31, 1939.. .......... .......... 66 

D. No. 267, Organization of the Philippine Army 

Nurse Corps Reserve, April 15, 1940.. ........ ........... 67 

S. No. 368, Procurement of Off Shore Patrol 

Reserve Officers, wepteaber 9, 1941. 70 

F. Fixing the Salaries of the Officers and Enlisted 

M«d of the Philippine Axrny, March 10, 1942... ........... 73 

III. PtviaT jKBfttlam* r Administrative Orders end General Order s. .... 75 

A, Proclamation No. 740, Incorporation of Philippine 

Army into the United States Army, August 10, 1941. 76 

B. General Orders No. 6, Oaaqjosition of the General 

Staff of the Philippine Army, June 21, 1939 77 

17. Meeeagee of the President to the ?W.pnaLAs3epbly 

Itetatm ««» 78 

V. Letters. Press vtat^ iisnta. . AtO* . . 9 f -thp_Pres Adopt. 79 


• iii - 


VI. 



B. 


Conr iomyaa^i 

aatap,^ej. si 

Lxeeutive Order No. 21, Incorporation of Active 
Military Forces into the Philippine Army, 

October 88, 1944.. .... ........... . 82 

-ocutive Order No. 22, Fixing the Salaries of the 
Offietra end Enlistee' lion of the Philippine Amy. 

October 88, 1944..... 84 


T/II. Mg^Pf^:ilitRS!_Piptgl. ctaL of the Philippine Afr-. 86 


- iv - 


th s 



PART I 

P R E - COMMON WEALTH PERIOD 


AND THE CONSTABULARY 


A. TH 1 PHE-OCr.lI lO.^ifEALTH PERIOD 


Until the Coiaonwalth was established, no Philippine Army existed, 
end no effort had been made to prepare the Philippines for self -defense 
•a a part of Its preparation for independence. The United States Army 
provided the defense of the Philippines and furnished the troops, 
omewhat more than half of the 10,000 American troops re ularly maintained 
In the Philippines, however, were Filipinos serving in the Philippine 
Scouts, a unit of the United States Army in whioh the enlisted men were 
Filipinos, end moat of the officers American. 2/ Cie Philippine Consta- 
bulary, although its task was of a police nature, formed a semi-military 
organization. It tb ut provided some experience and traditions which wore 
of value for the creation of an Army. Furthermore, after the adoption 
of the National Defense A®t, the Constabulary retained a close relation- 
ship to the Army. 

B. THE CONSTABULAHT 

The Constabulary goes back to 1901 tfcen the hilippine Commission, 
alter American acquisition of the Philippines, provided for its organ- 
ization aa a national polios force, at first officered by Americana, and 
composed of Filipino personnel, but later rapidly Filiplnlzed In the 
years before the establishment of the Commonwealth. The strength of the 
Constabulary developed to around 6,000. %/ 

1/ See Joseph Balaton Hayden, 2he, .Philippines. A Study in National 
Development. (New York, 1942), Chapter XXIX, "National Defence", 
pp. 730-759. 

SJ I*w jSnforoement .^ln _the hilippine Islanfe t Office of Strategic 

Services, Research and Analysis branch, H. & A. No, 8330, September 
JS5, 1944, for a study of the Constabulary. 


After the establishment of the Ccmmonwoalth in 1935, the National 
Defense mt creating c. Philippine Army placed the Constabulary 
the Army* 1/ The inappropriateneas of the exercise of police functions 
by an organization under the iinay became felt, however, ana a State 
Police Force was created by Commonwealth Act No. 88, October 26, 1936, 
setting up a separate organization and nationalizing all police forces of 
the country. The Constabulary continued during this period as an integral 
part of the Army. The new state Police Force also proved unsatisfactory, 
and President Manuel E. Quezon recommended to the National Assembly that 
it be abolished end the Constabulary reconstituted as a separate organ- 
isation outside the Army. The continuing dose relationship to be retained 
even with separation was indicated in President Quezon's message) 

*Uy proposal Is that we separate the Constabulary completely from 
the military sections of the Army, and employ it to carry out, under the 
supervision of the President, those police functions that devolve upon 
the central government. Thus while every officer and man in the Con- 
stabulary will be identified with the A ray, will receive his basic 
disciplinary training therein, and will be the possessor of those mili- 
tary traditions and customs that place a premium upon personal integrity 
and hold performance of duty in higher regard than personal gain, the 
organization as a whole will be definitely separated, theoretically and 
practically, from the defense forces of the Nation.” jg/ The separation 
was aooofiiDliehed by Commonwealth Act No. 343, June 23, 1938, and 

i/ Commonwealth Aot No. 1, December 21, 1935, Dec. 13j Executive Order 
No. 11, January 11, 1936. 

jg/ Message to the First National Assembly, "Separation of the Constabu- 
lary from the Philippine Army," April 30, 1938, Massages, of the 
President (hereafter cited as Part I, p. 341. 


- 2 - 


Executive Order No, 163, issued by President Quezon on June 83, 1938, 

In 1941, e statute was enacted authorizing the President to abolish the 
Department of Interior and to transfer the Constabulary to the Department 
of National Defense by Executive Order, 2J ®his was not carried out, 
however, and when the national emergency developed the Constabulary 
personnel were transferred to the Army, becoming Constabulary units of 
the Philippine Army. The transfer of the Constabulary to the Army was 
accomplished simply by the assignment or induotion of all personnel into 
the Army as Constabulary officers were assigned from Army rosters, and 
all enlisted personnel were reservists in ths Army. 


X/ Commonwealth Act No* 660, June 81, 1941 0 


PART II 


the national defsnse act 


TLiiu iUTIONAL DEEK&l, ACT 


CoiiiiOonweaLtli Constitution, adopted in 1935, stated among its 
declaration of principles 5 "The defense of the state is a prime duty 
of government and in the fulfillment of this duty all citizens may be 
required by law to render military or oivil service.* 2/ ®h« right of 
the government to conscription of ite citizens in the training of an 
anay was thus dearly enunciated, and the National Defense Act, Common- 
weal tli Aot No* 1, Deoember 21, 1935, at once provided for a oonsoriptive 
system which would gradually build up trained reserves. The army whioh 
the Act established was to be composed of two elaaanta : (l) a regular 

force and {%) a recurve force. The regular force at first was made up 
of approximately 10,000 men, about two- thirds of vhioh included the Philip- 
pine Constabulary. Ahen the Constabulary was later separated from the 
Army, as already described, the regular force then contained about 4,000 
personnel. The reserve would be augmented each year by appro x i m ately 
40,000 non as the system of training got under way. The regular force 
was primarily a training cadre for the reserve. The reserve group d were 
to be trained for five and one-half months, to be supplemented by very 
short refroeher training periods for as many years as the reservist was 
obligated. 

Under the National Defense Act, the training of reserves began in 
January, 1937, A force of approximately 300,000 trained reservists would 
have been reaohed ultimately in 1945 had not the war intervened, and in 
the following twenty years the intended maximum of alraott one million 


• 4 


1/ Art # II | ^60# S* 


mm would be reached. The system me devised for the Philippine govern- 
»ent by General DougLas MaoArthur, ufao wac assigned as military adviser 
to the Philippine government by the United States Army at the request of 
President Quezon,- and later commissioned as Field Marshall of the Philip- 
pine Ajnoy. On hie retirment from tho active list of the Amerioan Army 
in 1937, General MaoArthur continued his position of Military Adviser 
to the Philippine Army. 1/ 



1/ 3ee %eech of President outzon, "Tha MacArthurs in Philippine History,* 
August 24, 1936 Mpafiy.ea , Vol* 2, Part I, pp. 116-124, and the press 
release of December 5L, 1937, "Retention of Marshal Douglas MacArthur 
as Military Adviser of the Ocmomsealth," iieanaoflA. Vol. 3, Part I, 
pp* 351-352. In his speech on "National Defense," January 18, 1937, 
President iuezon stated, "the idea of making Field Marshal MaoArthur 
as Military Adviser to the government of the Commonwealth in the 
preparation of our National Defense came originally from me. . . * •* 
Messages, Vol. 3, Part I, p« 18. Seo. 16 of the National Defense 
Act authorizes the President to appoint and maintain such teohnioal 
advisers from the U. 3. Army as he deems necessary. 


- 6 - 


PART 


HZ 


ORGANIZATION OF 


TH S 


PHILIPPINE 


ABUT 


A# ‘£12 DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENDS AND THE GENERAL STAFF CORPS 

•^ ie -i’eaident of tlio Philippines by Gcmatitutional Authority is the 
Gonoander-in-Chief of all military forces. 2/ Until 1939, the Army came 
directly under the President. In that year, however, a separate Depart- 
ment of National Defense, headed by a Secretary, ires established. £/ 

Taofilo Slaon beoame the first Secretary of National Defense. 

The National Dafenae Act also provides for a Council of National 
Defense to oonslat of the President, the Vice-President, the head of 
each executive department, the Chief of Staff, and six other members to 
be designated by the President with the consent of the Commission on 
Appointments of the Congress of the Philippines, end a permanent 

^ a 

secretary, an officer of the Army. 3/ The President is designated as 
Chairman of the Council. The Council la "to advise with the President 
on all matters of national defense policy ’. A/ 

She General Staff Corps of the Army consists of the Chief of Staff, 
the Central General Staff, and the General Staff with troops. The Chief 
of Staff heads the Army, directly subordinate to the President. Th* 

Central General Staff oonslats of the Chief of Staff, the Deputy Chief 
of Staff, and suoh other officers as may be directed by the President. She 
General Staff with troops consists of those officers performing the General 
Staff duties of the headquarters of divisions and higher units. 6/ 

2/ Article VXI, Section 11, (S). 

Commonwealth Act No. 430, liay 31, 1939; Executive Order No. 230, 
Ootober 31, 1939. See speech of President Quezon, on "Creation of 
Department of National Defense," November 1, 1939, Uea3af<eo. Vol. 5, 
Part 1, pp. 205-207. 

3/ By Constitutional /amendment ratified July 18, 1940 and approved 

December 2, 1940, the Congress of the Philippines replaced the National 
Assembly, as the Notional legislature. 

A/ Ccamonwealth Aot No, 1, December 21, 1935, Article III, 

31 Commonwealth Aot Ho. 1, Sec. 23. 


By General Orders No* 6, June SI, 1939, the Praaldant directed 
that the Central General Staff , in addition to the Chief of Staff and 
the Deputy Chief of Staff should oonsiet of five Assistant Chiefs of 
Staff and a secretary. Five divisions, each under an assistant Chief 
of Staff were to consist of: 

(1) Strategic War Plans and Reserve Unit firrployraent. 

(fi) Operations, Training, and Intelligence. 

(3) Supply and Industrial War Plans. 

(4) Personnel. 

(6) Budget. 

Ihe following officers occupied the posts of Chief of Staff and 
Deputy Chief of Staff: 

°hM s£ 

Brig. Gen. Jose de loo Reyes (Acting), Jan. 11, 1936 - May 4, 1936. 
MaJ. Gen. Paulino Santos, May 4, 1936 - Dec. 31, 1938. 

Hejt Gen. Basilio J» Valdes, Jan. 1, 19o9 — 

Deputy Chief of Staff 

£14 Gen. Basilio J. Veldes, May 4, 1936 - Dec. 31, 1938. 

v/ulc, , uJht* hf w<a;> 

B*ig* Gen. Vicente Lim, May 3, 1939 * (» a m a l n a fl In Tmon 
l lil uU 3* 9 ^ f ^ , u ' 

B. ME REGULAR FORCE 

Th* Force of the Amy consists of the -General Staff Corpe 

end the following branches of service: 

/ 

(1) Infantry. 

(8) Cavalry. 

(3) Field Artillery. 


7 


(4) 

(5) 

( 6 ) 

(7) 

(B) 

( 9 ) 


(l> 

( 2 ) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

( 6 ) 

( 7 ) 

( 8 ) 
<9> 


Coast Artillery* 

Mr Corps* 

Corps of Engineers. 

Chemical Corps. 

Signal Corps* 

Off Shore Patrol* 
servloes are as follows: 

Adjutant General Service, 

Judge Advocate General’s Service* 

Inspector General’s Service* 

Quartermaster service. 

Finance Service. 

Medical Service. 

Ordnance Service, 

Chaplain Service. 

Professors and cadets of the Military Aoadaray. 1/ 


Officers and enlisted men ere assigned to the various branches, 
corps, and services as the President may direct. £/ 

AH ca, missioned officers in the Army must be citizens of the Philip- 
pines, Ccasnissions authorized extend from third lieutenant to the grade 
of general officer. Officers ars canaisaioned under regulations 
prescribed by the President, and all appointments end promotions are made 
by him. Appointments from the grade of colonel , however, must be made 
with the ooneent of the Gauaission on Appointments of the Congress. 


1/ 0* A. No. 1, Sec. 19. 

2/ Sec. tO 


All appointment a of regular officers are to be in the grade of third 
lieutenant, from aisong applicants who at the time of appointment ore not 
lees then SI nor more than 26 years of age. Priority in filling vacancies 
is given: (l) to graduates of the Military Academy of the Philippines 

or of the United States Military or Naval Academy; (s) to graduates of 
senior military training units in schools end collages; (3) to enlisted 
man who have served more than one year in the Army; and (4) to others. 

For the first six years under the Act, appointments are authorized from 
officers of the Philippine Constabulary who are citizens, end offloars of 
the Philippine Scouts and of the Officers Reserve Corps, 0. s, Army, and 
graduates of the U. 8. Naval Academy, oitizans of the Philippines, who 
have severed their connection with the active elements of the U, 8. Army, 
and others who may qualify through professional and military examination 
prescribed for the purpose. J/ 

A Philippine Military Acadaay for the training of candidates for 
permanent ooanlssion in the Regular Force ma established under the Act. jg/ 

Enlistment in the Army is open to mala oitizens for three year 
berms. s/ 

C. OJffi RESERVE TORCE 

Any person who has completed his reserve trainee instruction and who 
la aeleot d'for training as a ccs missioned officer, may after e. further 
theoratloal course of at least six months, and a probationary period of 


A/ 8ec, 22. 
2/ Sac, 30. 
SJ fceo, 27. 


- 9 - 


another aix months , be ccramiesioned a third lieutenant in the Reserve 
Force. Xl College end university Reserve Officers* Training Units may 
also qualify a student for commissioning, 

AH Filipinos are liable to military service. A ’’Preparatory 
Military Training” is outlined by the National Defense Aet, the obliga- 
tion to undergo military training beginning with youth in the schools, 
eaomenoing at the age of ten end extending through the schooling until 
the age of twenty-one. Some phases of this youth training program 
were begun, but it was never developed extensively before the war broke out. 

Trainees for the Reserve Force are selected from all able-bodied men 
tfio have become twenty years of age. Following trainee instruction, 
trainees become part of the reserves for the following years i 

Cl) First Reserve <=> from years of age and those under 22 

• ' \ 

who have received trainee Instruction. 

(fi) Second Reserve - from Bgg fc 52-41 years of ago, 

{3) Third Reserve - from ag ee 42-91 years of age. 

Trainees receive instruction for a period not exceeding five and 
one-half months. Refresher courses of active duty must be taken by the 
Reserves for periods not less than: First Reserves, ten days annually; 

Second Reserves, five days annually; and Third Reserves, every third 
year, seven days. 


Xf Sec. 34. 

SJ 6eo. 58 and inactions 80-63. 


- 10 - 


D. OFF SHORE PA1R0L RSSERV3 

% fe.cutlv. Order of S^te^r 9. 1941, JJ offioere of the ott 
Shor. Patrol war. to be obtained by voluntary application, or by oon.pul.ory 
draft whenever necessary. Applicants for eeeignment to the q-boat 
flotilla meet poeeeee certain qualifications, a certificate free the 
Soard «* Marta. ffitaednere, a college degree, or a R.O.T.O. graduate, and 
»et be not more than thirty year, of aga. Applicants for ncelgnmmt 

to the uiil lory Forces of the Patrol are eonalasloned aooordlng to the 
license held for navigation. 

: 2HE PiflLIPPUnS ARMY NURSE CORPS RESERVE 
Under an Act of 1938, the Nurse Corps was created as a component 
part of the Medical Service. £/ Rules for the organization of a Nurse 
Corps Reserve sere prescribed by executive order in 1940. 5 / The 
executive order provided that the Board of Examiners for Nurses maintain 
an up-to-date liet of qualified nurses and obtain from the Red Cross and 
nursing associations a list of nurses available for enrollment and 
assignment to the Nurse Corps Reserve in case of mobilization. Volun- 
tary applications for appointment are to be encouraged. If more 
applicants apply than are necessary, competitive abominations are to 
ba held. If voluntary applications fall short of mobilization require- 
ments, compulsory draft may be resorted to. 


1/ 

3 / 


3 / 


Executive Order No. 368, Beptamber 9 , 1941. 

Commonwealth Act No. 385, September 5, 1938, emending Commonwealth 

Act No. 1, Seo. 85 (ej, whioh beoeme Be 0 , 85 (g) under amendment 
of Commonwealth Act No, 569, lime 7, 1940. 

Executive Order No. 267, April 15, 1940. 


- 11 - 


ttem bership in idle Nurse Corps Reserve la United to citizens 
betweon twenty-one and forty-five years of age, with three years train* 
ing in a hospital, who have passed the examination for certification. 

F. mLXTASr DISITJCTS 

She Philippines are divided into military districts, as the Presi- 
dent may direct, for the purpose of recruiting the national manpower, 
providing preparatory military training, executing national mobilization 
plans, and supplying the needs of the aimed forces in peace and war. 

The functions are comparable to the pre-war corps area of the continental 
United States. In each military district, a corandsaioned offioer is 
assigned, with assistants, as District Commander. In tine of peace, he 
is responsible for the training of all units within his district, and for 
the preparation of defense plans; in time of war, for the defense of the 
district, under the control of the Chief of staff. 

In every province, the provincial governor executes all recruit- 
ment laws and mobilization laws and regulations. The Provincial Inspec- 
tor of the Philippine Constabulary carries out this duty as a member of 
the governor's staff. 2/ 

An outline map of the military districts as existing at the out- 
break of the war is found in the appendix. (Appendix VII.) The general 
area Inoluded within the districts was as follows: 
let ill) * Northern Luzon. 

End UD - Northern Central Luzon, 

3rd MU - Central Luzon north of Manila, 


- 13 - 


1/ C.A, No. 1, Sec. 11. 


4th MD - South central Luzon Including Manila, Mindoro end 

Palawan. 

5th IID *• Bicol peninsula of Luzon, and Masbate. 

6 th MD - Panay and Bcmblon Islands. 

7th MU - Negro 3 and Siquijor Islands. 

8 th MD - Cebu and Bohol. 

9th MD - Leyte end Sonar. 

10th MD - Mindanao and Sulu archipelago. 

8, RETIREMENT, VETERANS* PENSIONS, OOTERNMEUT INSURANCE 
AND DISABILITY PENSIONS. 

The retirement system of the Regular Force of the Philippine Army 
rests upon specific statutes enacted for the Army, In addition, the 
National Defense Act provided that until superseded by laws specifically 
applying to the Philippine Army, all regulations and provisions of law 
relating to retirement applying to the Philippine Constabulary should 
also apply to the Array. A/ 

Two general laws specifically apply to the Array: the Philippine 

Array Retirement Act (Commonwealth Act No. 190, November 14, 1936} and a 
pension law for veterans of past Philippine revolutions or wars (Cannon- 
wealth Act No. 605, August 22 , 1940) • £/ A special Aot also providea for 
the payment of longevity pay to commissioned officers of the United 
States who were appointed to the Array of the Philippines before 1936. Jj 


1/ Sac. 22 (g). 

JJ / Repealing Commonwealth Act No. 280, June 5, 1938, and Conaonwealtb 
Aot No. 359, August 22, 1938. 

s/ Coranonwaalth Aot No. 150, November 8 , 1936; amended by Commonwealth 
Aot No. 558, Tune 7, 1940. 


13 - 


The Philippine Army Retirement Act made retiraaent optional to 
officers and enlisted man after thirty years of continuous satisfactory 
service, and at the age of fifty-five, and compulsory after forty years 
of service, or at the age of sixty-four with a minimum, of fifteen years 
of service, Retirement can he requested after twenty years of servioe, 
hut in that case a Iwnp sSum of two per Centura of the average annuel sal- 
ary for each year of servioe is paid. The Government retains the right 
to grant or withhold the latter retirement privileges. Under the optional 
or compulsory retirement provisions first stated, an annual retirement 
pay is received until death of two per cental of the basic pay received 
on the date of retirement for each year’s active service rendered, hut 
not oxoo8ding fifty per contum in the case of ccraoissioned officers, 
and sixty per centum in the case of enlisted men and non-ccmmiasloned 
officers, of the total base pay received on the date of retirement. 

The benefits of this Aot may be waived and in lieu the refund of contribu- 
tions provided under the law liquidating the Constabulary Pension and 
Retirement Fund rosy be made, subject to certain provisions, ±J 

The present lew providing a pension for veterans of past Philippine 
revolutions was anaoted in 1940, j g/ A monthly pension of fifteen to 
two hundred pesos is provided for physically or mentally incapacitated 
veterans over sixty years of age, the pension to be determined by a 
Board on Pensions fee Veterans, as approved by the President. 


1/ See Sec. 4. 

U Commonwealth Act No. 605, August 82, 194C, which repealed Common- 
wealth Act No, 886, June 3, 1938, and Comaonwsalth Act No. 359, 
August 88, 1938, 


14 * 


la 1936, a Government Insurance Systma was established for ell 
government officials of the Commonwealth including officers and enlisted 
men of the Regular Force of the Axny, %/ Under this Act, applied to 
the Army , life insurance policies, for an amount the annual basic premium 
of which is five per contura of the annual salary or compensation, 
are coopulsory. Five oar oentum of the monthly salary or coopensation 
ie deducted to be applied to the payment of premiums* The government 
contributes such extra premium, beyond the basic, as may be due to 
extra hazards of the occupation, such amounts being included in the annual 
appropriations for the Philippine Army, 

Ho provision of disability pensions for injury or disease contracted 
in the line of duty is found in the Coramonvrealth lane for the Regular 
Force, For trainees or reservists who die by accident vdille in training, 
an indemnity of five hundred pesos is provided to the heirs. In the 
9vent of disability, a monthly pension of fifteen or twenty pesos, 
depending upon the extent of disability, is provided* 2 / 


X/ Commonwealth Act Ho* 186, November 14, 1930* 
j §/ Commonwealth Act Ho* 400, September 12, 1958, 


15 - 



THE NATIONAL 3HERQ&NCI - AND THE MSftOINa OP THE 



THB NATIvhi'tf., E.EJRffi:NCy AND THE HffiHaiNCJ OP THE 

♦ 

PHILIPPINE AND UNITED STATES AH ISX 

> 

On May 27, 1941, the President of the United States proclaimed 
that an unlimited national emergency confronts this country, whi<vh 
requires that its military, naval, air and civilian defenses be put on 
the basis of readiness to rapel any and all acts or threats of aggression 
directed toward any part of the western hemisphere.** 2 / Tv© months latar, 
•fuly 27, 1941, President Roosevelt called into servioc, "all the organ- 
ised military forces of the Government of the Philippines 1 * and ordered 
the V 

tnat 4t^b* marge d with the United States Army, General Douglas MaoArthur 
was recalled to active duty by the Secretary of Wax* and designated com- 
manding general of the new Par Hast Command, jj 

Shortly after General iiaairthur received command of U2AFFS, hi 3 
headquarters issued the following statement; 

*The general plan for the integration of all the aimed forces in 
the Philippines lias been formulated by General MaoArthur. It envisions 
a progressive incorporation of tlie reserve divisions of the Philippine 
Army into the servioe of the United states. It comprehends eventually 
all elements of the Philippine Army, hut until an actual outbreak; of 
hostilities will not include these echelons which are engaged in the 
normal yearly training activities. This will enable the Philippine 
Army to continue its uniform development In accordance with the national 
defense program of the Commonwealth and at the same time muster for 
prompt American Army training and service the other components of the 


A/ Published by the President of the Philippines, Proclamation No. 735, 

July 7, 1941, Official Ch«t*e r 7ol. 40, July 12, 1941, pp. 211-8X8. 

SJ Sae the President's Military Order in "Philippine Amy Ordered Merged 

wlthU. S. Amy,** Offloftil Vol. 40, August 2, 1941, pp. 879-880. 


- X6 - 


/ 


Commonwealth forces. The Constabulary will not be taken over with the 
exception of certain selected elements. 

M Bie plan envisions an tmedlate construction proven at strategic 
localities to house the thousands of reservists involved as well as the 
Intensive development of new air fields for the rapidly expanding air 
forces. All Philippine dements which cone under American control will 
maintain their national integrity. Ihey will retain their own uniforms, 
their own scale of pay, their ora promotion list, their own rations, and 

their own code of military law. Their training, however, will be under 

. \ 

the immediate direction of the officers of the American Army, On muster 

Into the American service they will be paid and cupplled from American 
sources." 1/ 

The Philippine Army Air Corps was called on August 15, 1941. 

Ordern were issued by US.OTS from time to time calling other units 
of the Philippine Army into tho service. iSobilization orders directed 
reservists to report to their assigned mobilization stetions, Bjc 
P hilippine Department (U. S. Array) provided officers and enlisted men 
Including Philippine scouts, to induct these units and to act as 
instructors. On September 1, one complete Infantry rogiront of each of 
the ten organized reserve divisions was inducted. On the outbreak of 
the war. Idle mobilization was not yet complete, the last units having 
been called for December 15, 1941. All remaining units rare at onoe mob- 
ilised, Tho Philippine Army Infantry Divisions, Reserve, had a triangular 


U Ifre Sjytji AflnitB^ RaQP-r.t. -O^.the United States High Commissioner to 
the Philippine Islands . June 30, 1942, p. 15. 


P A B f 7 

fHB P3ILIFPIHE AHMT AFTER THE HETORN OF S5S 


C0aUC«S«AL1H QGVEmmiT TO THE PHILIPPINE} 


ms Philippine armt afti® ihe hbturn of toe 
oomcnvsealih Govmomr to we tbxlxppwej 

A. EXECUTIVE ORDERS 

With the landing of military forces under General MaoArthur on 
the Philippines, on Ootoher 20, 1944, to liberate the entire Philippines 
frcta Japanese occupation, the Commonwealth Government was restored on 
Philippine soil. President Osraeno, who had succeeded to the Presidency 
following the death of '’resident Quezon in the United states, soon issued 
two executive orders i’f ectiag the Philippine Army under the Emergency 
Powers Law, which had been enacted by the National Assembly immediately 
before the occupation* 1/ 

President Oamana’s executive order of October 28, 1944, incorpo- 
rated the guerrilla troops into the Philippine Army* me executive order 
provided that: (l) "All persons, of any nationality or citizenship, vdio 

are actively serving in recognized military forces in the Philippines, 
are hereby considered to be on active service in the Philippine Army"; 

(2) the temporary grades of enlisted men enlisted or promoted by Coxxiand- 
ers of recognized military forces are confirmed; (3) the temporary ranks 
of all offloere, appointed or promoted in the field, prior to the date 
of the executive order, by Commanders of recognized military forces or® 
confirmed; (4) the dote of entry into active servioe in the Philippine 
Army will be that of Joining a recognized force; (5) the date of rank 
is that on whioh ths appointment or promotion was made by the Commander; 
(6) a recognized military force is defined aa "a force under a commander 


1/ Copies of the Commonwealth Act are not available* 


* 


- 19 


who has foaoa appointed, designated or rooognlzed by the Caaamander~ia— 

Ohief Southwest Pacific Area”. X/ 

A fjooond executive order of President Osmeno fixed the salaries of 
officers and enlisted men of the Philippine Array to make them correspond 
to those of the U. s. Amy. jg/ 

B. TBS 3SQBBTABT OP NATIONAL DBBEH3B 
AND GENERAL 3T\FF, PHILIPPINE ARUf 

d V 

Secretary of National ^fense and Chief of Staff: 

i 

Major General Basil io J. Veldes. 

Aide: 2d Lieutenant Marciano 0. Garoes, Inf. 

(Acting) Adjutant General: Major A, J. Rouoh, A.G.D., U. s. Army. 

(Acting) Ass *t Adjutant General: Lt. Colonel A. Qppus, A.G.3. 

(Acting) Surgeon General: Lt. Colonel Jose P. Nosales, M.C, 

(Acting) Chief Signal Officer: Lt. Colonel Vivancio D. Dayot, S.C. 

(Acting) Chief of Chaplain Service: Major Pacifloo Ortiz, Ch. s. 

Judge Advocate; Colonel -I. i* Sr ana, 7.A.S. 

Finance Sorriest 2d Lieutenant Aiaataoio Aoebedo, F.3. 

Provincial Inspector of Constabulary of Loyte: Major R. 0, Gavloli, Inf* 

t 

. 

. 

1/ Sxecutive Order No. 21, October 28, 1944. 1 

g/ Executive Order No. 22, October 28, 1944. he salary soale renains 

unsettled, however, pending final determination of policy by the War 
Departuunt. At present, partial payment only la being given. 


- 20 - 




0. KSEST/JILISINK'IT OF THE CONST/iBUIAHT 

Following the return of TJSAFFE to the Philippines, the Philippine 

\ 

Conetahulery has been reestablished. The new units which have been 
activated must not be confused with the so-called "Philippine Constabulary" 
or "Bureau of Constabulary" units organized by the Japanese or by puppet 
government agencies under Japanese oontrol. Although the re-established 
Constabulary r ana ins a component part of the Philippine Army, as it had 
been brought in at the outbreak of the war, the Constabulary has been 
charged by USAFFL primarily with the enforcement of the lavra of the 
Philippine Commonwealth and with the maintenance of order - the functions 
of the pre-war Constabulary. They may be assigned such other military 
police duties, however, as may he practicable. 

The units are reactivated by the Philippine Army after approval of 
Headquarters USLAFFE. The personnel are entirely new, none having boon in 
the old Constabulary. Two companies in Leyte have been organized so far 
(January 15, 1945), and are being brought to authorized strength ea 
personnel end equipment beooms available. As the liberation of the Philip- 

' A 

pines procedes, and the reestablishment of civil government takes plaoe, 
the provision of an adequate Constabulary becomes a necessity. This 
requires two developments: (i) considerable expansion in personnel (the 

two companies now existing are not half-auff Joiant for Leyto alone, on 
pre-war standards), ( 2 ) the inexperienced personnel must be trained 
properly for police work. The Conetahulery as now constituted along with 
the Philippine Army receives its operational assignment of function from 
tJSAFFB. The administrative organization and planning, however, ere 
exarc lead by the Chief of Staff, ’hilippine Array. 


21 - 


APPENDICES 


APPENDIX I. COMMONWEALTH ACTS 


A. THE NATIONAL DEFENSE ACT, AS AMENDED * 

FIRST NATIONAL ASSEMBLY ) 

Inaugural Session ) B. No. 102 

(Commonwealth. Act No. 1) 

AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE NATIONAL DEFENSE OF THE PHILIPPINES 
PENALIZING CERTAIN VIOLATIONS THEREOF, APPROPRIATING FUNDS 
THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 

Be it enacted b. v the National Assembly of the Philippines g 

Title I . - NATIONAL DEFENSE 

PRELI;1INARX ARTICLE. - Title of Act 

SECTION 1. This Act shall he known as "The National Defense 

Act 1 ’ . 

ARTICLE I. - National Defense Policy 

SEC. 2. The national defense policy of the Philippines shall 
be as follows: 

I 

f 

(a) The preservation of the State is the obligation of 'every 

citizen. The security of the Philippines and the freedom, indeoen- 
dence, and perpetual neutrality of the Philippine Republic be 

guaranteed by the employment of all citizens, without distinction of 
age or sex, and all resources. 

(b) The employment of the nation’s oitizens and resources for 
national defense shall be effected by a national mobilization. 

(c) The national mobilization shall include the execution of all 
measures necessary tc pass from a peace to a war footing. 

(d) The civil authority shall always be supreme. The President 
of the Philippines as the Commander-in-Chief of all military forces, 
shall be responsible that mobilization measures are prepared at * 01 
times. 


* As of January 1, 1941. 


- 1 - 


{&) 1 national mobilization shall be ordered in any case 

oi’ oiraatened or actual ac;'ro.>»lon. 

It) 'Hie notional dofeuejo org: aizatlon shall be adapted 
as closely as possible to the territorial and admin i str ?vti ve 
organisation of the Philippines. 

{&) '-he mobilization pi nt of financial, industrial, 
ecor.o?aic, social, intolloctuol, arc nore.1 forces on cl resources 
of the Philippines she ll ooftfora to t]?e provisior.r of the 
Constitution of the Ah iltppin.es end shall be prepared by the 
executive departments concerned in accordance with the following 
general policies: il) She respective responsibilities of the 

several executive depnrtnvents in mobilisation planning v;ill bo 
prescribed by the President; (3) Forces end resources shall 
he employed so as to scc-uro unity and continuity c>f effort 
until the threatened or actual h. yrassion to the Philippines 
has bees overcome. 

(il) 2-o profit incident to ;ar shell accrue to any individ- 
ual, corporation, socociation , or portn^rshlp. 


itBTICLL II, - mniovne nt o f Per nojin ..and liu,- onr eps 

SEC, 3. Military service shall be obligatory for nil 
citizens of tho Philippines, and the methads and procedure for 
the classification, selection, examination, induction, training, 
and release of all citizens from their military obligations 
shall be as prescribed in ‘i’itle in of this Act. 

SBC. 4 , 1 / Tbo registration of citizens for military 
service shall be a civil function carried out by the civil 
authorities under the supervision of the Chief of taff. 

& 3 C. 5 , Purir- c national Mobilization the Government 
of tho Philippines, acting through the appropriate ovommontal 
depart -ont, or by delegated authority, ehr.ll have the riv.ht to 
secure by mutual a^roaaent or by requisition all such resources, 
tangible one iritenrlble, end all such services and • .11 other 
assets or possessions, public or private, 1.0 may bo necessary 
for national defence. 


1/ As anoeded, Co uioii a oal t U Act o, 5G9, lune 7, 1940 



• BUC..,. in. •. jsfcuSffluaM. of .y- lr - 

eh U tonath 2°te 0 ! ‘iYMialt C r cir 11 ‘Clonal Dttaw ahtoh 

-acn executive aeoertm- ct t'- f ’ ? °° r3 ' a4en % the law® of 

a«btrs to bo iMiSSVi’ °£ ef » f at * ff * <“« =>i* 0 th«r 
the Oo® lesion on A:,toiu vL - , e f! ' dtl * *» 0< ’ i ’ 6 ‘" J '-* °- 

pemeaott eeexoterv 0 f thk c„.’! !, th “ >,atlon • 1 Mwbljr. an® a 
the Amy. ;.;”SS,cS Itn . ;D *° * ottl °° r Of 

Enttcra of notionel .ieic-r,e „oliav '1! ‘ " ola< »* «U 

staff which ahaJl 14y * . ’ “ ni,: - 1 * laTe a perron cnt 

deliberations, " ’ ' ^ ' rieu'ientary record of the Council. '•s 

San of the Cornell of”ilation2 Befense^”* 1 ”* ah * U bo SSolr ‘ 

**°*£\t *“• «"=•» * 

or con6uItazits shall be fi x Ji * ~ VK * "° witnwsce 

by the Preeifiontr La- ‘S 1* < ” rae “* lTO «*•» to bo i„uea 
the eppropMetlono f««,e toemti?^^™^ ^ ’ r " 14 » a *» 

«.1KSLS IV. . lbCTltorl.1 Q iroei^tien 

uov.er, p»viaug plepototS^nait^t^itai-w “-e^ti^' 

“ 4 the Philippine# ehaU be Sivi«ecl into 

of th Ia dVbry “ 11Uar y f ^°trict a coanisrionen officer 
lu r^? 1 e t T l ; L 8iHal b ® assigned as District Contender, 

W direct * ath * U ° k a5 " ljt: - :tr « s the Chief of OU£f 

.. l7 !. ti , 0 ®f pcv.oe, he h 11 be responsible, under the Chio- 
% Stjff, for ^training. discipline, and te-cticra "train i^ 
o, rdl unite within hie district, and for the ore-notion J 
C 9i.ottso ci.ans: and an time of war, he shall he responsible 
under the control of the Chief of Staff, for the d«f 
his district, * tn * defense of 

U. 5/ >-n every province, the provincial governor 
amal execute all recruitoeat laws and the la c an ^ ^ulatior-. 
eovomine the aobiUzation of persona and resources fcr^etio^l 
defense, whioh the Octroi Qon eral Staff of the Philipp ino Arny^ 

2J cnendod, Co. .Monwe dth . .ct ho, 569, Juno 7 1940 
^ 48 c'.encied, hoaaonnoalth :ct ilo, 069, Juno 7* 5 . 940 I 


nay prorcribe. fro. ti jt> to hi o. 'Jho ■'sovi'i.cisl Inspector of 
the - hilippine Constabulary shall be# d number of his staff to 
carry 1 out this duty* 

i£C, 12 . fceoruiting areas tdll as far as possible conform 
t?ith political subdivisions of the Philippines. 


s 


AHTIOLJiJ 'V* 



Centers 


f-EC* X?>, 4 / obilisistion centers abll 09 located in 

municipalities, tovnahips raid municipal districts according to 
their military population and the percentage of such population 
assigned to units of the roaervo. 


'fhe Chief of ->taff ah *,11 determine the location and type 
of stabilization centers to he provided, end the District Con- 
itander shall be responsible for t**o operation of these mobil* 
Isation centers at all tines* 


."iTtTICIjt VI. - r.tionel end f af ti ■ >. f •Qb il.i ant Ion 

Si3C* 14. A Motional • Mobilization one ,11 be decreed by the 
President of the -Lilippinao on e. opr oval of the Actional Aoserfoly* 

SEC* 15. ..he never the safety of the f-hilippinon is on* 
dancer ed, the President /nay decree a Partial mobilization* ' # 
shall promptly summon and report to the National saetibly the 
cause for, and extent of, the Partial * hbilization. $he National 
Assembly shall determine vhethor or not the ’ artial utilization 
30 decreed shell be annulled. 


AfiTiCLC VII* » i'echnical la vie era 

CSC. 16. Tfto President of tho Philippines shell have 
authority to appoint rad maintain such technical advisers fro <r» 
the Army of the United Stales and for such period of time as 
he may Seen necessary, vdiicl. shall in r.o case extend beyond 
hi a term* of office. 


4 / As amended, Oasioiraealth ct ho* Pi.-, ••rue V, 1940* 


Title II. • ILIT.'VitY ftCt SI-iAHOiT 
■i : , i. * . • Jlisat: , 

SBO. 17* 5/ The Army of the Philippines shall consist of 
the Regular Fore© and the Reserve I Provided. That, 

members of the ; le servo Force on inactive statue oh: It not, by 
reason solely of their appointments, oaths, camiseionc, or 
status as such, be held or deseed to be officers or employees 
in the Philippine Civil -ervioo. 

SIC, 18. J/ The organized peuc© establishment , including 
the Regular Toros end the Reserves, shall comprise ril or- 
ganizations necessary to forn the basis for a ccmploto and 
prompt mobilization for the national defense. The army shall 
at all times be organised in so far as practicable into bat- 
talions , regiments, divisions and, if necessary, higher units* 


ARTICLS II, *. ;. o Rem a Uw orco 

etc, 19, 7/ The Regular Force shell consist of the Infantry, 
the Cavalry, the Field Artillery, the Coast Artillery Corps, the 
Air Coi^ps, the Corps of Engineer^ , the Chemical Corps, the Myaal 
Corps and the active elements of the Off-.'. hors Patrol; the Gen- 
eral Staff Corps; the services consisting of the Adjutant (ien» 
eral’s Service, the fudge Advocate General’s Service; the In- 
spector Generol*s service, the uarter jester Service, tho 
I'inanoe ervice, the medical Service, the Ordnance 'ervico and 
the Chaplain Service, the professors end cadets of th© Military 
iccdomy; of detached officers, of detached enlisted ion, of 
unaseigned recruits , of such other officers and nnlir.tod men 
as may be provided fox'* Officers and enlisted men permanently 
assigned to tho services shall be know, as officers and enlisted 
men of the Staff* officers and enlisted men mot permanently 
assigned to a service shall be known as officers s md enlisted 
men of the line. 

In tiroe of peace the number of active commissioned officers 
and of active enlisted men required for the Regular Force shall 
he recommended annually by the Chief ox" L taff . 

In so far as may be practicable, the commissioned and the 
enlisted personnel of the Regular Force shall ho dram from all 
provinces of the Philippine.' • 


5/ As omendod, Ooimooav.'snlth /cv fo. 305, 
6/ As emended, Coranonwealth Act Ho, 569, 
: '.cmdoG., ' • •on*. <»altl>. .ct mo. >, 

.mmd Co uiOHv;ealth Act Ao* 569, Tune v, 


'optambor 5, 19.58* 
Tuna ?, 1940. 

- opt amber 5, 1KA, 
1940. 


e 5 R 


t-C, 20 , Officers and enlisted men of the Regular iorce 
shall bo assigned to the various branches, corps and services 
as the Presiciont may direct, 

"... , ’ • ■ . ■ , ■ .-< . . i 

-'•IX officers end enlisted men of the 'agular 'orce who are. 
not assigned to duty with any branch, corps or ccrvico herein 
provided for shall be carried on the detaohecl officors’ list 
uud detached enlisted run. 1 a list, respectivoly, 

P-hU, 21, 8/ The organization of the Regular Voroo shall be 
as follows: 

(a) All other regular units shall be organized as the 
President may direct, 

(b) The President may attach to regular units or may 
assign to duty with any component of the Regular Force such 
number of reserve officers as he may deem necessary, All period.* 
of such duty aa do not exceed twenty-one days annually shall be 
considered as regular annual training; all periods in excess 

of twenty-one days annually shall be classed as extended tourz 
of active duty, 

(c) The President may likewise attach for their prescribed 
period of military training such number of trainees to regular 
wits a3 he deems necessary, 

DEC, S3, 2/ The nppoi tment, promotion, and discharge Of 
officers in the Army shall be os follows: 

(,&) .411 commissioned officers in the Amy shall ’oc citizens 

of the Philippines; P rovid ed, That the ’re -i riant ray in his 
discretion retain in the ray any officer nov; holding a com- 
mission in the Philippine Constabulary, Commissioned grades 
authorized in the Army of the hilippines shall Include third 
lieutenant, jecond lieutenant, first lieutenant, captain, major, 
lieutenant colonel, colonel, and general officer: . Tovidetl. 

That the general officer grade may be further subdivided into 
grades as "proscribed by She President: And Provide ft, also. 

That Individuals permanently commissioned in a grade above 
that of colonel shall bo kmnn as General Officoro of the Lir.o; 
those not so commissioned but holding an office in the Army to 
which the grade of general officer is attached 3hall be know 
as General officers of the ctnff. 


q/ Pjq amended, Connsonvo.'-ltli ct fo 569, *>11110 7, 1940* 
aiadbded, Co -.namronlV.-. ct o. 312, -Tune 9, 1933$ 
Canmonuealth Act Ho# 988, S eptamber 5, 1938; 

Act No, 36S, Tune 7, 1940, and Comom.oalth ct < 0 , 640, 
Tune 11, 1941. 


# 6 • 


{£) Officers shell bo commissioned In the Army of tho 
Philippine subject, to such examinations for the tietersain vfcion 
3 f fitness nrd orafici-vcy as the • 'resident aay prescribe* 

11 appointments and promotions shell bo made by the President, 
but the appoi .t ;entr '-nc proriot ion? in the hmy from the rank 
of colonel shall be made with the consent or the Commission on 
Appointments of the National Assembly, 

i$) txcopt as hereinafter authorized, til epoointnents of 
regular officers ah ,11 be in the grade of third lieutenant, 
from among applicant:? who at the tiro of appointment shall be 
hot leas than twenty »ono nor more than twenty-six years of age. 
Priority in filling vacancies in the grade of third lieutenant 
v.111 bo givens first, to graduates of the Hilitnry cadar\y of 
the Philippines or of the United states 1-ilitary or --aval 
aadeay; second, to ’graduates of senior military trainin'; units 
in nchoolo and collo es; third, to enliatod won who at the time 
of appointment shall have served more than one year in the Army 
of the Philippines, and, fourth, to others* Provided * That 
original appointments in the Judge Advocate General* : Service, 
the P-ouierJ. orvice and the Chaplain torrico, shall be in the 
grade op first liautenent from among applicants at the time 

of epnointrient , shall not be loos than t.-.;enty**Cive nor more than 
thirty-five yoars of age, and, in addition, shall sieve engage 
in the practice of law for at least five years, if appointment 
is to bo ;nda in the Judge advocate General’s Service; said grade 
being also given, upon the passage of this Act, to such officers 
of the said services whose present grade is lo.cr than first 
lieutenant: Provided, also . That during the six ye: rs following 

tho improve 1 of this ct, the ’resident I-, authorised to fill 
vacancies in any commissioned grade in tho Army of the Philip- 
pines by appointment of officers of the Philippine Constabulary 
who are citizens of the ‘hilippines end of such officers of the 
Philippine coutc. and of the Officers’ deserve Corps, U, 

Army, and of graduates of the United Abates Naval csdomy, 
citizens of tho Philippines, as have, prior to their appointment 
in the Army of the 'hilippines, legally and honorably covered 
their connection ■ ith the active elements of the . rmy of tho 
United States, and of such others as may qualify through 
professional and military examination prescribed for the 
ourposo: Provide d . furt ■ er . That the .’resident may appoint 
professors and assistant professors in the Department of 

Aaaat ice and Natural Philosophy, the Department of Engineering 
end tho Department of Aonguageo and Dooial Arts of tho Hilitary 
.Academy without military rank with such compensation as he any 
prescribe, or in such comissiorod grades of the regular force 
as he nay determine ; and in tho latter caso, he may thereafter 
promote the:;, under such ro ulations as he may are. cribs, such 
nr ofesaorf; end assistant professors to be carried on in a 
separate roster rpart from the general rooter of tho Army and 


» v .. 


in addition to the number of comaissioned officers prencrlbea 
in subparagraph (£) ' of this section* ' J o transfer of these 
professors with nilitnry rank to other branches of the *rmy 
will be permitted; r:<i provided, finally . That an. officer 
below field rank designated an chief of an or.: or service, or 
Superintendent or £Jomand«nt of cadets in the Philippine Military 
Acadsny, nay be promoted temporarily to tno rsni of major without 
vacating his jermar.ent co: mission, such temporary rank be ini? in 
addition to the authorized strength of the Officer Corns prescribed 
in aubraragrsph (A) of thin section. 

(&) 1 ,0 / Officers will be distributed among grades os 
determined by the ‘resident of the ^hilinpinest P rovided . Thnt 
the number of officer.' commissioned above the grede of colono?. 
shell at no time exceed 1,1 per cent o? the authorized strength 
of the officer corps $ above the grade of lieutenant colonel 
shall not exceed f*& per cent; above the grade of major shell 
not exceed 5,2 per cent; above the grade of captain shall not 
exceed 14,9 per cent; above the grade of first lieutenant shall 
not exceed 45,8 per cent; And provided, furthe r, That the grade 
of major general 3hall be conferred only upon the offioer 
detailed by the President of the ’hilipplnes to act as the 
chief of staff and shall he retelned by him only r?bile holding^ 
office as such, each detail to be for a terra of three years , 
unless sooner terminated by the President, 

(e) In determining relative standing , officers of the 

ie ular Force shall take 'rccedence over officers of like grades 
in the Reserve Force, Officers in each grade in the Ge ular 
Force and in the Reservo Force shell be separately listed in 
order of rank in a manner to be prescribed by the resident, 

■which list ehall establish the ooniority of each officer in tic 
Regular and Reserve Force • , respectively, and which seniority 
shell not be thereof tor changed except through operation of this’ 
or other laws; Provided . That nothing in t>is >ct shall be 
construed as giving officers with purely military functions 
authority over officers with purely civil functions end vice 
versa, except as specifically ore cribed in this or in other acts, 

(f) Promotion of regular and reserve officers ah 11 be 
accomplished under such policies end procedure as the resident 
may direct, -provided that in t’ te of peace no reserve officer 
may be promoted to any grade until he ha?, served at least two 
years in the next lower grade. 

Any reserve officer may, in the discretion of the Pres- 
ident, be discharged at any time. 


10/ Ac amended, Commonwealth Act ■' o. 312, Juno ", 1930. 

■ action 8 of tho amending act provided for carrying into 
offaot the now provision e anosmia;; the chief of staff • 


8 - , 


{&) Until superseded by la is formulated by the National 
nseenbly for specific application to the Army of the Philippines, 
all regulations, courts •martial procedui'e, and provisions of low 
nov: 'ertaining tc the punishment, discharge, dismissal , resign 
nation, administration, and retirement of officers end enlisted 
me:', of the Philippine Constabulary shell, as modified by 
provisions of this and other laws, anply to all officers and 
enlisted men on active duty in the Army: Provided . That an 

officer of the Secular force separated by the President from 
the service on recommendation of classification or efficiency 
boards for reasons other than his oven misconduct, willful foil- 
ure, the intemperate use of drags or alcoholic liquor, or vioious 
or immoral habits, shall be entitled to a gratuity equivalent 
to one month of his current pay, as received by him at the time 
of his separation multiplied by the number of complete years of 
service: Provided further T That in computing the length of 

service of an officer for ourposas of gratuity payment, service 
rendered by him in the Philippine Constabulary shall bo given 
full credit: ^rovidoc^ finally. That the gratuity provided 

heroin shall be paid from the annual appropriations of the 
Filippino Army, 

{h) In time of war any officer of the regular Force may 
be appointed to higher temporary rank without vacating hi~. 
permanent commission, ouch appointments in grades below that of 
colonel being made by the President alone, but all other 
appointments in time of war sdvall be in the deserve ’orce. 

(jj Upon his ovn application and with the approval of the 
Chief of Staff, any officer may be transferred at any time to 
a branch or service other than his own without loss of rank: 
ovlded , no transfers to or from the Judge Advooate 

General r s Service, the Cheplain Service or the Medical -ervice 
3hall be permitted. Transfers in time of rar shall be made aa 
prescribed by the Chief of »teff« 

(j) ith the approval of the American Government, not to 
exceed^one-holf of one percent of the co~ missioned officers of 
the Regular Force below the grade of lieutenant colonel may bo 
details to duty at foreign military schools, 

hile on such duty, officers so detailed shall receive the 
pay and. Horan ces of commiacioned officers of their own grade 
in the army of the country in which the 'Military school is 
located: Provided . That such pay is equal to or higher than that 

received by the officer so detailed, 

(k) Not to exceed one-half of one per cent of the commis- 
sioned officers of the Regular Army in any fiscal year nay be 
detailed as studonts at such technical, profession^, and other 
educational institutions, or bo students, oboervers, or investi- 
gator:! at such industrial plants, hospitals, and other place. , 


as shall be best suited to enable such officers to acquire u 
knowledge of or experience in the special tier, in which it id 
deemed necessary that such officer; t shall perfect themselves: 
Provided r That 10 expends ah 11 be ir.-urred by the -’hifcippino 
Government In addition to the pay md llouonc© o" the of ficers 
so detailed, except for the cost of tuition at such technical, 
professional, end other educational institutions, 

<D The President is nut ori-?.od to detail or as sin to 
duty with units of the deserve force such officers of the 
Regular force as he deem a necessary. Co traandera of divisions 
and larger units of the Reserve orce shall be selects:’ from 
officers of the Regular Force, 

(a) Transfers of reserve officer;, .ati.in their category 
shall be Hade under such rules as the President :.ay prescribe. 

To the extent provided for fro time to time by appro- 
priations for this ..-pacific purpose, the President ay order 
reserve officers to active duty at any time and for any period, 
but, except in tirco of e national emergency expressly da cl red 
by the -ational G-seeably, no reserve officer ohtsll be >.r* ployed 
on active duty for more than six months in eoeh fivo yearn 
without his orm consent: 'ro vide d f lo^eyer t That reservo 

officers wtio under o extended tour-a of active duty voluntarily 
for any length of time and receive full pay and allowances 
t»e?efor, shell not, by reason oololy of much service, br 
exempt from duty with annual, maneuvers or annual active duty 
training* * Any reserve officer who fails or refuses to reporu 
for such duty , when so ordered, shall be punished p.s ti cot. t- 
martial nay direct. 

3SC. 85, 11/ The General Staff Corps oh all consist of 
the Chief of • taff, the Control General -tc.ff, and the <’o er l 
Staff with troops, 

(a) The Chief of taff shell be directly subordinate to 
the ^resident of the Philippines. 

Under the direction of the ^'resident of the hilipplnes, 
he oh ell cause to be made, by the Control General -taff, the 
n soo osary plana for recruiting,- organizing, supplying, v-iti 
oiny, mobilizing, training rnd clsaobiliMing the r v/ in ,o*;eo 
and in war and for the use of the nil it ary forces for national 
defence, Ko shall render annually to the President, for tr nr,- 
mission to the Rational Assembly, a full report upo, thy condition 
of *” the - may of the Philippines, i .eluding statements on to 
strength, cost, unexpended balances, requiraaanta, and so on* 


12 J JOg emonde , Go; non ealt!. ct o- 5Gb, ‘'•.rue V, 1. GO. 


„ v . - ' ie Central General Staff shall consist of the 

rr* 0f Staffj ttte deputy Chief of Staff, and such other 
officers of grades not below that of first lieutenant as the 
President may direct. 


It shall be the duty of the Central General staff 
to prepare plans for the national defense and for the mobil- 
ization of the oan-power end material resources cf the nation 
^ ®oer— mey, to investigate and report upon all ra tters 

affecting the efficiency of the Army end its state of 
preparation for miliia?./ ope r tionsj to perform such in— 
s .ections oi tno Army as may bo necessary to insure thorough- 
nc-r..s and uniformity in training cad compliance .itn regula- 
tions; to perform for the infantry, ©avalr; , artillery and • 
air units . no: the Off-Shore patrol suen functions &e the 
Chief of Staff may prescribe} and to render professional 
aid and assistance to the Chief of Staff. 


(c,) The General Staff with troops shall consist of such 
number of officer;; not below the grade of first lieutenant 
_s may bo necessary to perform the General Staff duties of 
the headquarters of divisions *nd higher units. 


It shall be th . duty of the General Stuff with troops 
to render professional aid and assistance to the general 
officers over them} to act their agents in harmonizing 
the plans, duties ana operations of the various organizatio s 
an t rrices under their jurisdiction, in preparing det. iled 
instructions for the execution of the plans of the commanding 
generals and in supervising the execution of such instructions. 


SEC. 24* (Repealed) 11a/ 


11a/ Commonwealth Act Ko. 569, June 7, 1940. 


- 11 - 


£k<C, 25. 12/ The Services shall consist of the following; 

( 2 ) The Ac' jut ant General’s Service, the Judg. Advocate 
General 1 s Service, the In jector General’s Service, the Quar- 
terns ster Service, The Finance service, the Ucdical Service, 
tre Ordnance Service, and the Chaplain Service. Each 
service shall consist of a Chief of Service and such 
assistants as the President may direct. The head of each 
service shall be responsible, under the supervision of the 
Chief of Staff, for the efficient performance of duties herein 
assayed to his service, and for the execution of ail in- 
structions and orders issued, hint by the Chief of Staff. 


(b) The Adjutant General’s Service shall be charged, 
under such regulations as the Chief of Staff nay prescribe, 
witt the operating functions of procurement, assignments, 
rometion, transfer, retirement," and discharge of all 
officers and enlisted men of the Regular nd Reserve Forces. 


(jc) The Judge advocate General’s Service ..hell render 
such legal assistance as may be required bv the military 
forces. 


(d) The Inspector General’;. Service shall be charged 
under such regulations as the Chief of staff (Sic ) may 
prescribe, with the making of such inspections, investigations 
c.nd reports as may be prescribed in regulations or directed 
by the Chief of "tuff. 


12/ As amended. Commonwealth ~ct Fo. 335 > September 5, 1933 
and Commonwealth Act No. 5&9, June 7, 1940. 


- 12 - 


(o) The Quartornaater ervico shall be cKoi- ith the 
purchase, procurement, storage , and ieaue a or the Army, of all 
auooliec, except those -hose procurer, &nt is aesi med to ot;ier 
services; with the acquisition of real estate and the issue 
of license in connection with government military reservations; 
with the transport , cion of the Army by land and water, and ith 
such other duties as may be- required by law or directed by the 
Chief of Staff: froyided t fi at such co missioned technic;!, 

assistants from other branches or services as may be required 
shell be detailed to the suer t*rr;ies ter service for a period of 
not to exceed three years. 

(£) The finance ervica shall be charged v.ith the 
disbursement of all fur us for the national defence, the account- 
ing of the sane, and wit]., each ether fiscal duties as nay be 
required by law or directed by the Chief of taff: -rovided . 

That under such regulations es the Chief of ••'taff may prescribe, 
officers of the . icanco Service, accountable for government 
moneys, nay entrust c-uch money o to other officers for the 
purpose of having these sic© disbursements as their agents, and 
the agent officer ns .oil ao the officer who entrusts the money 
to him shall be bonded, and ohall bo held pecuniarily responsible 
to the Government of the Philippines. 

(ft) The i sdical ' curie*- shell consist of the edicnl 
Corps, the Cental Corns, the Veterinary Corps, the Female 
'luraea, the Me die el administrative Corps and such other corps 
as nay be cre&tec by the President. It shall be charged with 
all matters pertaining to the physical examination, health 
and seuitatio of personnel r.nd animals of the my, 

(li) The Ordnance ervice, the i-adiceJL ervico, the lx* 
Corps, the Cores of ^ngineor.n, the- Signal Corps , the Off- 
Shore Petrol, and the Chemical Corps "hall ho charred ’ ith the 
purchase, procurement, storage and issue of each spec icl 
equipment, material nd supplies as apply to their respective 
services. 

These several arms ant. services are charged with the 
study, experiment and development of all special materials and 
equip; rent pertaining to then, 

U) The Chaplain Service shall have charge of the 
religious welfare of the Gray. 

SBC, 25-A. 15/ The Corps of engineers 1? charred with sll 
construction required for the national defense, including lend 
and eeaooast defenses, with the maintenance and repair of all 

.1 


If/ ’died by Cor nouwcrlth —• <>• ■> uptesabor 


- 13 


cue; construction -aid with the ••laintenonoe and operation of 
v,.i utuitlftr* ezeoot vuch construction ond such .utilities v, 
ok spool fieaiiy .--.si red to otter service.-) b-- the Chief 

of -tuff* 

1A/ virpiei -orpe shall bo charged. with 
tno installation # ainton&ncs c^ict operation of oil military 
signal otxarc'inieation systems -ncs equipment, exoopt the inatrl* 
let ion, uaintenanoe and operation of such oystaac on i / bo 
orgsnio to tactical unite* 

■'•«» 36* 'f.-io offyhosfe patrol shall oarapri-se all "ierino 
ecuirrsent and perso nnel Required by the 'hiUppine ‘Vvernment 
and assigned el ti er in oo-hcs or in war to the control of tho 
'-hi©. of taff * Ip ;hcll have auoh lutiec and powers a 3 racy 
bo prescribed by tho Chief of f-taff. 


A. (flu US XII, - ■~nJ.ist,'Cnt a nd i»oealic.t. .ent 

3?* ig/ fciy male citinan of the Philippines betv.sea 
eighteen end thirty years of a^e, eblebodied, free fro-i 
disease, of jaod ;orcl eharaoter and habit -, of average 
intelligence, and possessed of ouch educational attainments m 
®*y he prescribed, may be enlisted in tho Regular force under 
the following restrictions: 

Snlisti.onto shril he for a term of three years, and 
:aay bo aade by the recruiting officers at station; of the 
tegular force 1 Provided, .1 .at all enliatnonts in fore- at the 
outbreak of the war, or other grave national erne rgenoy, or 
entered into luring itc continuation, shall continue iu force 
until six months after its termination unless sooner terminates 
by the President. 

(b) Vtuoanriod minor.; botwena eighteen and two-ty-one 
yeers of age may he ftnlieted only on the written and duly 
mttosted cor.oenv os the father, to© rr.othor tvhc . sUo is tha 

only surviving parent, or th* publicly, \nom 'unretian, 

r 

i&} xollstneutG for service in any province, except for 
the Regular ;i vision, the Artillery- Corps, end • ir Cor n, 
shell be fro-. 1 , among residents thereof. In so far as practicable, 
enlistments in the :e forces shall be apportioned aueng the 
vertcKB provinces o' the Philippines. Any former soldier in 


Ifr/ idded by Comioaroalth Ust : ’o. 385, : >ept«riber 5, 19:; .. 
15 / As amended, Common e dth -ct Ho. 569, Juno ?, 1940. 


14 • 


N*?y* S 8 ^oo4 1 RV pine + G0nOta0Ulary * 01 ' th0 u&it9<a 

Xaioaiy ^SUlaxvforc*! £*£1^ That he is 

one ^ Q f I t T tUat tIie ««®r«cc b*tw*« hie ege 
***** ° f aCtuul servi ° 9 ahall not exceed thirty ye£r S . 

the retirement flK}f tiona a?plyiB S to the rwOlt^t and to 

«i«uiw^oroe Ji U 1 ^ 683 ° f a ® a J oraLiis * ion ® d o**i°®r a of the 
~ 0xCe aBiil1 *>® prescribed by the resident. 

ablv a^lefft tw ‘ n * niisted t^a who shall have c,.rv* h.vton- 
^2. * t letUi - tiiree years and does not reenlist eJarJl be 

™?; ai zssiT*”-"?*" “ capt ia « 

address ^ tht ^ t Vea -* 1V *"> -o^ever, to register his 
‘ E ,^ e wi^taxy ueadquartors nearest to his placo of 
rosidencaj y m v^d. That former soldiers of the %»S£!i£ 

orH^Vf 1111 ? 118 Constabulary and the United states Army 

~ S’* snare c ter and faithful service. ;,my be niUof 

to eaiiat voluntarily in tha ^ : V* 

organisation thereof' f WM 611(1 <iS6l S nod to « 


iiRTXCLS IV. - Military Academy . 

. Tllere ehell be established e military training 

school to be named the Philippine military seatfeny.’ for tbe'’*’ 
training of selected candidates for permanent commission in 
iT»ll 6 f al iZ J ' oxce \. Tac student body in the military Academy 
pines. b :ai0HU * J ' 6 ° Gdet Gorps of th0 •'**& of the liinp- 

th . ,?ff; *?. ^ ? ^ideat is authorised to appoint to 
rlt-r'i A ?f aaiy ^UiUdly, subject to such physical and 
rnen^i eneinations an he ,n;/ prescribe, the number of cr dots 
necessary to maintain the Cadet Corps at n strength of not n 
ezoeed three hundred and fifty. Cadets shall be selected fro# 
among qualified candidates as hereinafter provided. Candidates 
for admission shall be single, in good physical condition, not 
lees vhan seventeen nor more than tv.ontytwo years of s/ a 
and sliall be nominated by the t-enbers of the Natlor.nl sscnbl" 
eacr. of whom may nominate .any number of candidates, The -’resident 
shall appoint from among tnoae . ho pass the physic til end nental 
examinations with the highest ratings the number or numbers 
necessary to fill the existing vacancies: Provide d That a 

iiuot- of three members of the Cadet Corps shell be allotted 
to each Assembly district: ^ovi.deti, &X&STU That In case 

no candidates from a given Assembly district attain the 


!£/ ^ amended, a a son wealth ct ■' o. 569, June 7, 1340. 

12 / As amended Co ; onwee-lth Act ;. o. 3B5, September 5. 19&) 
and 0 oar.sonwoolth net i.’o. 5S9, June 7, 1940. * 


i 



5S inr */ ,cond filiation shall be -iven 

t0 *?* n — **** «»* district. If on *• 
* tZ~t aulon 710 <^didato shall attain the required 

tiie v< canciea in the iotrict quota shall be 
riU * ^ “ he - reciaont from succo.-sivl candidate at large. 

.. . ana ^llorencev of students at the ilittry 

>-Cad«ray shall he fixed by the President. y 


h . * y 3t f^ ^ ho nhall « after entrance to the Acadory and 
^ ~ 0if * completion of the prescribed course of train' •, be 
xound to be physic- lly unfit for military duty by reason of 
° r dl00a6e incident to the service, shell be retired 
>?lUl the rank of cartot and shall be entitled to the retired 
pay and allou^ioen of a third lieutenant of the Re-ular Force. 


Vpon satisfactory completion of the course of instruction 
at tha ---ilitary Acndaay candidates shell be co^isBionc ■’ third 
licrnt annate, in the -degular or Reaorvo orcao with relative 
»**» the order of final ganerol atending es dotor .ined by 
, r ® c ^.ty -' ; oard end Corraandrnt of the •-erfiany, r id r i proved 
by the Chief of Staff. * 


4 

The Academic Board of the ‘hiliupino Military Ac&daay shall 
oe ccciposed or the -’up erint ancient, the Cot lendant of Cr.Ciete 
s.c.trl vug x i oafs of t e deperenents and < r -hall have the cover to 
confer the degree of bachelor of scier.ee under ouch rule; and 
reyilationo S3 the o,nief of staff may proscribe, upon all 
cadets vho aey hereeftor satisfactorily oa nletn **■« oprovod 
course of studies. 

of >taff -hall have authority to grant ,-uvd- 
uation leaves of absence . ith full nay to all graduates of the 
* •ilitnry Acedessy, v : > receive co,a.iie.sions .1 the begulur force, 
for a period not ozceodlng oro month effective upon the date 
of graduation. 

Oadet® May be granted leaves of absences fro~ the Kilitary 
-cada-iy, under such rules and regulation© as the Chief of Staff 
may prescribe. 


Academic leaves of absences without deduction from pay 
or alio 'areas may bo cutnorised for the • A’nerinton n ont , profen* 
ssers , assistant profsooore, instructors and other officers of 
the • ilitary Academy for the satire period of the suspension 
Oh the ort'irary ©cadcc-ic studios , under :~uc rules i< 3 n rjgulftfcio. <s 


* 10 


e 


\ 

V 

*58 to 3 Chisf or . prose site: . yaatidftft. '.-hut omosro 

tjj too «*a«m iaram eosigaed for duty .t the i-ifiLHery '.oadtouy 
bcj entitle a to the ai-.ie < envp i.j *'41c e># oo are author:! .*ift 
or the lisgulsr I'oroe. 


V, - iiiftJjS^CTe Aflyog. 

"■.*•>.. ;>.o» foro* nhell Mnstit of . toh jm^sr 

of nfentry l vision© locatod '-bo '.resident mc direct; oi 
':ueh additional sc^r^te m ;i . jut.-,, button on*, co --.nloo r .,i 
i toiler asperate >wit<* ** to? -resident ;*y author i :*.©; of tdl 
roaarv* clause© not ©j signed to ti e rbors units, • - 1 of to;- 
el amenta of too Offshore Patrol, 

'•>.» organisation of i»a«m land i\d air units aft 11, iu 
ao far as practicable, be that o ccrrespondirig tactical unit a 
of tor? Regular .-ore./, 

•--0, 3?, the Chief of toff May 'stall or ensign to duty 
with -vnz-.vvQ uaito euoh enlisted nan of the regular oroe as 
do deoco noons miry. 


ABTIcah n » * dgp.-jrm :--f fiflsra- jail ^onci^ iaalored 

i£CU££&* 

34* ry perse® who shell have ccnpletto his trainee 
instruction and who la ©elected foe trstolnc ? .■ u c .doaios©; 
officer shell pursue ••. tooorctiCi-1 course of irtirr«ng of not 
l«no than six sjontfca to bo proscribed by the Chief of Stuff, 
upon eoKolstian of sMoh ho eb?2l bs c-.asitrod to . : uty tdtk a 
^•gulsr unit as probttloaarv third lieutenant for rwothwr 
period of six siontbo* -t the end of this » urvluo thoao Mo 
hfovo cltoplayod ^ur titles of lauderehip tj-.ci rise have Ssnaastrated 
thel* fitness to <vr..rian<i my be nx/ncinted tad coiiiiusionbd third 
llfltttfflMQts Of the 1‘oruo sn>! rysi .nod to on organization 

thereof, Ihoto who full to coqpleto the course of training 
Shell bo transferred to t o Isc{.or*B force a; enlist .! ~,<m m 1 
ch 11 be «t:sl&ie8 to aa orrmizntion t! too f. 

;'36* 38, At - vn: joiloge. ml nsiimmitU-z e; tlio rosl- 

dnnt tusy dee if unto there abr«lX be e tall i •!!©'• r.nd .aiateiood 
i«eaex*»e ^Pficcro* Tre inin?; ’’nit; of awei oroo and ao*vicos e.s 
he to? 11 wpeiify, htre every physically fit otucnnt ala .11 ' o 
required to pursue a couree c military instruction designed 
to qualify bin for a comical or an o third lleuter. nt of 
Peaonne# Xa so tur es »cy bo practicable, the atudsat shall 
be yasKittod to cboma the era or service in which ho wishes 
to tridn, f fnia oourao of oil i tor y instruction, if purauo' to ♦ 
yy ylaticn, shell e*>apt student© froM tr^'.inss instruction# 

H shell not saaawt tlwn fron rtgislrstlon, r 


17 


*•' go. -hisii oi • t. i.r uviix, b„ «tuul , .v nt with 

tii . t^iui oi Wn institution, deuJuv'.te the csnlcr ailit i-j instruo- 
jfMf 3UCii ° -.•? ; -uliutv ■.• ••: -,ol ui s*y be sect - 
s ^ ior institution* Ho is xutuorio.i t o ie: a« t . t uch 
■ In'ntiiiiti na the arise, # : .uip.t*>»t, sms ,.rvxrt.- foiob h.. 

deoas. essential to tfao conduct of thi: iniitractio.-u 

J'h i’«aii your tUo yy«ior iuiiitory instructor shall cub- 
iit t tf«; chief ot Ltufi tut ouses of tho-o .....ac-.rf of fch. :r-d- 
u&tiug ciusfe ».fti he reeou encb tor further training* Ti.v,-.c 
gruiw<tee .my bo oi\i.;r- ... to orgaais tioue of tiiu '•ygui.-r Foret for 
•** «onfcbu» r.. ■ er.'.ou* i.t tc_‘ ocas of tbio .uvi. 

tiiOUfc «ha i«.vo <Ut>, x^yeo tu» ix fitneot for do iou lu, *j® 

.oinfcoi . cobalt i'.oavO Jiird lieutenant. of tL, -vos. and e.;.- 
sign c to an organist bio» thereof* 

Gr -u to. ../ not roeo. . .aiw. f v r -it 

ti.ird xxouU-fifcat il Uis-..i t.. ..•j-ii:.. for u. . ..GnUscnt 

i.i’. ouch v<*ui i t,, - .. . iwi < ...o -,r'. y Li l.. • • jrva 

usolgosc iiO tiii vi»' bio, t., •;»••<.>* . . rivfet. or noncou >o- 
t»ion&u officer. uu rooococndod. Students of cliitur, o^t. who do 
not oavi./xttt. their c art- of etod> at *.n institution • f x<.urniii8 
. I'crvit-u.. - i tii b 1 -i . vx jffi . >je^* frtL'tJu^ U.;it -UU..1 o. .i.i b.e 
for ti*«.xnoe instruotica i. iudi te;y a .« t .tdr ccrua»e~ 

titir. a (. ti. tha iuotitutio?.. If ...or tiiun LG j. -tr.- of y, tu«sy 

XiUi.i b- yc U.C. Wt. 4«:.v-’ . us , *.0 CUiltui. 

SEC* 39* 1G. jW ^raoicle.'-t .^v r tii a... oint <u?.:: , u - 

on tia. raws . :on*itttion of thu GLief oi u.ff> *u«a rojxrve officera 
. Lull in ills ojuiioa i>*s ,;ctui.d« I auaaed ulc — . r > 
dates tsuy bo r^i^ui red to undergo training t 'rob-tt-r<rr;* third 

bnfos- n - -'.a a . Liuti*d tiui ec . i tiic* re;£. rvcu* 

; C* 4Q» ir/ in ao far #, &-y b» « -tic »M©, original a. oait- 
aenti.' by the • Idovif in .^n-uu &ov^ tuiru x »ux^n<oit be 

aside fruui 4s:wnj w»ou*e for.terxy hou; .a,, ' u orv*. co ..ii tic-.ua i-.- tir 
Unitscl ; tate. mrr v , fr • u... "oraar of;'i ;cr: of t : ;- '.itxa Go. ;-d 

..fui ;rox aaon ot->r- oho . oaetu.. yxce . t.. . .u- uotiit., r . e**i 
training ana 

: • 0. 4t« iCi.co: .xofciot-.d offitoro ci ti;a s> ? : ^..r . • iOt-. b. - 
tsssn U»® agat oi frtt»aty~ane wau thirty >v* r.. who urs recoaasnd- 
vl far it uiUtaat uu w*^ra iiaut oaut ..ay.xi aruu*, tin c sr.c- of 
instructlc r- oi oi . .touts-. t »re;-.cr*.bc<i tor thoc,r. tu»v col ioti d 
thair tr»inea iuotracticu, and afco are rsdoaoeudod ,fox- tjuinitij 
to ^ua-xfV u. reserve or iieor. ♦ J • u a*ti f-ctor, collation 


xG- Au amended, Co . oh'.'oulth Act ; o. o,., October ijJo, 
19/ As ssandsdj Qotuionaoaxtn net Ho. 09, October .-.y,' i/yo, 
Cossonse^lth Act Mo* 3*>5» ^ ^'ihcr 5, iivb. 

- IS - 


of Uii* course -they may be a^ pointed end eoeais atoned thir iiau- 
tenante of the rteeerve* / iq *• signed to lb organisation J the 
F«s« rve force-, iv c© y t a on jsobiiisfcti-'j., no lervice at. a ret-*;-rve 
officer ..aa> bo Rerforaed b> an eniistrd sen of the ; < ..ulur 

force. 

f); C. 4-. • d'iosi— ret <-nre officer. u.:,a fee , •?• eai -jrl frosi 

gr-iduete- of r,»uic- i ool.i*>- ; • -nr xcuver- unc.^r • ucn rev-.it- 
tionfc «v» stay bo preaeribed by the President* 

FL'C* 4>» ronervc office** theli be phyatenliy e nsaied u on 
eseh to active duty. Any reserve officer found *>hy sl- 

caily unf it for active f axe . urvict ut.U b>.-. d t. ci«*rt<n-.. 

. r S4. 44. Yoing ten arlw couuloUt their trainee instruct^ u 
and uru jpeleot 4 for id -t loan.. tfutniag t .•• .jo. if; * .. . • u.. non- 
omtaissioned officer* of the Reserve Force shell jnirstie s pre- 
scribed oenrse of three ..--•nthe. U;?. n #i t left star/ cc'-et-tr. 
thereof they fhti;. •- crr-T.ted in tne nonce isissiceed officer 
grade lor which tney shall hnve ..all;. . d, *i.a tfon live, i err r 
to tho re.- err. Force Am: assigned tv . n org nlestion thereof. 

f5E0. 45. Tho Chief ol fttff chsi^ be eapoeereti to erganite 
and et-Ubliah *okl;. ?uoei*x ano &<tvano»u ebooi unite <, he . y 
dee* roper for the special tralnin>, of officer of tsohaieux 
fcnes supply motions and services, ,.nd lor th x-xvsaeeo truirung 
of selected officers for fitic, staff - nd c. . im duties. 

40 . Ail carafe;-, to* lor 6 „x4ntamt ea ru ■ . vvt .fflcerb, 
rt-.cti t u.odlcxi offiei i*fe» suo.-.i Is required • • pubiify i. 
a v-intaent a# tuird lie xi-eiiant, of tn line before, bein^ nr :Ht- : 
to pursue ut»y axociul course pert .iaiug to tns teobniooi and 
supply service e* 


A Jx''Lh VI i - -i-cclvv T;uty Tr. V i.,. - -cf 

47. -’oriedo of sotlv* auty training i« tho : u^ex-Ve 
Ferae shell be as prescribed by the Chief of ftaff. In no f »r ns 
n»y be vr^ctici-bi*, tbe ctiva Jut, period, lor the thr«v oohexons 
ml Ji be a< follows* First -/i,t»rvo 6 . Annually « not leaf. ti«ar. %et, 
duyts} ‘>ecnd Ressjrvwi , annually, -sot lea;. th>a fiv«- .u.yaj an-! 

Third RSrervea* every thir: y :>r, not ieer ii.no freven d-.yr. 

isuring; suoh arlod ol actlv dut. training t n r:v.ervl^t 
asMoubi^ to the lees and rt/rfuls.t-h-ae re»or-b l for ... 
Ro^uiar lores. Ss.ce pt Ifc his o-n eojiseut, at aiuietcd ro^rciet 
any bfe required ia ties of peace to wm* aore tiinr. thirty days 
0 ;i ectiv- duty iii euy eux.«wi<.r year. 


19 - 


• -bC# 46* Any i-Oi 'xviet who i«iig w report Jor et .v- . „i.y 
wrviniag > uxrecW by the Chief of tofl ,iw be .xjnUhcA r. 
court-ia. rtisu. any direct* 

4 '>• ffi/ iuriy eicpleya* oj* fcii : Oovemasnt e# ;■*«#-..« to* uvinv- 
AUbtruct * on, or lor ..nnutti otivt -.,ut> trv Loin^., <v. Vor 

exte-tdv • o» octive cat,,, aim*, a not Aose ..At Jit. on r - 

suffer : *co« oi ,.i. v due vo hi' .,bs*mej In th. ; u_f iA.ux.it oi 

hi# obAt^-tAone, ,, xvvsrrc: officer c. extend*'.. cc-uv -a 

motive aty, rugs-rdleoe oi tu.. taount or his co. .^ucutijn cub 

c:lvi_i ixjbitiou, xituix bv- m.Uu«(I t-.. . v..r.. or rent c- i>. 

a*y be inscribed for bit; ..red* by iv.-U.vti n.* 

SbC* 5^* ii. ob*iiz&&iun «;.,*;.c-3r .l*n, 1 eotuiltut . 

follows t 

<«.} ioblilnAtion sttakr, nu*« « . — bliuhe<. for th . ,ir~ 

pose of providing store #.;& for the nras, e:.iuixi*nt, Clothing, ns id 
records oi units, ovhtr wum u.j«* oi the- «^oiar lores, to eu 
Mobilised in u - \ti'.r.,ux. cmrg-aoj, of Ruling provision in advance 
of vtobiiisntlon for tb« ntoebHwry ..uaitcr for aon w»d «i 

auen unit. during aohiii*ufcion, «nd of reducing to & aioicUtt U. 
cerioa ,.uc--..;;.,ry : r tion* 

(bt One taouiAi;.- uion center ainui be -..ct e-iicno ior • ■ - . 
y.:tt*iiou or siiaJJUr mat or, jum ior the vert hate-. > etc of the 
yiwt ,, for rvj,.Ui«atv or xiirgsr units. 


Title HI - Mlblfr Hf binVICH 

AKf ICul I . - eo*.!.et~->n to ;.CW: end Length 

of . oryxes 

SEC. 51. jUl Fill cinon are liable to a. '. Ltery . orvJ.ce* 

5‘cC, 5#.. *.->/ The obligation to uruoro suiiv r; troinhig 
a;*ell be^in with youta it* uuhooi, hoisaenoin.: t tin •*; a of 

ye, it., luui -UttbUL catena through nis sonoo-xng untix Ut> abux. v ch 
the «>;* of t onty-ont yenrs -nea he aiuix- ueot oo « aij v >ect. to ^ 
v*co t<. t**o ooiOiV; • ii at eighteen to t** ..-uty-ono yev.ro of 
ti# yxiuti* a,, not Attend «ny sot-ool or oo^i«t,«« tit obeli ent- -r 
too Jiitilor :V»fcerve i Objeec vo utu exoo tiouu j*r«*e«iribed i- ..•vac: 
-seven of this hot* Tne t-r. ii^n^ ..-aici. iw j , v ui*J re • 
rior to tito Cv -u«.d r your irt >hloh he ettnlns tu*mty-o no yevre 
of San*.- be un.4 K ?re nrotory .. it- ry Tr« 


ib ia e&iettued, Co.- .t;»nw*n-.lti* Act Ho* 5by# Juno 7, 1 /4b* 


10 - 


All -chao.. girls shell rtrcsive ugh Laitr'i ction : til i.. v..;/.. 

'* 6 the Ch ief of tali' any cteo necesrary for auxiliary •■.rvi.ee. 

Axa able-bodied auiu o xti m.f between the cf t-ont-,. • r» 
toC -' lift,/ year , hot*. inclusive, tx.eoj.t t.uo.m? : eolfically c ted, 
shall be ciiiBi ti jod u.. follows* 

Tv>- mao a - fuotH> between the aghc of t eaty nc t •■cnty-ona 
y«*iiro who hnve been select-.^ to rocoxve 3..jutury trxi .hi.-, 

First Restirve ~ h * bei*ecu ihe uges of' t enty~i thxrty 

one years, both inc.uaivc, nut including also ull those who have 
cospietsd trainee instruction or* it* oquiw* i \t *van thou; Uey 
at*y not he-.ve • attained the •’ i oi twenty-two. 

Second rtv-ryc - Those between tue i >,- of thirty-two yo.vra 
httu forty-one years, both ine«asiv*. 

Third Reserve - Too** between tin .»•♦ oi forty-two ye- ; n 
and fifty-onx yuare, bctn inclusive. 

•CEC« 3Jj* T~ 4 jg a.. -; xi-bj... b<- r< nr.-.i t rc >r nU 

tary trainirtg ix tn . Ara? in the ealend. r year in -Lie; tix.y 
will become twenty yenra oi age* This claet of training shell be 
Known as trainee Instructio n and shall bis giv- n tor -such periods, 
at auca times, and uauor auoo regulatl .* u tb* Pr^ide t «y 
from time to tixw prosscribe* txoept for those trainees ado atm 
for duty with ele ments of the HeguUr Force, the ,r..c j I trs.ii-co 
instruction {.hall not exceed fiv.-- nd m..— half nvth: ..* in no 
c s« shall the .xirlort of trainee instruction be extended, beyond 
t«elv- jont-d* except -?lth too specific ow .sent of ‘.u; trainee* 


AKTIOUS II - Procur-nent oi Vr : 

SEC* 54* Oh J.aauftT 7 first, i 93b, or a» eoon there* fi r as 
isay be practicable, the "resident nh&il issue * prool&rostlcn oti.x- 
ing upon »il . ouug aon, citisene of tho paiil pines, *ho ehs> at- 
t. in the age of twenty year* in that calendar year, to rt\;lst»r 
for fsXlitsn -nairaetion. registration siiail take pisce in sait- 
ubXe regletretioo niasej to fcs yreoeribvi by the city, isunici al- 
xty, or Nunlwlpel district govemuent In ><uicn ti^y reside, bet^ ;ea 
tim dttt-. of April first mi . : avert th. Annuui. r*(;i»tiation shall 
be hold during the owbq period in succeeding yaars. 

SAC. 55 * Th« Proeidont r-hxxx provide b jti aibmtioa all 
neootfcary rales ^na regulations for the ho thou tna procecrurt! of 
regletmti ou and the selection of trainee* for sUlt^r,. servlca* 


•beU^dwt fillip *** 0fal * f Ji ‘ ?»^ 

who are to be called fa*. ?i!f **; * at * r * ia9 **<>»« fogictrinls* 
year, he eiu*ii « u .-a ir ‘?t u ‘ e ® Ui *-ruotiai; in the »« t calender 
given ol th 7rLZ?£ t ‘tl " T U,0rou *" i ^**^><* to be 
Uorernore shell bo reu. on ■il^rw’ 1 ' 4, ^" Vt bc0n dr " ;;n * '™»k,c .ti 

aw: zi: 

mm% 5V£ JgLSJw^i t ' N ’ f Cri “ *«“"* *>“ 0.«m- 

to r.girt« ta5ii ; ;’.S; T- tur ^ tu “- “li ••> ,« a.u 

«.»u ai y pawonwl b. aS'enuU^t. 1 bt ”' n p *'"~ 

SKC. 38. tht hU»m fmm wo .a^t from ro.-l.te.tLoa, 

<i) *•**>» of toe POUl^pfn. to-oto and the FiuUpploe ,-. w . 

abroad^ 70 ^’“' a ' a ' oltlMmi of toe ? 01 ii .nee «io er. resldi- 

mam'to^rS^LeTS "ft*? **«• «» ^ -««• Eg, 

for aHita ry tr«i*iin£. “ u ** d,tei Hln4 ^ir obligation 

liobl^j'^oLu 1 '-' trril, “. ,° n , awlr ' <ltur!i » **»» ehefl oo 

to* nutiottal d»*a, t‘o T 

« Jsyrs^s srzz 

'“ a J ' on . froo ouetop, r** ut ■* 

*“f4'** lbr ' oiitruotion elt,. tat ,• .ieeot . i to, i 

« g rs s r r«r& £ S5.1SSI 

JS^^T* *■* “*•' * eel to SS. 1 - 

taiotflo^u^onf* * #U ~ 1 "* <« *»» 

(M) Kcoiecieetiee regularly ordained an ..-v *• , £ 
rf to* el.rti- eod Ntey treats of o reco.au” 


(o; 


fhyaioieoe properly eertiaed end noticing « 8 8ttCb . 


*0/ A* AKendt>u, coa amweeith Act So. $6,, Jun* 7, 2,340. 


az - 


is) Superintendent;- oi' penitentiaries, corrective <rl..o:is» i -f 
iniua uey iuau. 

Cjd) The personnel of the ooi utguard revenue outtor and light- 
house inapeetiou services. 

(*) Pilots, navigators inti mriim eu. >oriu tender. t;.« 

(f) Filipino eitlnent ufco are civil t<rvice eligible: ana who 
ora employed regularly by the united fti fc«f Govemuentt - rovtvla, , 
That t;*OK6 of trainee age who have bom drafted for military in- 
struction, upon ce; action of their esapioyttunt in the United States 
Government, shelx enter upon such instruction should the} be fc&io'. 
thirty year* of age* 

SBC* 00. ^Repealed) 21/ 


ARTtCLfc ill - fxa^.htxon. glassification . 
i ex', -risen t e 

S0C» 01* xl/ Acceptance Board e shall bn appointed by the 
Seeruterj of Rational Defense for a terse of tor** years. Box- ids 
ahoix appointed for • uext .aunicxpaiitxo.: anti isuniclptw dis- 
tricts at the population my require* Ihe let tr; : of Kati-^ni 
Defence hell determine the nuaber and location oi Bo&rdi requir- 
ed for the administration of tni; lee* They shell consist oi’ live 
regular maker* end two or w>re al terns tee* ?*o regular nenbers 
shall be physiaiiuie and where practicable two Jmii be of fit art 
of the Phiii •, ine Army stationed in tfe-* province. Fbe yuoratary 
of National Defense thali designate U» rja*irman :f the hoard* 

The- alternates shall wm and ottend tn. nesting of tiie Boord, 
in the event of it .-b«ense, sickness or otn r inability of tin* 
ro-,uiur # -.labors, upoft call of the Chairmen jf the board. 

£ivC« 4rf* The aedUcal ttui 2 --t.ru shall ndviot th >oard in 
oa-ae.: 4i era the young Bun* a physical condition for aii-H: ry ner- 
vine ia in v,n*fction« Eeoiuion by thu to«ru to action on a turn 
c =tse. rui upon ail other uatteri* ahail bo by ta&jerity vote. 

fKC. 63* X ung non wno have been coiled lor tr'ax:;o» instruc- 
tion, upon reporting to the Acceptance hoards, uhaii :: required 

to complete * questionnaire of a reaeribod fora, and to .atawgo 
a pnyaioal extualn tion. The board onail teen olauuil; ti.o y ung 


Ci/ Cooaoa vositfc Act So* 7 u, October 23 , 19 po. 

~/ g s aiiemied. Cow? ion wealth not No. 207, June . , lv3d, cne 
Coaaon.tealtn act Bo. 5d June 7, 1?40. 


23 - 


:Wn tfe ® ^Hewing ckssvet 

(£) Cl*a» I-Pit for u»U*n*l a «vio*. 

(b) CIacs II—- Fit for limited mice only. 

^ Cltfcs XII— Drfsrroc rnbii u later d; to. 

(iO Claes IV— ■ SrvtjpUd for physio-.! redone. 

to oxeacd T** ****** d*f«rr«d for not 

••iuaici ’ . o ( i ifinniot ' 'I di' tri * * , * 4 * r , -v 

- “ ttU > -• ^ ^ 

(b) Officials and agents of organised >>Oxioe forces. 

(o) Of l ic itlo of i«nu, air, ncr » rinu tmirport. 

**>' *£> ^ «***: 
-^Izomnt u, directed b, tiVprLjd^ ^ 5 * n *" 1 or * * ci ^ 

h ^ i> V ?f? M *» ^*!Mi3^Ible to ST^,ort tf 
•^n? laXt«£'c«^^ far certain Key* 

°?z r u **«— «• ,r • £*•*“*■ 

only S ™ T£ f£ y “f“ *t«w.r O.U b. mad. 

r^. 1 ^ * «»• * uocal,fr, r ^„-:r 


C.i.C. 67. Thu ,'ao--..i.Oic© i$o:-.ro „fcr.il bo 'ifi- b . »-. v u- 

•roa ? t for..rn!^ of to, tn.tM.i- to, ,.a»? iiuTi I li 

Mato and wmb :»rtelnl 0g to tie, to hi. futur, Juttou. 

fiiC. 66, ::hex% the Aocupk.nee Boer, doni j-h^ vi- <.• *w 

d “ r «*■*, of «w miom-i. ho »u,.^ w~4‘,T 

w t a* central .Kcrrlo^ Board in -.w. M r , * " 1 


** *u* — 



0) • 

43 r cJ 
'73 0 ) &4 

+> o a a) 
a x: .t> o 
3 £ M pe* 


© 


03 


w ■*< g-< 


6 UG. 7^, The Central Eerie \ Bourc {.-hall corn: 1st of five 

citiaenc uppoJ»te4 b;. the Secrets 17 of let tonal Defense who shall 
designate the Chair. an of tho Board, One nembei shall be an officer 
of the Philippine Army, representing the Chief of. itaff. Initially, 
one member shall b- appointed for five years, one member for four 


O 0& Je! 

C +* ® * 

3 C X 2 

q -p 



•v 0 

* rf 
<s © a 

* 3 


As amended, Co,;, on .eult.. Act No. 70, October 13, 1936. 
As amended. Commonwealth Act No. 5b V June 7, 1940. 


% 


V ' L<W * ^ * ahr Decision in all matters before the Board shall 
b.. u- majority vote. The Board shall have, authority to ens Loy 
sucn stall of assistants ana the services of necessary medical exnm- 
lnorw; t*s say be authorized by tne Secretary of national Defense. 

SEC, 74. Aj~ 1 casas of appeal fron the decision of the Accep- 
tance Boards which shall be forwarded by tne Provincial Governors 
shall be reviewed by tne Central Review Board. The appellant shall 
be authorized to be represented by legal counsel, and to preaant 
such facts and evidence in support of his case as he shall deem 
advisable . The decision of the Board shall be rendered without 
unnecessary delay and shall be final. 

SIC. 75. Tne salaries of the members of the Board shall not 
exceed three thousand pesos per annua, except tint the military 
member s h all receive the pay and allowance of his rant: and service. 
These salaries and tnose of the assistants and medical ere miners, 

. as veil as all expenses incident to the operation of the Board, 
shell be borne by the Philippine Government. Officers ana employees 
of the Government serving as members of the Board or as assistants 
or examiners thereof, if any, shall not receive any additional com- 
pensation. 


ARTICLE V - Incorporation into the Service 

SEC. 73. 14/ Upon .reporting at the designated training station 
the young man shall be examined physically, and, if fit for the 
service of his. classification, he shall be assigned to aut v . with 
an organization end sworn in. If tne examination discloses uaj 
cause for a change in his classification, the change shall be 
effected by the local Commander immediately and his assignment 
to training instruction varied accordingly, ./;;ere a change of 
station is necessary to provide the requisite training, the Com- 
manding Officer shall be empowered to issue the necessary orders 
covering his transportation. Upon joining his organiz- tion, he 
shall be sworn in. In case of physical disability disqualifying 
hi^B for military service, he shall be returned to his hone and 
prompt report made of such action to tne Chief of Staff and to 
the Jayor of the municipality or municipal district of his resi- 
dence. 

SEC. 76-A. 25/ Any person failing to register for military 
service herein provided, or who shall fail to report to tne 


24/ As amended, Co.aaon wealth Act No. 569 , June 7, 1940. 

25 / As amended. Commonwealth Act No. 70, October ~3» 1930, and 
Commonwealth Act No. 303, September 5, 1933. 


- 26 - 


* designated ti, iai,,g ct . . 

*£j£2S It *>“ K»U. — CuvW., 

ay a fin of nltT f> r( ' trUiR *** months in prison or to 

di^retS . or t ' T eed Uu tatt4re ' ! »•**. ^ doth, at the 
tr: l ,. tA " °““ r r- Conviction ior tius ott«, se ,4*11 not 

538J. evicted iro.;: tho niiit. r, senrie. herein re- 

f ro , Sf f^rtoreu oilier. ;tell be «. omot 

+ ,;.r , A '“ u ; u 1 J ‘ li - CyUr t «nd sheriff*.: fee. in the proseftu- 

tiun of cates failing under this section. 


ARTICLE VI - Transfer to Reserve Force 

S-C. 77. Upon completion of the prescribed course of trainee 
inetaructa , an, .unless the soldier shell enlist in the Regular 
force or shall be selected for further training to qualify him 
as a co missioned or noncommissioned officer, he shell be trane- 
1 erred to Hie Reserve force and as signed to an organisation thereof 
by the Adjutant. General. From this time Me name shall be carried 
on the renters of the Reserve Force. 

Uyoa tivneler bo the Reserve Force, such arms, accoutrements 
Gaiu clothing as shall be prescribed., shall bo transferred to the 
nob ill za. cion center of his organisation. 

Smc. 73 . ho/' On completion of his training instruct ton the 
trainee shall _,_se into the First Reserve where he shall be assigned 
to ait organization. He shall continue to serve in tae first 
Reserve to ineAtide tuK calendar y sr in t<hic, ; i he shall reach thirty- 
one year, of age. On December thirty -first of the year in which 
ne t-haxl become tnirty— one yuaic. of a L/ . , he- ajaaii be transferred 
to the second Reserve where he shall he assigned to an organization 
in that echelon. He shall serve in the C»cond Reserve to include 
the calendar year in which he shell become forty— one years of age. 

On December thirty-first of the calendar year In which he shall 
become forty-one years of age, ne ciia*! ce yr. uof o/tcc": to the 
Thiixi Reserve In *hich he may be assigned bo an organization. Re 
shall serve in this/ clas* until he shall be fifty-on yc^ro of age. 

CFG. 73-A. 27/ It shall be th duty of ail reiwrvists, be- 
tween the ages of twenty— one and fii > , Is^lusiW) 

whether' they belong to the cosuisaion.-d, enii. ted or other 
relative grades, to register their names nith the municipal 
secretary of the municipality r city of their temporary or 


26/ As amended, CoTimonveaith Act Uo. 335, « ept-waber 5, 1938, - id 
Co .r.onv f - ith ' ci 9o. 5^9, • ate 7> 1940* 

27 / Addea. by Co.r.onaeaith Act No. 569 , June 7 , 1940 . 


- 27 - 


of Staff, Tht rsgistJrboo'- fi” h= : f ” El f tr: ' >*** b y th. Chief 

° f St ^-T: r rr ?■ - 

chtefft of p„n^n^:*:rss::. 3hiil u ,xTto ™ i 

for JRJi'MLSS^ nCn ° f tll< - *»"*»• *>«* =*»11 report 
B«tiener D ekwe? “ W ** required by the fecrethr, of 


ARTICLE VII - Prepan tcry Hiiitrry Train h: 

bo as S fSi 1 T S 6 ^ 3rp ? B * °f Preparatory military training shall 
*5 To devel °P national spirit; to make the 

youth ihysically strong; t make. th-. youth aaxeUly confide.- 1, and 
t‘- prepare the youth for military service* 


.. S p* f“* ’repare tory rdlits ry training shall-, bogju with the 
y^uth In elementary gre de school .1 the e^e of ten year, end 
ena^l extend through the remainder of his schooling into college 
or the university as set forth hereinbefore. In case tne youth 
ceases to attend school, or for any reason shall have no schooling, 
he shall become liable for service in the Junior Reserve on 
reaching the age of eighteen jeers. 


ore. Ci. • Prepc j toiy military tri-.inirg i,- comoulscry noon 
tne youth attending school and upon others then they shall become 
eighteen years of age. 

S: 0 • 1 3 « 28/ The physically unfit shall not be required to 
undergo military training, physical fitness shall be determined 
by e board of uieo.icttl officers which shall by appointed by the 
District Commander. 

ESC. 84. 28/ The District Commander is chargee with the 
supervision of preparatory military training which shall bo divided 
by age and school classes, 3 follows: 

(e.) Junior cadets ; above ten years of gc, attending primary 
and intermediate schools. 

(b) HIJ- school cutlets : attending high or vocational schools. 

(fi) Junior Reserves : Eighteen to twenty year; of age, both 

inclusive; youngmen not attending chool or college. 


28/ As amended, Commonwealth Act No. 5o?, June 7, 1940 . 


- 28 - 


SLC. & 5 » 2JJ Instructors for cadets shall be assignee by the 
District CoBiuuncer from the qualified male teachers in the provin- 
cial soLools who nix aembors of the ue*.eive Force . 

Instructors for the Junior R&oerve until be assigned by the 
District Commander iron the officer*, and men of the Regular Force 
or of the Reserve force stationed in the District. 

IhG. 66, Course*, of instruction sh&xl be prescribed by the 
Chief of Staff. 

w*-.C . 67. 29/ The folio uing persons are exempted from train- 
ing in the Junior Reserve; Those who are found physically unfit 
by a medical board } those who ure living abroad j and those under- 
going any other fora of aatnorized military instruction. 

SEC. SB* *gj Parents unci employers snail be required to com- 
pel attendance at preparatory military training. Upon conviction 
of deliberate failure to discharge this obligation, the respon- 
sible parent or employer or noth shall be subject to a fine of 
not to excuSQ one hundred peso 6. 

linroilment in each category of preparatory military training 
simli be accomplished at such times unc under suen regulations as 
the Secretary of Rational peiense may prescribe. 


Title IV - GRADES, PAY, AND ALLOV.iiNCEvS 

SEC. dV* 10/ The grades and pay of ©misted men men shall be 
as foixo*s: 

(a) tfontaiy case pay ior enlisted men of the Regular Force 
snail be as follows; 

faster sergeants 

First sergeant#.*.... 

Technical sergeants*. 

Staff sergeants...... 

Sergeants. * 

Corporuls ♦ 

First-class privates, 
privates 


P45.00 

42.50 

40.50 
36.00 
30.00 
22,00 

‘ 17. jO 
14. QO 


29/ 


• • : i .* • * : . p • oni eaiih let * 0 . 5o7, June 7, 1#40, _ 
amended, Coiomonwealtn Act No. 71, October '->> 1936, Con- 
nwealth Act No. 3c>5> September 5, 1933 , tno Commonwealth 
t No. 569, June 7, 1940. 


- 29 - 


Air corps: 


Jaeti sr sergeants 4444 ?85.00 

Technical sergeants 4t4444 ** ' io’.oQ 

Staff sergeants 75ioO 

lirst sergeants. , >U.OO 

Sergeants 36.00 

Corporals. 27.00 

First-class privates. 22.00 

Privates 17.00 

Nodical service t 

aster sergeants 45.00 

First sergeants. 42.50 

Technical sergeants 40. 50 

gorge*, nts 36.00 

Corporals 28.00 

privates. 22.00 

' Con sta&uis. ry band : 

Assistant conductor of the band P120.00 

Soloist professors... 80.00 

First-class musicians. 64.00 

Second-class musicians. 56.00 


An enlisted ra&n of the Regular Force who shall reenlist 
within two month*, after his discharge by reason of the e pir tion 
of his enlistment .“hall receive reenli tment bonus of one 
month's pay of the grade held at the time of big discharge: 

Provided , That due to the necessity for technically trained enlist- 
ed personnel to properly maintain flying equipment, those enlisted 
men not to exceed fourteen per centum of the entire enli: ted 
personnel of the unit who qualify as air mechanic, first, second, 
and third classes, shall receive a monthly nay of seventy-five 
pesos, fiftj ;esos, and twenty-five pesos res actively: provided, 

further. That all enlisted men or air mechanics of the Air Corps 
who have been rendering service to the Phili >>ine Amy Air Corps 
prior to the date this law takes effect, shall receive the benefits 
of this Act: Provided, still further. That under such regulations 

as the Secretary of rational Defense shall prescribe, enlisted 
men of any grade except members of the constabulary band and en- 
listed men of the air corps, may bo rated as specialists and receive 
extra pay therefor >jer month &s follows: 

First class. 

Second class 

Third Class. 

Fourth class 


- 30 - 


pOO.OO 

56.00 

40.00 

30.00 


Fifth class. . 
si.v'J.i class.. 
Seventh class 
Eighth class . 
Ninth class.. 


P20.00 

10.00 

0.00 

6.00 

3.00 


p ■ P^ ovx . d , feO| finally , That nothing in this section shall operate 
to redact une pay which any enlisted man is now receiving during 
has current enlistment and while he holds his present grade as a 
result of tuts classification. 


Enlisted men shall, in addition; be entitled to rations, bar- 
rucks accommodations, medical attendance, and clothing as may be 
prescribed in regulations. To each enlisted man not furnished quar- 
ters or rations in mind, there shall be granted, under such regula- 
tions as the Secretary of National Defense may prescribe, an “ 
allowance for quarters and subsistence, the value of which shall 
not exceed one peso per day. 


The total number of authorized enlisted men in each grade shall 
he as the president may direct. 


(b) Grades and pay of enlisted men of the Reserve shall be 
the same us those of the Regular Force, except that enlisted 
men shall receive no pay while on an inactive status, or while 
undergoing annual active duty training: Provided , That in time of 

emergency, where & partial or full mobilization has been declared 
by the president, reservists shall draw pay* and allowances as may 
be prescribed by the President. 

SmC. 9u . 31/ Jne annual rates oi pay and allowances, to be 
i-aid monthly, for officers of the Regular Force, Female Nurses 
and for reserve officers ordered to extended tours of active duty, 
except probationary third lieutenants, shall be as may be pre- 
scribed by the President in Executive Orders. Pending issue of 
appropriate Executive Orders, the rates of pay and allowances now 
prescribed for officers of the Constabulary shall apply to the 
officers designated in this section: Provided, That due to the high 

mortality rate among flying personnel, officers whose duty requires 
regular and frequent aerial flights,- shall receive an additional 
compensation equivalent to twenty-five per centum of the monthly 
pay received by non-flying personnel of the same rank and grade. 

SEC. 90-A. When an officer of the Regular Force or a 

Reserve Officer ordered to extended tour of active duty suffers 
some injury or disease in line of duty, days lost in the treatment 
of such injury or disease shall not be counted against the annual 


31/ As amended. Commonwealth Act No. 90, October 23, 1936, and 
Commonwealth Act No. 569, June 7, 1940. 

32/ Added by Commonwealth Act No. 335, September 5, 1933. 


leave allowance provided in sections five and seven of Commonwealth 
iiCt .lusnbered Two hundred twenty. An injury or disease shall be con- 
sidered as acquired in line of duty when it is contracted in the 
f' e2 T iCe £ ° r reasons other than the officer's o-.;n misconduct, iilfull 
iaXiure, the Intemperate use of drugs or uleohoiic liquor, or 
through vicious or immoral habits. 

90-B. 22/ In the case of an enlisted men of the Regular 
iorce, an injury or disease shall be considered at; contrasted in 
line of duty when it is acquired in the service for reasons other 
than his own misconduct, willful failure, the intemperate use of 
drugs or alcoholic liquor, or through vicious or immoral habits. 

SEC. 91* 34/ Young men undergoing trainee instruction shall 
receive five centavos per day, in addition to meals and barracks 
accommodations, medical attention, clothing and trans ortation; 
Provided , That any trainee who may serve with the colors longer 
than fxvc and onc-hxlf months except for those who may be required 
by regulations to serve additional periods as a result of their own 
misconduct, or unauthorized absences during the course of their 
normal trainee instruction, snail receive, ov:r and above normal 
pay wild allowances provided for trainees, the sum of five tesos for 
each additional months sc served. 

SEC. 91-A. 35/ T/hen a trainee or an enlisted reserve while 
on active duty diet as a result of injury or diser.se contracted 
in the service for reasons other than his own misconduct, willful 
failure , the intemperate use of drugs or alcoholic liquor, or 
through vicious or Immoral habits, the President map authorize the 
payment of burial expenses not exceeding thirty-five pesos and a 
sum not exceeding one hundred pesos to the widow or dependent 
child or children, or in the absence of widow or dependent child, 
to the parents of the decet sed trainee or enlisted reserve; 

Provided , That injury or disease acquired while ea route to or rom 
the training station or mobilization center shall be considered as 
contracted in the service for the purpose of this ; ection. 

SEC. 92. 36/ Individuals undergoing training in the grade of 
probationary third lieutenant snail receive pay as provided in the 
preceding section for trainee.- of xorc than five and one-half moat.is 
service, except that they snail receive such aiiov;ances in cash 
or in kind as the Chief of Sxaff may prescribe. 




Added by Commonwealth Act No. 569, June 7, 1940. 

As amended. Commonwealth act No. 272, June 2, 1938, and 
Commonwealth Act No. 569, June 7, 1940* 

Added by Commonwealth Act No. ..35, September 5, 1936. 

As amended, Comonwealth Act No. 272, June 2, 1936, and 
Commonwealth Act No. 569, June 7, 1940. 


- 32 - 


***■•. l'S *- ■?*. •* al '' cr * 01 tiu ■■•svvtb Officer#* Train:; sg Units 

i\-,r V " r «c<'ir^ *ucl; clothing fciloeaace 

ror «~i~cu.^ the Chief of it: ff shall direct. 


** Uttd^rgoiog last ruction at probationary third lieutenants 
*.. y»U*y - officer** they shall receive th:- c;. of 

trainee w and tne subaiatunae eUowr.ce prescribe for their grs da. 


*• : " w ^2/ s*ORervo Jfficers ena . misted - ..ab^rg of tic, 

Pe -;. v force on annual active duty to uiug shall receive no iay. 
iitQw ant it bo iurftioc.ad :-ubtiBtcnc> ; end ..uits-hie > .uirturi «hile 
engages wr. t>uci duty* They shall be f oral thud treat ori&ti=.u or 
relaburseaent therefor, for the travel from their hesse to the place 
of active, duty and return, thereto* 


&8C* 95m JjjbJ Reserve officer© >on extended active duty with 
tuu Regular Force obc.ll receive* pay and axio-. -act' lu.vo with pay, 
ir^u .-.•idichi treateont, «*ud other privil ag< j aruvcribed by 

U 02 regulation for Regular Officers of their rasy-eetiv* radea. 

Oi fleer* of the A ray of the United .States aurving as aoabsra 
ox the dfciiunoa Rsi'ans'. is a ion wts be . ayvu dvu ing their nrlod 
•■■* v.GTVicc, sues. !82 iit xxy office:-, ;•. ; , cos mnu cud e .oiu— 

.—.'.to at the President of the blrippine *ay elect* The Oonsi ®- 
3ions conferred upon the offla-jra orig -busily eervong • s technical 
edv leers © ha ll inoiude one Field ihriaii.. uio eh* 1. 1 to© known ue 
the uiitssy Adviser. 

t--C. 9b* The Junior Cadet. , ifign . chcoi Cadet., sna Junior 
Reservists ahull receive no pay. 


Title v - a; pROPPiAf io» if rmm 

AF-TXCLi: I - ct..0d sf A. v ro; ; rlr.tiu ?; , .a.e 

Accounting for Catl uitu. l)efen lads 

;i:C. >7. j±/ s-biic funs a for too defenst of the Philippines 
ahail bo s . .rOj.rietcd, ea .Cudod, .a.d sccountfcd lor according to 
six t-urposca, ae foxJLowtj 

i* pay and Allow: ecus of Pereoisuei. 

II. Maintenance of Perionnal, 

III. Tnc s yorto t ior. . 

IV. aruinaent, Iquipaent, and u-,plie&. 

V. Construction. 

VI. Mtftoei laneoua. 


37/ Ac upended, C-»a.4onwealth Act No. $ov, June 7, 1940.- 
3-/ As oawnded, Co, .on«ealth Act Ho. ytifj, fcoptoaber 5, x93 ~ . 

As <uMHded» Coiasonwaaith hot No. 3b>, Ae:. teatot-r 19a v,, and 
CoiaBcaeealth Act Vo# 509, June 7, 1940. 


- 33 - 


rvylaSvU T n c t OL „ ur i.H 6fcw*.A tc divicKb ii l x.it m harciii- 
Sifter ceicrtbodj y. oviciw, IWtbcr , That for *.. ; ‘tried si ten 
yef-ra following the of tidt iUit, nil funds ay.ropriated for 

any 01 the above ^urpsue* sue rettai&i ag wat/ j" ended it the end , » 
•uch fiscal year sfeaui ao available lit succeed 1 flice- ;-ea.v-. 
for e. r onditure under the suae pur-onac only, unies*. other >• ■»© 

fy too re. iciontt i.va-1 j . Tom, *.-*»• rvv.ido:-t 

au v ' jtttewlM end direct that perctaxec, f on., or ail lv. ; .a. needed 
by the Amy couler any of the abov , uroosee *haxl to aod* under 
too direction of the Chief of :.t atf without ti«. interrelation :f 
the Eivtsion of Purchase and Supply of the Depertnent of Finance, 
any ; revision of e~istii'.;i is* to the contrary aot xthi-i ::tuin> • 

PuRfOCTJ I - Porsortnci 

This purpose shall include the folio -lug itcos; h- so pay » 
longevity .ay, cs ,.;.utehlou of <quartt*rc, and OiohiiB b t ..iote-ic-.. -i 
officers and enlisted Mm of the Keg alar and Reserve Forces, the 
pay and allowance of cadets at the Military Academy, the *a gee and 
, . : ju i'iofc of civ-_Li*n employees, agents, end unskilled xaboror. , 
in® uilo *ance. provided op law for pert jus un-sergo ing tre r.ee 
inn traction, Ho t erve Officers Training srpn instr- .tion, ana 
Pre ; r. cor v iiilitary Training and the amount or anountw annually 
a. propriiitud for the pension and Hetirt.,wnt Fun-j of the Aray. 


PUKPOStf XX - blntonunce of poraonnel 

Tui., purpose shuU. lucioae she following itexss i-ODai- tc.iOe, 
ts&altailofi and hospitalisation, one quartering of the . *<ia r 
Force ..ad of the Beoerw* Force whan on active cut., including ho 
lighting, hestinj, ana upkeep of ail builuingw necesoury to ho 
Jfaticnex Defwasd}' th* training end education of too Regular 
Hetervu Forces and of vr 9ns undergoing trainee .ut ira ao ■ > 
HeZurvo Officers Train r~t; Corps .nstruotion, had Tr^. r tory "_**i- 
t-r, aduoutic.i, for til* welfare of the --ray, anu for burial of 
fte.ibers of the Air*, who die ix> active aervice* 


•Jj Q: ;. £11 - Vj.. 

This purpose snail iitcxiiiio ths ioiioelA^ itctsst Ia«? aut.>oi -z .0 
twwaa expense 1 f i ect by rugolatawau of Ui* civil end ftiJ.it ry 
of the Aray, tir authorised trend, •-ortst.-cn of trainee- 
to end froa their hones, the authorised travel e^emditur* of «M- 
b ' 0 F toe Reserve Force 0.1 active duty or ..her, oaUen for r*&>~nr 
armu..d training, ti.x urchaee an. aalntwh-aefe of anmai -ua r-ter 
tr^nhijortation* tho aaintcuance and upkeep of aotor traauport. t>.pa> 
unit the packing end trenfc.mrtation of ail ar&uocnt, equipment, * nd 

^applies* 


- >/* - 


lic\Y : -£ XV - bra> jjtt t t ’-.oui&isaot 

fhi.- pui^ofc- .‘•■ hal l include the followin'; items: . wxpoot &nd 

tu.'-'ir oii«at . rts* signal, wad. en^in^er .a-nt *.ml aunpi. !*»«-, 
iltioa, quarter :-t«r, tedici.- tad air coiya auppliob tad 
•quipaeat, in* suppxdaa for tax .auiate.-ixnoe upkeep of a bUiSc- 
tloa coaterr, and till Itess necexsur, in *1.. icvul •;.!<?.. t of th* 
9»tior,i . C*f*noe ?oro*»« 

K V -» Comitrucv au 


Tb.it purpose ..i ws.il include the construct- sa of lead end xus- 
coast dofen&as, the construct. racks, quarter a, faospit 

tiepote, arsenelz ettd ill other buildings required for the 
Defense, tod the acquisition of real astute* 

: ' ; jKP0";3 71 - soilsuuod.; .•LinuneiVuro. 1 . 

This purpose shell inoluds the jlseslisus. ut *u.pc:iditureu 
of the various turns tad services of the Military . .'v;b . i ~nd 

of the Control General Staff as detersiinud bv the President, txul 
the can ting ancle..; of too Aruy: Provided , Tbi.t the 'h-i xppin* 

Araj is granted tun frunking privilege for its officii, acii and 
ttuthoriaei t. an*- . «.nclt;. envelope.: under such ruio: .ad r ^ulfttlonsi 
o., any 1. f i-.-j-cribt. d t-j the ?r*4dUiuut» <• .i -viaeu, firth r . 

That uIm nous 'jt. u«xiv«:d fro .a the .olo of products ua othar 
i..ctivitiOi ..bull b- expended e„ tbs Chief of -f is „• direct, 
subject W the appx'ovti-. of the tac rotary of ;.ati;<uui Del ,n;.e, 

iiix. To. .. -i .•-.♦x.-tlv.:. -.-•f luaac . (Oait i) 4 


Title VI - FBUL FBOfISiCKS 

3 SC. 79, / Ll luflt *«d s-erta of lav... Pilch ure inconsistent 

sit., this act, ere horabj i-epeoied. 

lu2C, 1 jC. Mo prorldLoa of till net Gill op -r*»U» to r-:- 
duct tii; ;.jfc . fciiti.i.u l *vi;d ..Uouancee of offlcrr or u*liat>..i 
Ban of the Phiiipoia* Conctetouiary belo* too toUu uesrusl t ay 
iijjet i^.io ,-oe rrcoired by hi,-. fro.u the In.sol .r . •/•....■ .it ; t. the 
tiao ;>f the innufeurntiOBi of the Ccasson.-eaiti. of the /hi.. . iaso. 

SB©* 101. (Gained) £J/ 


0 / this section appropriated funds for the year 1936* 

ZT This sccti oi re-let 1 tv a^priprli^tioai ior U*e ytur l .^h 


Thin Aot sltal i taka effect upon its a, -vaval 
Approved, Dec aber iil, 1935, 



.1* 

f \ 




V 











v, 




• f 




- Jb- 




B. m OFresa OB «,! OB ™ S tIKXIH, SIXTHS 

First iatioruu. iiiwjibiy) 

first £«aal«a ) B. So* 10X9 


(CctaLsai^ctiti. Act t.'c. i5w-v) 

M '•?£ P * r '- :?T ?jF u*om« PAX ?o C0it ihi:i:ws© 

OFT..CESG ,fc< : "X F TH-. UNIT p FTAT.'-T. JO , ; * 'Q r -i* wv r-p -«•.• 

I IIXU PUBSC Jd£D TQ JBIC .RM3T Or IWIT^ 

SSStJSPL?** 3KITEB -*» cii^T ® is 

r« i 4r^ ~ ' ~ 05 n?r . vzt or cn-iiZ' ■•. p 

m mr . .»** OF TH: "' 

: J-i. X tl ■■•■.'■ i -■ U. w~. .»r ■iiii-„,;;,,.„, . 

^ Cowtilesioned off lews of the Avay i»t th.b United stat •« 
1,20 ctG u !V rt.de in tne lie, ulsr ;-orow of the 

Ar,8 ^i. 0 * t Philippines shell b»- entitled to receive longevity pay b&sod 
on ‘ J ‘* ! " ~ ! ’ n bth of tjtrvicfc u s t,.» uc. viu, first, ainetuo; nuedr* >• 

uno thirty-three: IrQVlded* That, a for,*»r officer; of the 

oi ttc Ur- it. \. . t. te ;i- ; griiunteo of th* United :.U Ht ry ‘esce-v 
ona of the ’united states Navel Acadtwsy, who huvo been appointed to any 
co*3ifit»loii«d crt'ie .in tav ,,rsay of tbw PWLti.vin«.s riort the date 
this, lot fJuii affect, o to l 1, front the (kt* of euoh appointment in the 
*zv& -i the Philippine*.-, receive the bonefiU of the !.!•*>, 

. SiX* 2* In •'••■•t training t£ .'• . v - nl xi;;ht!- of r. vl. it. of c , 

co:a';iasioaed otiic«r o.t ■£»«* KoguLtr Force of the irt^ of Uie ?uL. i .— 
pine;-, f.;otivt uty ; - r; -;>r sod «*•. e cwh:.; ioaed officer ur ,.. .n ..li. 

*“*** : t;o; .--ray of tti Jr.it* -d red/ ox oo i cadet in tho United 

StttWi' wiiit i;.' f xo^t.jv or Unit-.u '"totor. rfoviii Ac<- itaj, •eio.ttA. credit- 
ed to the ftsne extent ec ticnric# under i rs^oief coxniwsion of ctlrer 
i-etiv ■ -iiy ’itl. f.. • Aj*.y of if - Phifi;-. ; Jjieri .v>vic*.w. T.'. ot : ’ \u.h. 

of eervics in tbt. • o. *y, -4ii.it *r> let, is ^ or Nav. i .. i. y of tU-j - • 
for *fcioh he t - ;*.ar.ivir. tl -- xir ,. .it . ;.y froo fcL ^ y ol 
the Unit®, - lotos «ifcil not fci counted in ecu.*uti ng tht ,»ac.at oi n- 
tireioent that he shell be autitled to ic the irxy of th - pjjllJ 
oiwitj :.n - *.-rc.vloco a f:>. th-.r. Tit t . ay offico:- ;/ th, Ar ... • f the* 

United Ftiitft.- vho retire? or -ho h-t •- rctir* i fro* th^t irtj 1,5 r.ri«r to 
accept c cot oitsior in the v.-y c.t the ■nto.i,.. 1^.. . .hull reexivo 
r^tirr..T^nt ; y froo the roili opine :ov »rn.3. nt, y.iie*. b. toe uif- 

fereaco of retire . ,nt could hev, received ft a,, ta Ar,. of 

the United hid 1*? l-osuinod. i ; it rnd in ta.,1 ... v . ..14 to nis 

by tho «r:o of thw Unitud : t^u.. on tn-i d. vO oi hi. . Hi , ^ at, it 
teing undei -scon th. t tii-.- ota X ■ •*-. -f !cte. . >. ,-. a. ..-.cc .1 -no 
Ftiili.iyinv, iuell b. the date >.r. wt; ,cn the « ;,ixae ott* *aiA*v r u of 
retires- :nt pay froa the *r»y of the United it- ter, tD*U be oon^utou for 


* ...-i.rtav • by, for. x-n <- .-~u. Act f-o. :i^f, June 7, 194 U. 


I 


a ~ .yt - 


. v 

:. Ju. Ii coa. atin* tho pay of oou-i^aioa^d fficiv f tue ,.r., v 
°* Via unlvix . and £tt*dufctca of cue. United : L. to. Miiit-r^ . ee- 
uec^y or lilted . t-..tc;. Xuvul Acu4*.iy f a«tttloa«d in emotions oao n.. tao 

toe xeogevitj $*v c eal l b». bueed on iu inorsu <. of t .n y .tt.i • 

lor $v Uv; jfuux-c c* ; rvi.ee eoaec uncled every fi.-e ^ nut at provided* 
9i»i# tto* increase in longevity pay ahnll not oxeoed fifty per centua . 

\ *♦• ’^ Ut fc.-preprxfctfcd for tue Jr.^ :>i ".n.- Piiii: tn«» 

ia yearly 0->ncr*I L ^ro.^ri&tiou £ot. ; nd 1.. th i ti oa&l Defend 
ixci v« hereby ondo -veil .bin for to. ,,-ur; o*.u of curry in, . ut thu 
rovieions of tfcJLe Act. 

-SC* 6. Tuis ,.vt nlu.il t... .w effect u -an l, »■>.. revel, 
improved, Kovvuber <3, 1936. 


- 38 - 




Q, GOV" JBttHT Si INSURANCE ACT 

firft National Aaasahly) 

Ej -eciai r-a&sAon ) 


b. Ho* *373 


(CottBonwe*lth Act Ho* lBt>) 

AS ACT TO CIt- ■-. TE UID ESTABLISH A *QOfttlfeiUnr ErHVX CS WSaSaRC'.*. ^XFTIiV' 

• to psoras tor its ads^istration, and to appropriaIi w ss 

FUHDo TaSBJEFOH, 

So it enacts.; tj th» ,V. tlcuai ,-u . ocA?;..- of -the rhUi.w.mcn t 

S.CTiCtf 1. Title. —The short UUe of thio «ot ahnii be th 
"Govoirnauat service Xasuiy ace let.* 

A. P<tl ; ftitlo-i a .— V.hon u*«< in tuic Act, tne following 
shml, unless the ouitwt otherwise indicates, have th* foiloain.fr respoo- 
tivu na&olBg.st 

*(&) »ifcnloy*e n tuiftil .n nay p;r.^cm in vac .• rvico -'1 f »v Go* vr.« 
sent of tho o.tita of the Pnili.>pintc-, itfe .uWivi^i n.-i, gmc-es 

<rn <i inafcrucioat -iitic^, iiicluuing an «niistv4 a*n -»r officer of the 
feguiur Force, Philippine Arny, poooeii'iftg either V^porary or er;u neat 
civil acrvict ttatua. - 

(b) *Bo~rd B • nd *8yabfc* tt afcaii m~n re... ^ctiv?>-y, tn-. °Govcrn*ent 
aerviea Inaur.nce Board" and Uvj *Ck*vcm&»nt *rvice lasur-'.ncs yste« ,: 
dieted and o..t -hAishcd in this *ort* 

( o) B Salary , pt-i, or t. inn* j a h. . , CO-.i: trust «. r/.i 

exol iMl* aJlL bonuses, *focey,” slieenaeM, ana ov«rfcia* pay, or'sAiary, 
pay or Cow^-'cii ■■■■i %*-•'-* jjivso Xu ^v-xtion to «•' •♦>*» p«»- X ti> •• position a* 
yank us fiiwd by !•* or reguiatiohS. 

» i ' , • - 4 * ' I 4 

(a) »;*eabar* thill aeao any es.vAoye* who in into tua 

C jvorji-'tont IfirvAee Ia~ur *’Ct oyotv -k in -.;;eoru : ice o 5. * a. .; r; 

of e«cti;*h four uer;of. 

(e) * Life ia»ur nca* shuix *c-»« any i’ur;r. of iaour*.ac« •-••r. iiio 

euthorijeed her-, in, o-uid* :-n iirii toe- aiio, t-nco» s^ati «ic* 

(f) s^eaborship policy” shall mu-jx o -ife insuv nco policy for <«n 

aaeuntT the • i^aiuo of -hico is ^uiv i .-at to oL-. ,- T <-r c /; ntu£ 

Of ».«a loyoe 1 ^ bsoic nimuea s- iar. or oo*por--. tion, c:-.c«pt Ur t m the 

cx-ee 'of acab -rr of the '<• ..uiax force, PhUi- .lnw re y, Uv. b fttc . ro- 

^ i i bt f i»< r fer - otua of thaii annua u-,. *ry or -.*ti a. 


: !EC* 4* -'o * > Qa jiicv>tic n oi j?u Ab • 

the eystea shcU be cob. uieory u.:on— 


- 39 - 


# # # 

(s) c,I i i'vt-i’b und onxictoc aen Qt th«= f.eguisr i'oree, phiiinnlus 

jireyj • 

z A # 

V °* ..- oonfcr lbuU« tc.-~-jc ■ in:: An:- o:; tao last -i-.v «t 

ffeUeafet ti»- d'ii-i qb efaiab thi« Act stall tota eifuet 
oi' roiAotSic^ Uta date of th* aeab^y<8 crpouit^nt, c ^j .3 ton* or niisto- 
smt, if this toe a iftWr d*W» end aoathiy thereafter, there ehaxl be 
nducttH? *-nc withheld iron thn aonttoiy salary or conpsnef-ticn of t>ach 
^ottlbev of ti*e f.yetea, » * « five ger centua In o*so of of.fic-.vi'; mri cu- 
ll stud aen of the Uoguier Force, Philippine *r*y, to be piled to vne 
payment of the unpaid oromluaa of the .nwaberehl:.) policy - ju-.-a to &ueh 
aantoer under the provision* of thU Aot ...» 

iiC. o# ^>w;jv.,cni c v;trii'utiv:u ->(»ii- ! vi.ni.iT.- . ,tj. tu, y:,,.r nineteen 
hundred tv :U thlrty-w-even, wad aortu-tiiy thereafter) such portion of the 
e n e u a* nppro or iatiou ior the Philippine a asv toe newi's.-a r ■ for t»y. 

payawnt ef <utr.: praaiuw (due tc» the extra U~*urd of the occu.Atic-a) 
on th»i aottbershlp policies cf officers, and , .—i: fed ton thorecir hr- 
be tr; ii^V.rr- acniniy t.; th© ;-y.:-tc« for the purposef -trovided aor-xa. 

.# ♦ •» 

c.^C» 8* ■ ; e r out It . our ... nx-.- . — j- vi.. ctivv c,-a Ur. l.st Ivy ts-j sixth 

raotith following the date on .etch this AOt atall t^kt rffeot m- fad* c lag 
the data of ww esatoear* a appointment, ooatiierion, or xuj.1. tc; nt, if tnic 
be i Inter d*W» * mn officer or enlisted nan of the v-.yAu'.r force, 
Philippine Aray, shall be &utonxiici*iiy insurou rnd pri nted the 
corresponding nsabarahip policy for an aaount tfc- -nausl ,i.- y > of nhich 
1« toquivaluat to five .r c*n%M of hie current basic ennuetl eel&ry, 
waci any either vpiavr a^toer of tht p.t.p fer .-a mount xav ..../a 
pfeadua of whit-ji d equivalent to sic: .u- c*utua of hie be vie currant 
aanutl aai&ryt Provided, hoeevvr. That in the ofcee of an incrotee In ’ 
the saount of the six per cent contribution aade by end fer ft araber, 
tiio face Volu jf ais policy tih.>ll be lacr- ..teJ toj <ui • .jciai coi’r* v >oiic[itsg 
to caxu inert--- . to^putv,*' Cy the Scard cu the t- lv f t.-.. rcacinlng 
period of the policy .mi of other ccnditiocit xnd coRtlngi-noiee . fi ct- 
inp the risk and v f j.oo th-sreof. 

CnC. 9. Ei fact ox diuoxa-x . 1 or ,.r.. Uj.i fron service . -tlnr.-n 
dififtiesai for eaue* of a nyatoer oi the iryuten, the toonex'itt under his 
aenbtrahip policy shell be autoa^ticuiiy forfeited t; tho fynton, ux- 
eupt ouc-nsU. of tiid c- .el or srun ^ac-tr value, ihieh « noimt th 11 v 
Paid to auon Bwato^r, or in & a oi death, to his beneficiary, in 
ethar oi :»es cf separation before axturlty of t policy, tn-. uov /ma nt 
contribution : ab&ii co. ee» tan tho injured «enbt»r th il ■ v>. tljw folio#- 
ing optional (a) to colleot the cash surrender value of tno policy; 
or (to) to continua- the policy by yayin*; the fiui pre.-aiuaic t:>.. reef; or 


- 40, - 


■a to obtain & paid up or extended term Insurance in such amount a 
'rliod, respectively, 'as the paid premiums nay warrant, in accordance 
dth the conditions contained in said policy; or (d) to avail himself oi 
;uch other options as nay be .urovided in the policy. 

cgc. 10. notional insurance .— Upon application to the Bo&iv aaa 
)n satisfactory evidence of insurability, each member ;*.ay at *y 

•la Q additional life insurance as he may desire, subject vo t •• 
risions of section fourteen hereof, ££vided, That the amount of said 

ns ^a2 5s- 


0 , , , ,rnnri i ' fa. on a. * * * vrovideti. however , That the e.vtr,-. 

SEC. 24. ■ - -u o x. -y,,. — ; n(. eiui ted men of the 

remiums on the membership poiicie~ ox Ji t - ^ appropriated 

egular force, Philippine Army, ’*1^ 

or the aid to the phiUwine tocij . annual appropriations for 

flirty- seven* end annually that In the c,.e of regular 

he Philippine Army, tfd pr°^g. ur( . from 

lehber: of toe System. ms * mK “ t oontr ibuti-ni' and t tru prtniumo, 

ipeoiah funds, the r’-.to. •* _ - m hGrc is, likewise, hereby appro- 

iEi ™ 

jgtabli s hnent°end operatim of the Government : enrice Insurance System 
sreated and established herein. 

SEC. 15. ja dl -*™ * 

otherwise provided, the Govaraaen d Twenty-four hundred and 

be subject to the provision. i Hundred and 

twenty-seven as umended, ^ hereafter enacted shell apply to 

srs^^rs urf**— «««^ 

SEC, 26. v.ff active da M -«>ls Act shall tube effect upon its 
approval , 


Approorcd, November 14, 193b, 


- 41 - 


and reubsunt fund or Philippine cojistabuurx 


LIQUIDATION OF PENSIO: 
First National Assembly) 


B. No. 2371 


Special Session 


(Commonwealth Act No. 188) 


AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE LIQUIDATION OF THE PENSION AOT 

FUND OF TRE PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY C. ; T. I' BY ACT TJHBERED ONE 
THOUSAND SIX HUNDRED AND THIRTY-BIGHT, AS ENDED, AND THE PAYUrU? 

'OF REDUCED PENSIONS TO CERTAIN BEREPICIARIES THEREOF, AND TO AP- 
n FoOFRIAT£ THE NECESSARY FUNDS- THE' EFOR. 

Be it sn^cted by the N tioaui .erably ol trie Philippines : 

S'. CTION 1. The ■provisions of Act Numbered One thousand six hundred 
ana thirty-eight, us amended, ere hereby declared inoperative as oi 
Nov- iOer first, nineteen hundred and thirty-six. The Government Service 
Insurance Board is hereby authorized and directed to liquidate the Pen- 
sion end Retirement Fund or the phili . pine Constabulary created by said 
Act Numbered One thousand six hundred and thirty -eight, as amended, 
immediately upon the approval of this Act, or as soon there it r as may 
be practicable, but for the purposes of this Act, said liquidation shall 
be' deemed to have been effected et of November fir. t, nineteen hundred 
an,: thirty- six. 

: ’;C, 2, The Government ; ervice Insurance Boars is hereby authorized 
to a, roly the- proceeds from the liquidation of said Fund to the payment., 
in the manner herein prescribed, to officers and enlisted men ol the 
Philippine Constabulary who -ire still in the service, or who have left 
the service by resignation or abolition of the position, antt who nave 
been contributing to the Pension and Retirement Fund of the Philippine 
Constabulary and not previously retired, of the lull amount con tribute d 
by them lue interest up to November first, nineteen hundred and thirty- 
six'' at the rate of four- er centum per annum compounded annually: 
Provided, however. That the amount which such officers and enlisted 
men of the ^hili rine Constabulary are entitleo to receive shall, if they 
remain in the service, be applied by the Bo..r. to the payment of one 
yetfr premium on the cobi ulsory membership ineur .net corresponding to 
the i under the ; rovisions of the Government Service Insurance Act: 
utvwirVd turther, That any excess of said contributions over ana .hove 
the r-' .iiu - bovT' stated, shall be paid to tne contributor in cash, 
either in full or in installments to be deter. dr. ;d by the Board, and 
ir, the i. tter case, aildef erred payments shall earn interest at the 
‘ te of four er centum i.-er annul compounded annually, bat tne same any 
be commuted and cashed in any financial institution ovmcd or controlled 
by the Government by discounting tne principal thereof at a r. te not 
to exceect one -er cen tum per annua. 



There shall be paid to those officers and enlisted men of 
, Constabulary * no hi-v- been retired from the i. crsj.ee, or 


- 42 


v- 


&no ants: 


# 

p # 


L n “ ; ® s^rvxco ronusredj auring the second year, one ic tnree 

as ^ V t^lL C l7ilile ' t0 their dfe P e ^^t 

a vrov • CV yea + B: v-:-^v.a-; Tact tit. ho..rb, ,r . ^ 

t'ic ■ ^oot. nf ° Cloc r: ' °* Fia; " nee > - : -f at .ny time sus end or c 'cel 
have^on^^f f + ^ £,cnexoa *5* BWrai ^ after due investigation, 
officer o* W vL^ iC tajUnt °" 1>ensioas altett ^ received by the retired 
° -o , t J ° r air> beneficia let is nore than twice lh.. 

aao “‘ “ contrioutions to the f.sul r ,i ac 4'* into, e t »x - > 

ec ,. otn*ied annually; rther, That the. said retired o 

for tvir -- 1 ' UXw benelxci - aaos trc aot dependent upon their ,onsionp 
for t.„ir ^.nt -n nee: Zrovidud, further. Th ». the >c ,:i ., to stir ' 

n f; ° *f* no^at least sixty-five year* 

;..oi.4;n«nt. .^lysic-i disability, cc 2 tire-, anile tec .-, i, :., t those 
retireu for cisaoility incurred in tor peiiornance ol duty, as ... ; 11 
as to thexr dependents, and to the dependent* entitled . 
to receive pens! s of those silled in tao perfornince of hat' , shall 
continue a. cue ru toe proscribed by the pc : S ion levs . ..ic. hav heretofore 
esbjaeed thea? groyided, further, That in no case shall the total amount 
f -• v-ucea pension payable hereunder, exees . the. benefit tu t is 

oeia& rceexv a at present under the ^rovioions of the Concttbuier 
Pension anti -=tir. .oat fund ..ct: .rovidod , _ urh.-i, . I n £ t wp • eloi •• 

or tne Tecrotary of Finance roy-rding susi oweien or cancellation •: h-e 

payment o_ pension shall bo appealable to the President of 
pln fi : i^d.vroyided, finally, Til t the :ensi,v.s ..ution.c iu ^lV7ct 

Euail not bv, subject tc ~ny tux, lev;, or attachment and shall be ^ic- 
iroa the cua appropriated for tne ic to the Philip Ane Ar% . cnslon fan' 
t. hundred thirty-seven, and, annually thereafter, fron the 
annual appropriation for the Philippine Army. 

, - 0 . 4* at ue opt- on or thw n loner to be cxercieec. b win rot 

i^*t- ; tih.n January 1, 193 ( , no coy be givtn in lieu of tea reduced 
pension provided for in section y hereof a gratuity equivalent tc too 
yc.r: average current ,.ay ... ves receivin', curing the last three years 
previous to nis retirement: r.-.-vif.cb . ro.ov.i- . That the Gov; vnn r. 

Service Insurance Board, , it. considering the li-uncial t .iru ,i/7 
irie sarty concerned, shall determine whether such anoint shall bo id 
in full or in installments to be fixed by the acid Board, and in the latter 
evc-nt, ail deferred payments shall ecru interest at the 'ate of four ear 
camtu,; a.,: annu'; cost co unde- ’ annually, but the ie . . coanured . / 
cashed in any financial institution owned or controlled the Govern- 
ment by discounting tne principal thereof at a rata not exceed in,; , v‘ 

;sr c ,itu. ,ar ;-nnu-; . 


- 43 - 




SEC. 5» All the funds, properties, and assets, and all personnel, 
facilities, equipment, leases, contracts, and other obligations and 
instrument;- us well at- a.'.l records, files, correspondence, tad otner 
papery belonging or appurtenant to the Pension and Retirement Fund of 
the Philippine Constabulary as created and established by let Numbered 
One tnousand six hundred thirty-eight, as amended urt hereby transferred, 
ioi tx.“ purpose; oi liquidation as provided in this Act, to the Govern- 
ment Service Insurance Board, which shall hereafter- exercise. full 
contro-. and authority over the same. The said Board, with the approval 
oi the Secret; ry of Finance, ic hereby authorised to promulgate: the 
necessary rules unr regulations fer the accomplishment of the purposes 
oi this Act. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as taking 
aVa >> the power oi the National Loan and Investment Beard. to , invest the 
funds belonging to the pension and Retirement Fund of the phi li, pine 
Constabulary should the Government Service Insurance Board elect to 
place in ate hands the investment of caid funds under such terns and 
conditions os be agreed upon by the two Boards. 

£LC. 6. For the purposes of section to of this Act, ..ad to cover 
the expenditures, including salaries of personnel, which the board nay 
incur incntcuta. to its funetiaas under tiv provisions hereof, the In- 
sular Treasurer is hereby authorised and direct d to transfer from time 
to time such mounts us may be nece:- r v not to exceed in the aggregate 
the cum of one-million five huadre ' thousand _ osor to the Government 
Service Incur.- ace System, and said suns are hereby a preprinted out of 
any funds m the Philippine Treasury not otherwise a; repriatod. 

I 

-.LG. 7. This Act. sht.j-1 take effect upon It. .proval, but to 
the r need pension., it shall take effect on December first, nineteen 
hundred md thirty- sir. 

Approved, November 14, 193b. 


— 44 — 


£. kWL KfcTIRSttEJT ACT 


First ’lational Aaucmbly) 
Special Cession ) 


• o* 2374 


{Commonwealth -Act Ko, 13 0) 

iff AflT TO ESTABLISH A HS'flKafiiNT CYSTKM FOB fflS PHILIPPICS AMT . 

AHD TO APPROPRIATE FUWDS TH2RBFCR. 

Be it enacted by tile Actional Assembly of the Philippine?? 

Section 1* This Act shall be know as the ’’Philipp .ins 
Amy Retirement ct*. 

Sec. 2. In computing the length of service of an officer 
or enlisted man for purposes of this et, service rendered by 
him as commissioned officer or as enlisted man in the Philip- 
pine Constabulary ffiall be given full credit. 

See. 3, The ages nr.d periods of service establishing 
eligibility for retirement under this et are fixed as follows? 

Minimum? thirty years o" 0 continuous satisfactory 
service and fifty-five years of age. Boon attaining this 
eligibility, an officer or enlisted man has the option of 
retiring from active service rrith the approval of the President. 

Cb) Maximum? forty years of continuous satisfactory 
service or upon attaining sixty-four years of age with a minimum 
of fifteen years cor.tinuour service. Upon reaching this period 
of eligibility, retirements shall compulsory unless the 
continued service of the individual is, in the opinion of toe 
President, required for the good of the service. 

Upon the completion of twenty years satisfactory continuous 
-ervlce. an officer or enlisted man nay, at his o n request, 
bfStlJod from active service. In such case he U receave 
a gratuity equivalent to two per centum of his average annuel 
se fLv as hereinafter defined, for each year of satisfactory 
continuous service. Such gratuity shall be payable in one lump 
sun. The Government retains the right to gr-_nt or Withhold 
retirement privileges ’under the provisions of this section. 
Average annual salary is defined as the average annual base 
_ av received during the last tnres years of service. 

P 111 Officers and enlisted men of the Philippine Stay now 
drawing retirement pay and residing in the Philippines may at 

+? A be o giied by the President for active service, during 
the Period of ibioh service they shall bs entitled to roceive 
the full pay ot t heir rank or. grade. Refueal on the part of 
-If* __ Aniisted man to perform such service ahali. 
terminate his* right to further participation In the benefit of 
nrovided he ie physically fit for eervice, each fit- 
’ a.tomin.d Oy the Ohl.f of staff, .-ltd the .pproTel 

of the President. 


- 45 - 


I 


iny officer or enlisted man who is receiving the benefits of re- 
tirement pay under tills or any other Act shall cease to receive such 
retirement pay upon his return to active service, or his failure to 
return to tne active service when ordered to do so by competent author- 
ity , or when he is employed by the National, provincial, city, or 
municipal governments, wit:; equal compensation equal to or more than 
tile amount of his retirement pay; but if his compensation from such- empl<y- 
;uent is less than his retirement pay then he shall be paid the differ- 
ence from the Retirement Fund, 

Sec. 4* When an officer or an enlisted man is retired under the 
provisions of section three (a) and (b) above, he shall receive until 
his death an annual retirement pay equal to two per centum of the 
basic pay received by him on the date of retirement for each year's 
active service rendered by him but not exceeding fifty per centum in 
case of commissioned officers and sixty per centum in case of enlisted 
men and non-commissioned officers of the total base pay received by 
him on the date of retirement: provided » That this rate of retirement 

pay shall not be applied to officers or enlisted men separated from the 
service through the action of Classification Boards, Courts Martial, 
or as a result of his own misconduct, or resignation: Provided, further. 

That any officer or enlisted man of the Regular Force, Philippine Army, 
now in the service may elect to waive the full benefits of this Act 
and receive in lieu thereof the refund of the contributions mentioned 
in section two of the Act providing for the liquidation of the Pension 
and Retirement Fund of the Philippine Constabulary and a reduced re- 
tirement pay on the same rate herein provided, but only for the number 
of years of active service after December thirty-first, nineteen 
Hundred and thirty-six, or to obtain the full benefits of this Act, 
in which case he shall be entitled to refund of the contributions above- 
mentioned only in the amount to be determined as follows; For those 
eligible for retirement under the provisions of this Act within twenty 
years or more from January first, nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, 
a refund of one hundred per centum of said contributions j for those 
eligible within fifteen years, eighty per centum ; for those eligible 
for r,en years, aixtj per centum ; and for those eligible within five years, 
forty per centum . 

Sec. p. There shall be annually inoluded under "Purpose 1 — 
Personnel" of the annual appropriation of the Philippine Army, sufficxen t 
amounts to cover the payment under section throe hereof, 

The sum appropriated a3 aid to the Philippine Army Pension Funds 
in the nineteen hundred and thirty-seven appropriations for the Philip- 
pine Army is hereby made available for carrying out the purposes of 
this Act relating to the payment of retirment benefits. 

Sec. 6, This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 

Approved, November 14, 1936. 


- 46 - 


T. SESlOEiTIO* OF COBStABUfcJHf RBHBBIHIT FBM> 


First National Assembly) 
Third Special Session*) 


B. No. 2437 


(Cojanon-et ith Act No. 237 ) 


‘ ■ * * m VAWT AIL ANNUITIES 

rr r i^~ P ot : ^c^SiF UHDLR m ' FOT3 ^-t to the terms and peo- 

" •' HUilBERtli THIRTY HUNDRED i ND FIFTY, TKIF.TY- 

fmOTTHE ARTI CLE III OF CHAPTER THIRTY- 

2JL i m C ° U£ ’ EiiC;i AC A iESDSD I?r EFFECT 

*■ h-,3 * v 10 HOVuMB.R FIEpT, NIIL I'V2N HUNDRED .,Nr THIRTY-SIX. 
enacted by the Nationa l Assembly of the ?hili ; ;ines ? 

^TIoL’ i. Ab used in this Act, the Term "Teachers* Retirement 
mean Act Nufflbered Thirty hundred and fifty, as amended anc 
in e£i ect prior to November first, nineteen hundred and thirty-six: 

5L5S* Retirement Act" shall mean Act Numbered Thirty-one 

nundrod and seventy-three, as amended and in effect prior to November 
fxrst, nineteen hundred and thirty-six; and the term "Constabulary 
Retirement Act" snail mean Article III of Chapter Thirty-five of the 
Administrative Code, a-? mended end in effect prior to November first, 
nineteen hundred and thirty-six. ~ ’ 


SEC. 2 . Notwithstanding the provisions of Commonwealth Acts 
Numbered One hundred and eighty-seven, -One hundred and eighty-eight, 
ana One hunared and eighty-nine, all persons who, on or before November 
fourteenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, had retired under and 
pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Teachers' Retirement Act, 
the Health Retirement Act, and the Constabulary Retirement Act and were 
then receiving the benefit, provided by said Acts and the beneficiaries 
of said persons, and all ^beneficiaries of deceased persons previously 
retired under said Acts, s hall hereafter receive and be oaid the full 
amount of the annuities which had then accrued to them or may hereafter 
accrue to them, anper the terms of said Teachers* Retirement Act, 
the Health Retirement Act, and the Constabulary Retirement Act, the 
same at if the provisions thereof had not boon declared inoperative. 

All sucu payment shall be made at the time ana in the manner that said 
annul tie, .ouid have been paid if the said Teachers* Retirement Act, 
the Health Retirement Act, and the Constabulary Ratlr.nent Act, and the 
provisions thereof, had not been declared inoperative. The restoration 
of the annuity payments made as in this section provided shall be 
effective not earlier than November fourteenth, nineteen hundred and 
thirty- six. 


SEC .3. Ail persona who by the terms of this Act shall be entitled 
to receive the full annuity accrued, to them under the terms of the 
Teachers* Retirement Act, the Health Retirement Act, and the Consta- 
bulary Retirement act, shall receive and be paid said full annuities 
from the date said annuities were reduced or discontinued. To the 
extent that any of said annuities has been reduced in amount, or other- 


_ 47. - 


wise not paid, an amount equal to the reduction with Interest thereon 
at the rate of four per cent per annua from the date of withholding of 
said sum tu the date of payment thereof ohaal be paid to said persons, 
ill of said sums so withheld shall he paid not 1-. ter than January 
first, nineteen hundred .aid thirty-ei^ht, and interest thereon shall 
be computed to the first dap of the month neat following tnc-dat: cn 
which checks lor the payment of the sums so wi-ctiheld shall b( issued 
and mailed. 

SEC. 4* The Government Service Insurance Board shall administer 
this Act, and for this purpose shall have power to aaopt, subject to 
the a jproval of the president of the ?ui_i pines, eucu ruie^ and regu- 
lations as any be necessary to carry out the provisions hereol . 

SIC. 5. Such sums as may be necessary to tuir„- ^.nto effect the 
provisions of this Act ore hereby appropriated out of an;, funds an the 
Philippine Treasury not otherwise appropriated. 

SEC. 6. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 

Approved, September i3> 1937. 




\ 


- 4 <* ~ 


G. NATIONAL DEFENSE ZONE ACT 


first National Assembly) 

fourth Special Session ) B. No. 3867 


(Commonwealth Act No. 321) 

AN ACT TO AUTHORIZE THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES TO DECLARE ANY AREA 

OR ZONE IN THE' PIIILIrPlNES AS A NATIONAL DEFiUSE ZONE, TO PROHIBIT 

ENTRY TiffiREIIJ EXCEPT TC CERTAIN CLASSICS OF PERSONS, AND TO PRESCRIBE 

PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF. 

Be it enacted by the National Assembly of the Philippines : 

SECTION 1. The President of the Philippines is hercbj authorized 
to declare, proclamation, any area or zone in the Philippines as a 
national defense zone, and upon the promulgation of such proclamation, 
it shall be unlawful for an^ person, excepting public officials and 
employees of the United States and of the Philippines, to enter such 
zone, or to remain, therein, except under regulations to be prescribed 
by the President of the Philippines: provided, however. That in no 

case 3 hall any parson be deprived of his property witnout just compen- 
sation . 

SEC. 2. Any violation of the provisions of this Act or of the 
regulations prescribed by the President of the Philippines pursuant to 
the authority contained in section one hereof, Siuill be punished by 
imprisonment of not exceeding six months or by a fine of not exceeding 
one thousand pesos, or by both, in the discretion of the court. 

EEC. 3* This Act shall take effect upon rts approval. 

Approved, June 9> 1938. 


-49 - 


. Jo, J616 


h . nDi^sin m rjgstum wr trokses or * ‘ jjm&fs 

first ’ tiuua_ Assembly) 
fifth Special Session ) 




(Co ^oa - . ith ct Po. 400) 

M -'rOVIranii FOR. THJ: F Y‘;S!T OF ISf-^IRITI -.J?r *»;«*; I0*tf VH 

OF hCCIDi^T £URi’:& TH. T.'lISfUfG 'F ?t..lin ; .,v O' i • ;,Vi: T-*- >F Th • 

• 

fr- ., ■■; by tite ffetoionx ; AggcnbL; of the ■ iU , . ino; : 

0. • TlO'i X. The forooc heirc of cny train - l® or rf.^ervi to, 
die toy .Hocideot during tna , orioc of hi.* n .iuit. ,, or while 
ussiotittfc in iwuwnnroro or other prsctice; of the ; hill-pin* ,.r:, , air . 
’on entitled too tui indesciity of five hundred pe not, 

. -C, If thw uccidont old not x*esult in th'- .u-tu ct the trr i • 
or ra&orrioto, but 'mu disabled hiu to ©ngago in f.n, kind ot . orV or 
trade, or o-. . - .ivtL hi,? of hiu . ip nt, or if hie dit bility i; such Un.t 
it diaiui^hov hit » rutr^ cu r nc:ity , or thut it becoaej .unwttnt.nt 
disability, sum train®© or reterfiat e.ui.ll V ©ijtitiod to. * ..tto.-; 

pecu.i a oi fifteen, r ast>o in the Fir to thrwe cc.co. and t ent.. a:.o:« i*t 
this A»bt octte* 

hdO. 3. For the pur oms of this tct, v,o Aooeotnnce how eon- 

;.toxtuv..y under Co&a&weftith Act Kuaberad Obv. if. hereby taado c.s t. Board 
of Claim;.- . hich shall determine tho cl- in: under this Act, 

SLC, 4* The Pret-ideat of the Philippines k<j hutfeorts* di?<bur«5e~ 
a»a©tu on account of the operation of tide * ot fron any of the a ; -j. 

X'jfir ;,ion lor the Philippine j»rss* for the years nineteen Uu-wo md 
thirty-© l^ht xnd nineteen hundred xapd thirty-nine. :-'->r 1 ■ u-.t 

und forty end eubaaquent years the neeer ry it*.s of e.oropriot-on 
-hall be ir.oiuded in the , r orltio*: of the n_ . . pica ,..r .;.. in tue 

ennu&- Conaral nptropri toion .:cts* 

C. 5, This Act shtoil to. too effect upon it:.- r vu mu; shall 
uiso fcj-pij- to clai-aa nrialn® fro.*, accident.'' nithia tno y urvi«^- uhoicof, 
attic*', iiav's occturreh oinoc nineteen hundred and thirty-sis. 


A.. proved, .eptcabwr Li, 1938 


I . ARTICLES OF "AB 
first Rrt tioiiui X«.wably) 

Fifth Special Session ) B. Ho. 3771 


(romon. ofclta \ c % ??c. 408 ) 


tf ACT FOr. SEUCTRCr FTOTEr* AST HWF pJfLCTC.tL *RfWiriCW FCn 
BirFEV.-s, '•TJ^TT-L.'’ jirjflFO i. fiJfTF?-: ”' v '-JLIT Ri TT” r T‘ 1 

sobjwt to '*i lit. .1 :.v'. * " ' 

B» it »n.rt.c Lp tL-' ^-.Ur-nrl- i-epbiy of tho nMlt 


TH-: RATIORAl. 
FOR PERCfWf 


SSCTIC* 1. The foUwing article? stall be know vr tne Article 
°f *er .nd stall i-t *11 tiaes apd In oil jxi-H<se* ru toe Ar*v of tho 

Philippi:: p .... 


(Then folio. the frtdelet.) 

TLC, h. l off'- • ot co v -'■■"> tv '1 prior to the f.-fc »f rs<, >6 

of tills lot pht.il ,v v_*nif:iu o r ooortU nee ••it.l. PL<- 

ticna in feres et the tine of their cored hsioru 

SBC. 3* All laws end p*rts of lews in so for they *5 re inccu- 
oi^tent with this Apt are hereby relied. 

SKC. 4* Tills ct sh 11 t .-re ?fiVct M poo it, v ,i. 

Approved, September 14, 193*L 



* 


ML- 


I* CSEuTIOT? OF THE rtSPA^TiOSTJT OF K^ram, DtiFfNSK 

l 

Second Hut ion*! .tseesbly) 

Ftr*t f cseicr. } 


(C • ■ ■ . ? V ri ;; 43ij) 

* :I ^J9. r ;lin‘ T •? ' T '^ r T! * ,?F * fxmts, T) v ‘?v ; ,nn ?n: 

Cl HS/iLTk V'iJBLI: -.lUTAPJ * 

o' A-. k’.. •■ tiMv - . .:- - Mr --f g . ■ ;; h ■>.,■; ,y 'He-..: 

* ;• . r '. ; • n- of Htciionfs'' Oefonee •••»>•.' thr. ?:y>-r- rfcoent 

; •■ '■••• ful-lic ■■‘.ilf'nv r- a Ti;.-..- ^resicUit of the ''hillp- 

u. i o Guthorlswi t.-_ ui r.tctiv -te, by s Aoeutivc; *)rttr, tht. or[*fcni86tiou 
of the uforusaM DotortaentH on or Vfore July fire,, ninV.tiMsn nundrod 
and forty-oao. 

* '• T**'. o! >4«Uor-u •. Itef-uro . ui'.l •' ,...ro .• with 

tilts duty ol eu^Jurviaint the nations i. defense ixro^r ■ of the oairvtfcy, 

*’hu for tixtr* yur.-ose* it shall have executive ru •••*:■• :••••. -sv r tho «• 
burc;o,^ officer, «r,t i^r^lc which the President say deters cue to be 
.TOpsrly uador the jurisdiction of the salt* Bop rtrv-at. 

* * * 

S2C* 6* Ti ic Act ihall t k» effect upon lie -j irovai* 

A : spxo**&, ay 31 » 1939. 






- 52 - 


A,. TOR lETdtUBS 0 1 PHILIPPINE f&VOUmONS OR «/,RS 


Second "s-tlorwu i-,;i*o 3 bly) 
iourti* r.peeial Session ) 


B. So* iOU 


(Coiaon euith do. 605) 

Ad ACT TO FE0TIS& FEOftLOKS TOR VETERAN f. OF THi PAS? PHU.IP' , iir ' VOL-J- 
flCSS OR TO CHEAT . A BOARD 03 PHISI0HS POR F- T WW?-, ANT TO 

hPPR .PRUTS FUHtS TteSiEFOIU* 

3* it _i.u5.0t- d l -v the Rational Ar.^oubljr of the puili^>inea ; 

O .CTIOR I. The veteran. o: tho ; -.st Phii-lypine r_voiuti' ^ » or - r 
shuii b« entitled to » nontaly peat-ion of not let then fifteen pa; oa 
nor li O T 1 " tnan z*o hundred p&eob, provided It it completely snovn— 


(<*) Tu.'t they uro I'nyeiMiitXl} or ex’uU.ily incurs olt‘-fctu it -w-- «•- 
n o ny> , T w - tiioir ore faery oceujx llou, work, or eupioy tent, not c&u . > 
•MTiV v_C<i «gutra<5t"-a oft-'T thi ft ■■toyH;. Cl thib , Ctj Ot 

;b) Thi>t, being over eixt,. ye r- of > ge» they l ". not - . v 
& aront or hidden awac; ox ru £ ;ort. 


.-•re. ... In ca3* of de-.tn >f a veteran , .ucior^r, or ?; tp,--Uo rit 
for u* -.erwi-oa to ehiob be U eatitied, tne nccru.-d -uvl n-w»iiocv.a * a- 
Biorui up to the date of hi® death shall be polo tc th* .xidow, or i* -«<•- 
fault tiiereoi^ to hie lawful heirs. 

,iior.. ft m> ure no lawful heir-, the pay^t of n ~ wu ; 

arras.’ 4 * shell not b ttthorlsod #. cent soon -rt ur r oi 
wcii’nr ,- for the ,ay ,«it or refund to the rt ,. c«. tttmte of tn. t.i- 
for barite and luet iliaoeo of trn.- uec*. a«-. 

(y^rt 3 p or the uropor -dMinit tration of tai- Act, tu. t*. 

n f enoioru for Taiwan® to be «Mpo**i ox tae coauruat* — * - 

the Pud*- - t,* the CocolSfcionear ox Civil Service, tho luuitor . .our^, 

^ 1 a v t r ' no of the .'--ot ?faiii.;piae revoluti a. or - .—-»*••- 

^ ^ Z Swt of Se ulxl ine. lit tu* eon..cutof the ,, ; 

Ml, .dditioniO. but tJ» ptfaer * «tKrr. _ _ 

ehftU Berra »iw« iTL. of t* n mbos for every oeeeioo ectually attended 

rtLT’tb: *» 

Bjjf ihOA* . turn PkiliuDlltM QWB ttM rMOHUkhtl' 

bj ti& preeUc.it «.*' ua oto rule® >f procedure, net- rain* 

30 «( 1 . 5 i.o ... . , ur .a, ... UM> 

in ih- J*it reyniutionn or »«., “Od fi*. !<» 


TW. Mt Co»on»«i«> a* %»»*>" J - W3 *' “ d 

C<M xou^titu Act No* & 9 , wust 


- - 



V 


i 


'.A 


XXTVw. v» PVttsixiMit. 4.4. . . 4 » , A , 

> v.. .. >u w ,., ^ - - 

’ v.. r-t»*. .ucu rci*; aoi.il «*cwwto 


»> toe ;»i»U&l'-Vi 


u Efci 


£ ****■ w ,vu ^ c &LiUl 1 T~ “T~ im T> ■“■**• ««** **-•&»> 

^ .^Cft^Ui potfttihio ■ ^.U^v i r0t ,Ct i! -° tevctxr. 


oato/bo t tio >■ piic nt. V a* J A A ^ -' -»tooris«*i tc* .-. (,;usi. tor 

of ctor^, the oatu ’ - J: i ' t>er ***• 

Kean: la e«toe«tioa with toto ct . - U ‘ w * toe 

to* .to-jp ueu 


li&i. e . 4 »p 6 ry cic-to be i' t xci 


5 . Mo * 8 *nt, uttoux* or other poreov in civ r v ,.f tfc* ,r-.- 

£“"£ J: --•^ " ,:roT '- «*• - -rtijw ..if* 

, ‘ — w»* -*.1 wiv -'-t-paii vxou .ittr.ie otucrwiw*. o .* u t* 4 . ,i*ier-ti nuil 


— -- »«« or M 1 , ..:, ... v ,;r 

\ - - - ; : r •-•,•• ^ »> r i\; iov . ... 

^»a' ■■• v • •» a.' ,' V rovi ii , of tto« . .c: ,. ..1 i„ 

puttiihc4 tv „ 8 toe of frcxa Oii-i buttered s-> tvo hii..-iTvd •. ■:, .Vi, or . V 
isprioon^ot of fro* three t . ., c^to ? *r . ith* # 


■ 

ou ‘- r t-i ,J v ‘" : * .:-or.:- '.C 3 C- . ii j .. uUiOiitp, .■>■;- . j ,f- •. ^ , gr 

Cu: r >-OCOiv«v to CCUtoO Oi to.-t.gwi t . w . v . . : , e.^uU'i . v 'AY. 
v»-Vv-l <-•* • -:-t* f. .tCffi»Sjf| .w ^/V wwi-,; ;. • . •. i'or .i 


’,£ ^.s. •••“ -■ •• hi-.. ;«••..-■ ii. >«i ■•- 2 -.:.c.:;. .... .?..j« f j.-, ^ 

— Ojici. in&blil ox v , 

d^-ilv -r..' u» thu , r-c-ii i..r. v4 . v - tho <-u. 




S~C* V« An aloQ grunted uodo." thlc iot irfK.ii oc r -. % . i„ - ; i 
u; proper KbpilostioD tes bwo r^tnivod tbt Boards tsvi «ta 

t. tiu» ..caoi . ar: Wiov-i p «..i- L trc k. .t.« aoa./uudJ: v-.«r to..' cc, 
to t A ii be ttntitivJ to receive tuc . j'rce tiu J~t. i’ in 

ca^e tnw 52 * 0 ^ *U&li AW*ia fcirt toa^' -., atiti • to ,\uah vXtar 

r«arihaicg th^ir osciglzMl >:.c. 


If, after vt: fe. Jiicotiou for . oor-jiy. ' Iwy been dice ..iyve-i or 
— 2 >. •. • } ■ •••- ... . ... :•• ..-. •: ■• : ^ toot :•••■ Bo pd «.. . .• ... ... 

ttte (Mttsian ftftaii i» p^mbi a the date of receipt ci tit.- fin & a^*- 

piiafttito*' r it •»*• oiH>iiJaed ... t ti». . i.pit >2- to*. .. :ui v. 

«=.!., i.d at. ua«i. -I..-., v.-. .. :. • 3 ;. «ui.i vw .. »*roa i*'.-. 

the ner. epplioetlao ••*. ... root 

SB* 8 . If . .tolled dvriag the threo yoevs 

ftolc.\in*;: tbc .virti oi Ui> ri^ut r,v vrccciy.. t-. . . , :•. ?. i; .• 1. c^:-:, 

»'- too Oi£«* aa^r- be* bv too rarecu of cct- of too .*crr r*t i -r too .--/oent 
of t/u- fCt^lca* tos, ' .r. n eon cv.v;*,?- . ,. _.i b > r-2;u';- i t«.- c. v ;i«c r 
ioct hlv ri.^it to the ^etiitoi* *n cob core, tie nvae .-^1 *. firoepeh 


b4 - 


r 


froa th» ii t >f ttw 

V ^ i ; ‘ *'ttm filing b * i-'ciudad nguin 

t i '*— fcn~ ’ ten u i.iTi •-».«» oi j -.<i»,onu ror ]j}'' 

?*t **. Aot oeQau * iRO*i«ieitut«J to r*<teiv sho * u th t 

**«»*** or *» coating receiving Jxm 
Sion suny ^ ^ *«“** tor the .,. yuunt f 

?£&*?» ^^SSS r U; ^- ' ^ 

^xr ct under talc Act, and un ** A, * 8o ' Avc ^ of c: id 

t’^t***’ ^oboxutad by t*o 00 ^^-! ' ^ n <*■*&*& to 
toe refer. The jootmitm., > l 9ltaef;o:; » In a fora ,rc- 

authorised t adaini.-^r to" ^ fcV2» A ** fc ° m « *« . r, h.-riy 
oat no fco ahaii to eh^*r; ?or^ tad bi *> «itacos*o, 

b. .4J2** .££££ SSSw*" *“* £* "Mi -wi* or lWU , 

J* i«6-i or OHUitaa. wo«X: ’ fl rroIt *»» » «'» «ttoS, u*e, 

*•“? or * 0< - iti , orllc^;* ,:.^' W -* 1 -* l “ «.. ,*»«., W, • 

or ire.dy the toad* of ”%£***' ° r **** ir ***»•«, 

*» it; opinion, ££*!*? ° r °* **•*•<* ’ 

*yencica «nnor this Act hw. * ** r ' :i *" -^ooivo 

U-. J-t.j.tr , . ;, * jwnoion or <«t -••• -• tir-’-f* Vur » bcfor - *■ "•• ■" 

the ,en 3 ian, r, by the a0 ,.. t off Afloat f n . f? "V ” G; ^ *nforn 

o> nvce. , of the e.ctuax roe: oa; c^. irj t ’ &u v ‘", ik * n ^ tiaoe :.i-. : 

tto 34f ; .o:i ion, xLthdr&wji, or reduction If \ „i.ici; 

t^V* 5 ^ 0,-vort^xty to b« ^ 2/^0 ^/‘ ;aia0a iw r • 

^ ^ ^ thT^t t*z n^LuT:: 

tor in^Iidf,' 0f **Wa 

7 1 ^ - 1 *" n «*1 to his *nsiofl. 

^ a£th of the BUtmu ' 

****** rmmtiUi *° *** to t» 

TjZT’.r*’ » ^rrruT-^^ lr r 1 *- ' 

ic ^.. xln. 4 :tlon# Jpon Tr-ii ac^ t th * t ftj, 

«"» M» to tv:,, « .SiT^,; Ll^JT 1 ' ^ -■••- •*.«, 

“^tutod. In ordor to info» tha Jc»»i J«tii J* otl;> '-‘® r ‘ thus In- 
■* th* ie.as fk.fi fciirt. resev d. Tit / ia | 4 ^- r °i not taw ine oltj 
***** uy” *•« for tr^^Lc befit, ofJfjLcw - ^ not J 

t, ttc tmt\ ci t.v Sc. w .r .cf.S J* “t- 11 * 1 to the roftnm, 
ijl, * i «t‘oc. inonrr..,- t,- tta« in por/ondn/oSh^^f, "“ 


- .55 t 


> 

it 


otxtwv gr aoioja. or «>■ ,riv..U -!•„«, 

J?- “ ri 'V i“:^ v : ll » * Ut «* int.nu ,n of holpin,; w in- 

* **"• «*■*• «°»*k nor nore than e.,x aourin., 

to or continue recoil, * enaioo under toi -ot. ' 


., • L - < X5 * '*'" * 1 « fl oi -«wi nor .«n.-ar ay aoi»: ideratao «h«.i ,• 

At tv *“*»**« o^. s . { .aj»iow ijr«jatodi or tn t ... ht realtor be yr ited 
UorsuatUr, -no *U liens iupoaoa th;rcon sm-ii b, nuii .nc void. 


w * >0 *. Vj-oi croti ;»i i:u .iCw t it e. Jen liued 

in, -n..ii uu punished by u tine not e .oeotUii ^ t o bund -n {jest ... 
*% ia a-i.ioniH.-ut o* not xsore ton 34* wantus. 


17 * CoaoMnAskatn kCts Humoured Two hundred e.^nty— ii,.ut 
n. • rhrsu hundred iiity— uaao are hereby ropetoed, and no i'und tot 
-i-sido to ct crjf out the .ur.-oaet of tnla aoc auail be iveiJUiolt ior tn. 
ayntont of tno ; enaions granted unuur said Acta, uni.edu ; nu until tow 
origan -ib a. r u.xc-~ -a .at (>z Zha par jirturi* huv.: tuon rovifMJci . ,nti &;: .?oy . 
ay -oi© ooi.ro *.n ensiona crush: i by thxe /.at, in thu a.nner . rovori't-d 
-a section eluvti.. 


8 SC* Id# Tuo Board oa Peaalons for Vet ahciJL be 

abolished upon the tx^iag effect of title Act, ac-i six the .- ubor ia :'... 
ori'oni.Ci oi snid Board, it. records and dooax-ntE, fumitur., c jipuvut 
no other appiirt i o a n a o *, ns wea* . a toe buxen^a of t-a» t uropriifciom 
for the expenses thereof ana for otyasat of pensions, shall be trtmt- 
ierreu to tm. no» fiot^rd cro: tid hen under, thich h*y reorFeni^* ^ 
port annex in accordance with tin* rw‘i,;u.r«atiitt of u«j Civil : 
uas iUilei.* 


Sa-G. I'A Thor- ia a. ;ro.rl tec out .1 . u;. fund is; xi. l..vu. ... 
Troisury not others a 00 t»-ypr.p;riutou th- »*t of three hajidri . u ; ut.c. 
peso., or so uach thwreox any b- ne century, t carry at ’uo or . 
of tji. n j-ct. fc-ift'ever, tub ; uppr-opriatica rhuiX a vt to. x:lmraot«er of 
a jaere tuvuoce ;.*-yiaaat, end any tu* apenv c.. k •.... bae tiiez tc- uu xi bu 
funded fj’ . the . ..ocx.-: I’ousi cr.:..toa- oy uo won. ,.bta . sv in oar. 1 five 
uaridr.a forty-nix, kao n & ,; Th€ V tux ax a cue Fhixip, joe /.eveaut- «. 
or xi'. -...A-a Funa*'- '£ae board on Fonuico.. far Voter*. nr ix uatucriseo, 
with t*xd proved of the Freeldeat oi to. F*xxJLi ..uxea, to act a nice 
part Of tk-,- ivxnda uereitt a..pre$ariat«a, or oi' •the Veto tuna cl Ux Phiri;— 
prut a; vo-i ationu or : . punaaon r und®, for ux- .. ( ..i a. ieu 1 

the pc-reouuoi, &r«h*porbtition eipenses ana p..-r diox^ of invc- ci.-utorv., 
furniture, equipaesit sad oi'fic. xu... pilot# 

,-aC» i-w. lixia «tCt ahi.xi take efx'ect u - a it. a. < : row a. 

Approved, august ii, iPhu# 


- 56 - 


% 


L. 


ABOLITION OF INTERIOR DSPAKPHHarT 


B. io* 3*03 


(CotaaoaMefilth Act So* 660) 

m ACT J^?S? ISI ‘ iG m * ABOLITION of the 
BEPARTM iZiT OF THE INTERIOR 

Be . lt ui^cted by toe Mtlonai A *.eaahiy of tn« hin 

tic* SJSfi • !““ ffSJ*?!* « ‘“'thori.-s, ct n» 

to alwUitt the Dalrtrnt •f"tni* , v!S TU t * **“" ict * Lj Q: ac -‘tive order 
hviy>£ , ,,,. ^ ^ ' 9t interior end any or all oi it 

reeor^. LS^t. »■»** PO~«, twUm! luti.s, 

Executive • - jif4*o. w +t *f"^ itard * 0IUC!; o^ui,aent, end iroperty to the 

?£>£££« “ d **• »“* ° f 


J|). S g -ffi V«t*£tem t of Na t i onal Before — Th- po Wer of . executive 

thi PhiilS- ^ Secretary of the Interior concerning 

U rtollppim vonstabulcry ana thy local police fcrcoe, end nil S 

conn ^:o^^^{h! UraitU^€S, ° mCd •***■■*>'«* W** “*«* n 


„ u _< rfn^ T ?° ?ri!Sld * nt of 4116 Philippines is authorized to transfer 
auch of the employe*;- end appropriation* of the Department of the I - 

J^ e J* *** “^* orovai of this Act to the dc: rtment 
to viuen the actios perf orasd by then have- been transferred by this : c t 

M * **<* s ***> *> provide mi* d epurtowU with ^ 

5[J President of the Philippine* is llke«Ue authorized to order the 
transxer oi eucn other cjfdcy.oe of tho Dep^tawnt of the Interior as any 

£j °5 “» *‘ tis at «» in connection .,ith 

ta. th»reto by tWc „ct, to any other bur.cn or 

office of the Gamnwrat »hicji nay hava tctuul need for their carries;.. 

PIC. 3» Ail poaiti'une of such employee;! of the Dep-rtieont of the 
interior as any not be troisf«n\.u to the several Deu-rtaynt , or to 
other bureau# and offices as provided herein, within one year fro* the 
a t'^T r f' L 0l Act, snail be ooruidered aboliohed, and such employee;’ 
?hi.-JL be entitled to re tir eaten t gratuity ii: accordance w^th thy revi- 
sions of Act Kuobered Four thou^.nd and fifty-one as if the* -cxe retired 
m der e&iu *et. 4 “ 


SLC* Ub This Act shell take offset upon its approval. 
Approved, June 11, 1:41* 


-p7- 


/ 


APPENDIX II 


EXECUTIVE ORDERS * 


No. 2. Assuming command of armed foi*ces, November 15, 1935* 

No. 3 • Creating National Defense Council, November 16, 1935, 

No. 10. Proscribing Army promotion regulations, January 11, 1936. 1/ * 

* 

No. 11. Designating tae Chief of Staff of, and transferring the Piiillp— 

pine Constabulary to, tho Army of the Philippines, January 11, 1936. 2/ 

i»o* Ija^ignatiiig, the permanent Chief of Staff and announcing certain 

appointments of General Officers of the Philippine Array, May 4, 1936. 

No* 31. Issuing regulations for procurement of medical reserve officers. 

May 13, 1936. 

No. 36. Transfer of tho Teachers* Comp, Baguio, to the Philippine Army, 

Juno 4, 1936. 

No. 41. Transferring adrainistr tivc supervision over tue Bureau of 
prisons to the Philippine Army, June k9, 1936. 3/ 

No. 46. Fixing quarters allowance for general officers of the high com- 
mand of the Army of tho Philippine*, July 20, 1936. 

No. 57. Establishing Reserve Officers’ Training Units in the Philippines, 
October 14, 1936. 

No. 56. Recognising Reserve Officers' Training in ban Juan de Letrun 
College, October 14, 1936. 

No. 82. Revocation of Executive Order No. 41, dated June 29, 1936, re 
administrative supervision of Department of Justice over the Bureau 
of Prisons, January 4, 1937. 

No. 83. Receipt und donation of money for national defense and expendi- 
ture thereof, January 23, 1937. 


* Executive Orders included in the Appendix are indicated by an asterisk. 
1/ Repo; led by Executive Order Ho. 169, October 15, 1938. 

'tj The Constabulary was removed from the Array bj Executive order No. 153, 
June 23, 1938. 

-*] Revoked by Executive Order No. 82, January 4, 1937. 



- 58 - 


Ho. 100. Quarters allowances of Philippine Army officers, June 14, 1937. 

Ho. 106. Arrest of officer, nd onii tori Tnen of the Philippine Army. 
August 24, 1937. 

Ho. 115. .Requiring the approval of the Secretary of Public Works and 
Go Tn.ur.ic t 3ne in the construction end operation of any government 
radio station end authorizing the grouting oi gtneral authority 
to the Philippine Army to establish and operate radio stations for 
military purposes, September 1, 1937. 4/ 

Ho. 149* Fixing salaries of Philippine Amy officers, Febru'xrv 7, 

1938. 1/ 

* No. 153. Reorganization of Philippine Constabulary into u national 
police force, June 23, 1938. 

Ho. 154* Designation of Cebu landing field as a military airport and 
landing field, June 24, 1938. 

No. 155. Fixing salaries and allowances of Philippine Army officers, 
July 23, 1938. 6/ 

Ho. 169. Seniority, promotion, and elimination of officers of regular 
force, Philippine Army, October 15, 1938. 1/ 

Ho. 178. Procedure in oases before courts-martial, coui't of inquiry, 
military commissions, and other military tribunals of the Philip- 
pine Army, December 17, 1933. 

No. 179. Designation of Philippine Army Chief of n tuff, iocoaber 31, 
1938. 

Ho. 134. Promulgation of rules on mobilization, February 2, 1939. 

Ho. 203. Designation of Philippine Army Extra Cantonment Zones in 
all mobilizati.CL centers, May 3, 1933. 

Mo. 205. Policy to be observed in the promotion of retired officers of 
the phili “iae Army recalled to active duty , sy 31, 1939. 

Mo. 207. Establishment of .O.T.C. units i all colleges and universi- 
ties as a requisite to recognition by the Government, June 15, 1939. 


U Revised by Executive Order Wo. 2L5, July 22, 1939. 
tU Repealed by Executive Order No. 155, July 25, 193d* 
6/ Repealing Executive Order No. 14b, February 7, 15-'- . 
’jJ Appealing Executive Ordei No. 10, October 15, 1938. 


- 59 


rrom thf se^iS.e, n f 5moti ° n > «*<* Wtlon 

Army, jal^ o, X739, f kLo A * sorve Faroe, Philippine 

* provul 01 the f S^r^^^oi^uhli 0 ’ ^'i* ontikled "Squiring the 
construction and oper-?on’ni ^ ' orks ana Communications in the 

^itary r^^erru^t ruaio stations for 

* N °‘ It UnS£ ftaK; -^ c Ou^val f> reof, to officers of 

i,^-cer 30 , coMsdseioneu la the Philippine Army, 

* N °* the Bepartaent of Kationk Defense, October 31, 

ho. 04. hoard of Indethfeuiacte Sentence to look into the record of 

V ****** peniteiitiai-lee Wld to v^Tlr^L 

reco^endatxons for tnexr release on parole, Novomcer d, 1939 • 

* " "* ?hUip ’^ *** a ““ »**■ *e*erve, 

:io. 279. allowing certain reserve officers of the PhiliooJne Amr 
1940? SSeSS firearma under cei tifioaie of registration, JoneY?, 

i0 ‘ 3 ^u.t r 6 > ^4l? 0r?S 01 Prufesuors of P^PPln« mitaiy Academy, 

a Ho. 368. Procurement of O*\fahor« p-wi c 

1941. O- 1 shore Patrol Reserve Officers, September y, 

r Unnumbered. Fixing the balaz-ies of +h» „<•*. 
the Philippine Ar ^. < Goverament „ 


- 60 ~ 


i. smcmzm the nausem constabulary into a national police force 

Malacsnan Palace 
Manila 

By the President of the Philippines 


Executive Order No. 153 

REORGANIZING THE PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY INTO A NATIONAL 

POLICE FORCE 

, ^suant to the provisions of Commonwealth Act Numbered Three 
nunareci forty-three, entitled “An Act to abolish the State Police Force, 
oo reorganize the Philippine Constabulary into a National Police Force 

^ funds tilerefor > K Philippine Constabulary ie hereby 

constituted as The National Police. 


X. The Philippine Constabulary 

1. The Philippine Constabulary and all police duties, authority, 
and responsibility pertaining thereto are hereby removed from the juriB- 
oxction of the Chief of Staff of the Army of the Philippines and will 
nereafter.be administered by the Chief of Constabulary In conformity 
with applicable laws and with the instructions contained herein. 


2. The Philippine Constabulary shall be composed of such officers 
and enlisted men as may be detailed thereto from the Philippine Army 
with the approval of the President. It will be organized and controlled 
in all its echelons independently of the Philippine Army, and on and 
after January first, nineteen hundred und thirty-nine, will be separate- 
ly supported and ad mini stored . For administrative purposes the Philip- 
pine Constabulary shall be deemed to be a bureau of government, and 

the Chief of Constabulary shall have all the powers conferred generally 
on bureau chiefs. Provisions of existing and future laws applying 
to the discipline, conduct, and responsibilities of individuals in the 
Army will, so far as they may be appropriate, apply with equal force to 
members of the Constabulary. 

3. The uniform of the Constabulary shall differ from that of 
the Army as follows* shoulder straps and piping on the uniform of the 
Constabulary shall be red; for the Army they shall be blue. 

4. The Chief of Constabulary shall be directly responsible to 
the President for the execution of all police duties, responsibilities 
and functions heretofore pertaining to the Philippine Constabulary 

and those specifically assigned to him by the President. Subject to the 
approval of the President he will prescribe and issue regulations for 
the conduct and administration of the Constabulary. He will administer 
all laws end regulations affecting personnel of the Constabulary, 
excepting those pertaining to the procurement of military personnel and 
the promotion of officers. For purposes of record, he will transmit 
to the Adjutant General of the Philippine Army such reports and 
returns as may be necessary to enable that office to maintain permanent 


- 61 - 


* 

0 

» 


* 

• records of aU personnel. Annual eligibility and efficiency boards anoint- 
ed in the Army under the order,, of the President . ill include propor- 
tionate representation from the Conctuoulcry. 

5. Subject to the approval of the President, the Philippine* shall 
be divided onto Constabulary Departments, each designated by the name 

oi a principal island or croup of islands-. Where necessary to ersate 
:uor^ than one department for :ny island each will receive c- suitable 
designation. In each department the Senior Coast: fculary Officer shall 
be design tec Department Ins >uetor f Con: tabula ry. He will be re- 
sponsible to the Chief of Constabulary for the efficient functioning 
of the Const /bular> n his department. 

6. The Senior Constabulary Officer in each province rill be 
designated Provincial Inspector and will command all Constabulary 
elements in that province. For routine administration anc supply 
purposes he will coraraunic-te directly witt the Chief of Tioaati.bultiyj 
in all other matters he . ill bo directly .subordinate t; the Co :artraeht 
Inspector. 

IX • P ala lions U.t, ot.n Crust;, oulury and loot 1 ~vlicc 

7. Pursuant to one provisions of section six of Common .julth Act 
numbered Thro© hundred forty-three, ail provincial, city,* or other local 
fire and police uodie: oriel provincial guard:: t.. may have bear, wholly 

or partially removed frora the control of local officials by Commonwealth 
Act Jtuaberec; fighty-eight are hereby restored to such control, and 
to the status occupied by them respectively before the- approval of 
the Act, subject hereafter, however, to such reg*olations -Jf fee ting 
organization, ad a .istmtion, and civil service end other Amplifications 
required of individuals holding position? in these bodies ? my be 
approved by the President, 

8. Pending approval of the regulations indicated, in the preced- 
ing paragraph, it is hereby directed that all meabers oi local 
police and firemen in all cities, municipalities, and municipal dis- 
tricts, shall continue in their present functions in the ...ervice, with 
the same power, - , duties, : ad functions : r. pe^cc officers and firemen 
within their respective jurisdiction^ c . have obt ined hen tofore, 
serving under the direct control and supervision of their .. propriate 
chiefs of police and city, municipal, an, municipal district mayors. 

The salarie of s id police and firemen shall be paid us heretofore, 
from the same sources, and -at the same salaries now authorized. 

Provincial guards- and special agents cha^i like wise c ritinue in the 
service under the supervision of their respective provincial governors 
and their present authorized salaries shall be ..eld ae heretofore by 
the province, concerned. Provincial police inspectors *nd other 
commissioned officers appointed under Commonwealth Act lumber, el Eighty- 
eight snail cease to function as such on the date this order takes 
effect, provincial constabulary commanders or inspectors who have not 
been previously appointed police inspectors and those who have been 


- 62 - 


appointed ex-officio police inspectors, shall act and continue as pro- 
* i ^ pectors withou t additional compensation in the pro- 
^ id * h ^5 are respectively assigned. Until the oromul- 
gatioa ol new regulations, the same rules of discipline as have 

^TrZTli JT e f? I C8d r* 6r the P^isions of Coaaonwealth Act 
Kumbered lighty-eight shall be applicable in so far as they are not 

inconsistent with the provisions of Commonwealth Act Numbered Three 
fi?Sn. y ^ *“* ° f thlS 0rder t0 911 aeabers o£ local Police and 


9. Under the provisions of, and for the specific purposes ex- 
presses^ ixi. Section Eight hundred thirty-four of the Revised Adminis- 
trative Code ell -ocal police bodies and individuals ii't each province, 
including ail provincial guards and special agents, are placed under 
inspectorial supervision of the appropriate local representative of 
the Chief of Constabulary. 


10, Under the provisions of Chapter I, Article III, Section four 
iS) ? f cb Numbered Three thousand nine hundred ninety-two. Revised Motor 
Vehicle Lad, personnel of the Philippine Constabulary will be designated 
as deputies to assist in preventing violations of said Act and in 
carrying out the police provisions thereof. Regulations approved by 
the President for insuring traffic control as intended in that Act 
will be executed by the Constabulary and a 'll local police under co- 
operative methods jointly established by the Secretary of Commerce 
and Communications and by the Chief of Constabulary. 


Ill, Procedure of immediate organisation 

11, Until a permanent Chief is appointed and qualified, the pre- 
sent Deputy Chief of Staff is hereby relieved from hie duties with the 
Philippine Arsiy and is designated Acting Chief of the Philippine Con- 
stabulary, 

12, All organisational plans, when approved by the President, 
will be executed through the cooperative action of the Chief of Staff 
and the Chief of Constabulary. The plans will provide fort 

(a) The initial transfer of commissioned, enlisted, and civilian 
personnel from the Army to the Constabulary, including the Malacanan 
Guard Company. 

(b) The transfer from the Army to the Constabulary of appropriate 
property including real estate, weapons, transportation, clothing, and 
other essential items. Transferred property will be dropped from the 
accounts of the Army and receipted and accounted for by the Constabu- 
lary. 

is) The normal supply and maintenance of the Constabulary dur- 

ing the remainder of the current calendar year from military funds and 
resources* provided . That expenses incident to organization, additional 


- 63 - 


t : 

* » 

l « 

I i 

< ! 

« 

•housings and procurement of special equipment will be accomplished from 
funds specially provided for this purpose in nineteen hundred and 
thirty-eight by Section eight, Commonwealth Act- Numbered Three hundred 
, forty- three, 

(d) Development of procedure to apply on and after January first, 
nineteen hundred and thirty-nine, whereby the Constabulary may secure, 
upon direct reimbursement for all costs involved, which is hereby 
authorized, of equipment essentially military in character, and any 
other items which may be most efficiently and economically procured 
through utilization of the Army's procurement agencies, 

IV. Emergency control 

13* During any period of emergen oy Involving the employment, 
upon the direction of the President, of any element of the Army to 
supplement the Constabulary in maintenance of law and order, the 
military element involved may be temporarily assigned to the command 
of the appropriate Constabulary official or, if the emergency so war- 
rants, all Constabulary and other police elements in the affected 
region may be attached to the Army to operate under the control 
of the Chief of Staff, as may be directed by the President in each 
case, I n all such cases routine administration and supply of the Army 
and of the Constabulary will remain the responsibility of their respec- 
tive chiefs, 

V. Funds 


14, The amount of five hundred thousand pesos appropriated by 
Section eight, Commonwealth Act Numbered Three hundred forty- three, 
is hereby released to the Chief of Constabulary for the purposes 
specified in that Act, subject to approval by the President as re- 
quired by law or regulation and particularly in all cases involving 
construction or the acquisition of real estate and motor equipment. 

15, This Order shall take effect on June twenty-third, nineteen 
hundred and thirty— eight . 

Bone at the City of Manila, this twenty-third day of June, in the 
year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-eight, and of the Com- 
monwealth of the Philippines, the third. 


MANUEL L. QUEZON 
President of the Philippines 

By the Presidents 

JORGE B. VARGAS 

Secretary to the President 


- 64 - 


Ittt - ttWfi P^la45« 

Manila 

By tu«» ^resident of th« phiii, -taee 
iUecutiw OitJor Ho. ^5 

, **»» ID om®5 OF TMK 

v or Sxf 4 ! 4rf0 ***** C^iSMlC2?© IK IKK PHILIPPI** A Ktti' BY 
UI ACCEPXAMC i* OP Aj'h- I&ULaT&C haH* tHERT IK. 

of .!* cW ®° nir ‘ fe v Of tho MaUofuv* Defem.'. A«»t, 

’ina Arm-* w-^ t U " Araj ** K> urt ' cooaieuiuwd In the v»hi_i ~ 

£ ' ^ f *% fcoa oA . ***** incept- nc« or asaindletad rank taer«in ‘ 

.Jftf * f *' facWVe ^Pt-rat^x- first, nineteen hundred uBe thirty-nine, be 
fri »»f v, - HUart,ar " or ttt£ w-wutau vtJ.ut: thereof, wuioh xi><t n be-* 
IdouUcii^ «xtu unw ante* -.^scribed for tuc offioan, of thy >aUi .ino 
An*. of the wm*e gr.de. *• 

iion« at the flit,;, of i.iunil*, tiut thirtieth at 1 of 3«ofc«-nbor i • if 

sss? - - *• “ 


MAN Oil o, QUEZON 

?_gecxdtmt of tn 

By the re:.identx 
Jor£$ B. 

recr^t-. r,. to t»e ?r.. x-ldent 




V‘ ~ 


c. 


ORGANISING THl 


IF. PANT:.*: NT OF KATlOMAL DEFERS!; 

U&l&mam Pal**©# 

■Manila 


By the President of the 'Uili ; .pines 


&tooutivu Order Ho. <J0 

ortOAKmtG m D&?aAm>v of «atio:iaT. mo 


rurw* nt to tat- -roviaion^ .-A covfc.oascclth Act l<uux.re© l .-ur i:ur.-..:x d 
thirty, i iid by virtu* f the iut~.ority iu at by i., a uei 

h* Queoon, Pro iaoi-.i- of the ?hiii plnec, do hereto,- order t,. or r , sanation 
of the Department of Rational Doidnao effective Novoaoej first, nii*ct4f5ji 
hunarea i.nd thirty-nine. 

the ®e k xartoent of M«tiuucd Defense s4u.il be char*, . ito the uty 
of „apervi;-;ing tn-; national defence progras of the- country, and nnii nuve 
executive supervision ovar the Pbiii pine Array, the Bureau of heroaaati.ee, 
the Bureau of Coo. t md Geodetic Survey, the Phili. -pine Kant Icui /c..-oc:., 
and hrer the estabui.shai.nt end operation of ail n.uto siatl-ne (rac-.'ivlnii, 
txenazh. thing, or bro&dcu&tfng) other than those iiuint ined by t.*. Burt »u 
of Posts* 

The txenafor U; the Dep-rti-unt of Rational £«IYn: ~ of tin- Buiv ur, 
offices, and services enumerated in the second paragraph hereof shall 
be effected on Roywaher first, nineteen h.ndrea and thirty-nino, or * a 
soon there- iftc-r e pruotlcable, but not later than Decumt r thirty-fir; t, 
nineteen bundr-d and thirty-nine* 

Thu necessary fund for th. organic tiasi and e^tdb.ioh&ont of fchs 
Office of the Secretary of Matronal Defence and for its maintenance 
until the next fiscal year shall b t -u;:i uv- th« fereeu - vin, : iu 
salaries and . .>>. and undry e.ipenae# of the Bureau:.- • nd office, of the 
Office of Urn President, and siiuli bo expanded iu accord a ;- «itb - 
bndgot to be u^rovoci by the President* 

The aiiex;.<wMied balances of fuocL or upproprlvtio;.. <uw uy, ,-»raon~ 
nel, equipment, aatevi ls, xocorao, >n& other , -.rtic,. rt i<» ■•.•; bo 
the Bureaus, offices, am iorviees em#» ; at .c. tit .-c-.nv .ur 
hereof art hereby truHoferrcd to thv i>®->artra.-nt of Nutionau Deforce.. 

Tho Auditor Cnarai,«»i tb<- Cotraiss loner c-f ins Baudot shall rasas the 
necodSciry atdjUBtcientt of the uyj^yiud^-tioivo cifeot-.d thereby* 

Hone aa the City of iunila, this thirty-first cuy of October, in 
the year of Oui Lord, nineteen hundred thirty-nino, nc of the Coa- 
nonmJ&Xtn of the Phil! pinou, the fourth* 

tea l. v -: : -2 ;» 

Pr^caYct. of in.-,- - a'i - i .. iv:'- 


By the President? 

Joi'tie B* Vargas 

Y C ; . A ..V, >- ta_-- 


- 66 - 


j>. or - ’ w tnn : ~" c.th»c hesfpve 


. oJ.t>ce 

t.ucuvivo Orator Ho. At>7 
it? ai.- pjii:juv.n> *Jea ok;j. ^jka t • 


?u*uU xat -o Ui-J rovitioi.! 4i‘ t.-ocui-:. t >.*.-• ‘.j-J XV** ^e)l/ X t-hr 
jittfisf.-'- — i-oXcRt .. hGi, ias> .Uvi*wi9r< Tb> co- r.;..;zv,. i.Li< j*.ct duabdr^d .iifcfc 
hundrctu c <4 cr* v king i 4 ie Huriju Cor <c «; cow^-nant ri -x 

ti:o i j-vrvi c-» ,';uu Ls-:.y t cja- ioi Ao»-.u f . xm«u ;••»* r*. 

for wi. ox i tius ajr*o cox .. c iwiunw .41 n«ruo* ..fc^cii 

-» ;< r- • i x~ii„ . unt 

{£) T ix« Ux» 4 «i‘ oi v. i£ ox uJ^i josu .4 ox Ci«.- iio- xv of’ 

fox* Hurof. 4 i*:v oi qyaiixi*'.'. nur- .icu iauaLx be jc<a;/ij 

io-«ii.-uv xi-c . v ; tc* j — r , vac .jliv-xx ix.4.1. . x.; I'Odr* a 4 . t.- . . »-i\ 

. jii t 3 i* MMi+j. r<--. , M a-. au sueeatibi . 

; .C-xX.uicU. tv is .Vi i . I CXVXivXii Oi i. . - 4 - ¥e,.\:L ~ 

tion i'ox itoroca to ox- caobAv.-AX&ueu ox oat -vnu u a* i-t 1 C to , 

v 4 VX 4 ii . 4 .. liXi * 


(b) Roui&tx*^nti . 

CuV-fige- ;C V.O.. : JJO. »••. UmiVIC »/ :• 0* ' XO-’ ■.‘.>■■1' !:0vi" 0 ' .i iitVJil 

. iO v' 4 .x., 'Vv* 


rs£i*.-wr*o -juu xooo^sixyu x.ar-iaii . ^ o...-4~w *<; xadr 

of ^.. 4 * *. 2.1 it .- ival ; (.Vv * u; /.. u. « i t u.. «*-^ -* 1 

J ‘i* f *u.-~ lx Ui^ ^cu-c . ifj ^; c x i U -*i *-*• . ■■•- -•* 

.-V <-X XOX* 12 ^ »• -Ud w **- • Q’vUx Id x iii' 

%..< iiit; Soxpii h-r. w ^ Xl-Jwilii- tltiii* 

(c.) 'xi; - • C*i *;0-if il A.X ‘.Cl -J. r* w ' Vy*wuUfl V- r M - -• ^ 

v. iii ii*-.; iiUlcf OoZV^. C v/V-v. tO fii-L .u. tix*# x . - 

juijrcxoxi v* *!*>;» -.uC** X/ixixic-* -*'•* *' * *•*• *• '•’ 

oxiua iao^ o.- Avct* v %aj, Wio :^cr^UJr^ oX /t*. t - .- o- 

of C'. „outx'vivc w^raxrt^t.ic.4^ U? ^tor^. rclt»- 

x.:.Y’; of o * 

fo-ixx :::v-Vw ^ut-iMlJLfciuXOi* It WiO U.*.u OOui ^Ui40r> ,t 

bt: refcortvu uo« tiio tt» i’ c • - — ^i^LUiOUt wilu. - - -c . -v ••• — 

of lot. fra~i 4 ^. 0 ^ U- ^ * ii* 1 ^ 1 f J A ' ‘ I# a 

nur^e^. 






v ,a u uii .nt *’or a».BOi. i tvikip Ail th» nUToO uVi.c sv. 4 V -tU.e 

,■ 403*5 »• ti«.- ;o:lcv .i«-; xX».v'-«i . ■•!»&; 

uj ei-.u iv t U « citii n oi- Ui biU. v iuiM, ot — > “• « 

t.'- nt/" -on Uv*r «»- ■. id : D. tj-li’.’ j • ! • oi -** -» 

1 / r*<?c. 2 $ (i>) i-s W^adod b> Coaaonnettlita Act 'Ho* 569 # June ?# -9 * 


(b) Sho must be unroarried, of good oorui oh&r star * ,.~n ♦ 

yapirttttiai, and physically fit for afutajy &ervioe. d 1X t 

Sho aoftt hairo fpx^mUZ fro® a duly uoereoited throe ye..r.« 
course of KrtiuArig la « genorel hospital *ith a daiiv avertas v -.f firtv 
patients or eo.ro, including aen, wooon, sad children^ durin* tiu Mjpii- 

»■* ^ or'^Sj Slips 

utld ttuso of hoji4t*u.fc cer*ag for vobmmi only «u ; be eligible fov 
k rt ^int«£at if ttwir experience shall inciudo at leat nin- aonths* 
training in a general hospital for the o&re- of aeu, *ot&*a, and children, 
vitner 'raring tiioir souivo oi Naming or. i,ub:. t . uent thereto t u»> 

T&a* ;.ubt e- iU^nt. pott-gr uoate tr. Jxr.r., or ho^Xt , 
OAp® rlarice which supplements deficiencies of training any be accepted 
*f wdur such ruios ^nd regulations os aty ba prescribed by 

Jjjj.j**** °* '•'•*“** * ita approval of tn^ secretary of »}ati> si D©-* 

(d) She au^t huw pun sc* the eype-.iinutlcn prcsorlbvd by la- for Ua. 
practice or nursing in the jfhliippinoK tnd j>oas ©c. the- corr sconcing 
certificate of registruti n iaaut-d by the Board of L/Ax»iaer., for \'urse?.. 


3* APix>intaiant end Pros-o t..on 

y 

Appointments to, and prorsotions in, the Nurse Corps Reserve will 
folio*, the tmao federal policy «a hi other branch.-, r of the p©r- 

▼leo. 


4» Classification an c. C-.-.’i:--enu...tiou 

Memh.ro of the Rurse iDorps Reserve shall be classified, sue their 
rates of p.y during their period of active service, shall b; as folio. : ! 


(oj Jfurce .... 2*1,100.00 

(b) Bead nurse 1,500.00 

(ys) Chief aurso 1,600.00 

(u) Superintendent x,l00.00 


<*) In addition to rhe coapea^- tion provided ir pex^'rapho (a) 
to {&i ) , nurses will be furnished *itii quarters in win.-i ~ 
•fceaevsr avail? .hie, or ia cash, carresjjoiuiing to their 
reltitivo rt-fhcc in Accordant:.. with *-.ray Regulations govern- 
ing this natter leaned' with tn<. u, rovai of tin* resident 
of the Philippines. 

5. '<obixiaation 

(a) Uciloor, of the Sure© Corps Reserve my be a . ignen f or .erview 
in funeral hoapiti-le, evacuation hospital#, end surgical bespit as in the 
proportion of tax- a nurse o for every fifty-patient capacity or R*jor 
fraction thereof* t 


- 63 - 


HHHI 




, .„Tu,?TiT ??T *“?* «■» Of tltwoBned op « cu , 

faontili— thoasfc.vaa in :'a„diiitio_ to ioii' fnp ,-jt . , to 

a, y to un.t to miieh ««* « iv , « ^rAiSA"! 

™ 2S r: 

SLsS t.;; 5VT 


j '-?,>•* 

• / J- 4 - v*\ 


■ 1- ' *U [u « 

-.IV- '^i;,. r.; : ii - :i , K - 


Bj the President* 

Jorgfe B, Yvr^. e 

- ?;.. Uitv r» t _ , * r,t 


^ r 


r -9 - 


i’liocir?- v :;t of emaor:: patfo: ar.rJWE officers 


Mulac&nun Palace 
Vuniia 

By tho President of the Fhilippinec 


(Executive Order Ho. 36&) 

pBOcanaifHT of offshore patro^ n-mw 

OFFICERS 


Pursuant, to the authority conferred upon sue by the Constitution 
ad existing la*»6, I, Manuel L. Uueaoa, President of the Philippines, c 
sroby prescribe tho following regulations, governing th .<roaur ;&i»t ->f 
s serve officers in the Offshore Patrol of the kmy of the Philippines* 

i* Reserve Officers in the Offshore patrol of th*- .nay of thf> 
hill pinna p frx.il be procured in tae following manner* 


a. By voxuntcry application, and 

b. By eoapalcory draft whenever necessary. 

2. Reserve Officers in the Offshore petrol are generally classified 
ccording to the serrxoe or oab.-bliu.:,;ent t- ~bich they are £>x . xgned 
a folio wet 


x. Those sealgrik-a for duty in the Q-Bo^t Flotilla, 

b. Tnose assigned for duty in the Off snore troi acre 
establishments, and 

c. Those assigned for duty in the auxiliary forces. 


y* Applicants for cosxiission in the Offcnorc Patroj. i’eaerv- -hc.il 
tate the service or eatablixbasnt to which they vent to be assigned, 
hey «*»»•< 1 be required to pass the regular physiosl exsiiinatioo pres- 
cribed for officers of the <mayt Provided, no»evpr, .That in the aauc 
t those applicants who will be assigned for duty in the auxillx ry 
orce of the Off shorn Patrol, suen defects as shall not affect i n- 
pplicantt* capabilities for disclx rglag th. cutiee of t-n officer on 
oard an auxiliary vessel axy b<t waived* 


M In orcer that an applicant «xy be coi-iissioned in tin. di- 
ore Patrol Reserve usd - -i ogned In the t-Bott Flotilla, he t *® id 
diuloat or certificate us having succesef JLly passed the exteini wson 
vea by the Boaru of Murine rxaaincrsj or be the hoioer of degree 
t airing a four-year course in an. uccrsditsd university or coxlt^a, 

V v;oTC graduate ; shall not be aore thou thirty year a of gt at the 
t« ftho filing of hie application «au au.t have uadergono »ucn 
lining &s the Ohi*f of Staff of the Amy of the Philippi** fliuaA 
■feacribu* 


Q>> 


Applicants for reserve cca iasion, to be assigned iu -.the ‘' ore 


- 7C - 


arfwbiUba. .ita of ta Of fshcr* Patrol, suet 01 ,mk^ + 

qualifications ui re tinxaad nacea^ii*' J ' ■ f ouw *‘ 

B^crve fficera toa.-xgnod lu ih To»t , ; 1 t> * onr 1 ^rvica tbt-rein. 

“ ,,a «*»•"•• ‘•OWiel'MW, U i; r; t?°oS •• 

i*™*** ;••’ -^ing ..^Ufic-itions Of ^laiLur • X !n ^ * 

of tLa ff .ior® :>ftirci* ” ^art-no* .... vu« iuncaune 

*;v“ c.at- tffco or* & t yolnt-.- .. ie?»«rv- ffxcer in th< 

g?!. ^ u/illary n*lt S, ,x " f 

^ . ^ X r.w ttfW «■:* radio ; ,rxo i ,/.. .. • ■ ,,J ,; n L 

end holding govonurant license, &e suck. The cri' n- n 7 * 

s«fflr;TSw i w to * -* . f . 

JS«£ * m * “* • - *»*« M tk. 


f JrV 1 ; 7 I1;Vt 1 ........ :o>Uift 

Fir^t Ut; O! coond -agxnoai First Lieutenant 

' %: " : 1 ; tv " r Thi; ......... econd a*utan«»t 

' : i ,vS " or " jyrta - a « iu -* r ** Third Uoutenant 

■'■•* taiio . :Lv graph Operator, Flxxt Clans; 

or l -^■* tor Second xUutea&nt 

^ •' -xu •.!• -dr.-;.a t .? . rotor, aoond t'~xsi , 

01 Pastor Taxi'd Lieutenant 

4* :t ***«& tint* -s tLj axiganeief 'if the xar/lc- . y it quire, 

«a^i tr*i ^aaricri-ig Cjcan^c^M cjCw^co^ on 

hosrc •; vesse. ; or connected iU. navigation, who xr.. not y«t heretofore, 
coaaissloaed in the Offshore Patrol Ra starve, my be drafted ,.na required 
tx pjjrfora each cati Sa dvamei ntcf.ceu:>. Jpon i. i no drafted 
•.nay u'.n. bv. .‘iouad ano «- i .. ; .saxni...ii ta the grados. - ■... -Cud-.:;;' 

the xicauscs aald by thaa, -t, dateraln-^d in ^rKqrnpn „ (c) henof, 
ov accor-iXt, to thoix educt tian&i qoe.xlfic-tiona aiui irofcaxieneti •*.« in- 
ing ami altiil. 


>» In oruvii* in*... the provibititi of tuu next preceding 

iuxxy affected ehen aacesaxiy, the laxaixi Col*-. etc* f Jaeioax 
and the Chief at the -indio Division of tat. Dep. rtaant of -:at: .1 r«- 

iesoc are nxrsfc; repaired to fwmish the :hief of fluff coaplvU Uistb 
of ala person^ are no ; holding, or nho aa> hereaft^. a ixaued, 
lioence.. *c itarine officers,, engine era, pilot*,, rtdlo r tel* rt sh 
o para tors, together with pertinent inforatlm regarding th •. ducat: vm.l 
anu proi'e^sxon&x -pxalit'lc . tio,.-, *c.pioy»ect of ouch person.: nd aco e ther 

dfcta as do;- bt daeirf-v’. by the Chief of tuff. 

6. The dt tails ae to tne Banner cf drafting in the- off ti.oro 
'etroi Rasirva k ersonui rendering technxcax xeivi.oes -xn board ve • ox., or • 
in connection vith m^vigxtlc-n ahs.ll ht fist : rudued by oho Chief -if , tuff. 
In eftee of national emergency , or t ouen tiae a.- coapulsdr; ur-fting 


- 71 - 


i$ n9C**bttxy, zix> Cilia 1 ; teff .iiuli eubait to the President i the 

fh£Up?bM» hie reeoa. end .tion as to »i*c! shall he drafted. 

i^or *t the City of Monila, this ninth day of September, in the 
7&SL&?*? Tu^"' 1 ** «** the Coa-.on«dth 


SJOTJL U QUE20K 
/resident of the PnUi:,.oine» 

By the /resident* 

Jorge B. Targe 

Secretary to the President 


f, JIXXHG TUr- 01 ; TH OB MO ;UD RLIS'1 L it ■ , OF TH;- PHILIrVINI 

AKJdl 

By too President of the Philippine# 


Executive Order 


waxKG hhf, tiuhies of m omc ■ mt EaueTso »*.% 
of m PHii-LPPim, aj«i 

pursuit to the provision# o i f&otion %) of toe Motional Di-fens* 
Act end of the Zwr&*aey Power# Lua, X, Muouai Queson, President of 
the Philippine 8 » do horaby prescribe) the foilo«ixu;‘ schedule of ooiury 
Xtet#» sad qpertert alio viic* for officers of too Philippine ;ir*y, 
effective 1'irch 15# l‘M2, and .uWiding for the duration of the -tar 
tad six aofltou toerouftor aoieas sooner tormina ted b„. ena.vtent 
authority* 


*ajor G* aer&l .... 

3ri£&difcr G -.noral 
Colonel .......... 

Lieutenant Colonel 
■idjor ......mom 

Captain .......... 

First Lieutenant • 
Second lieutenant 
third Lieutenant * 


mmiAb 


M 

PlOy JOI 

8»G90 

7,GJG 

b,(X>G 


4,600 

4,000 

3,0CG 

2,400 


soamx 

igaim-fis ailmx; 

P200 

200 

200 

200 

160 

UO 

xoo 

so 

60 


During the period that the r&tae of pay herein prescribed are 
effective th«ro shall not be paid to any officer an inert; co cl pay by 
r^son of length of service, coanoiuy ceiled "longevity fey." 


During the period that the r^te# of pay herein prescribed are ef** 
fective there moil not be -vld to any officer an increase oi ,-ap i-'-r 
duty requiring regular and fSPequof.t »or*oi fli^hto • 



mm% 


r wu& 


H3stor Sergeant 

Technical Sergeant and First tergesht 
Stcfi* fergeant 

Sergeant 

Corporal 

Private Firat Class * »«** 

Private 


Monthly 

Pay 

Monthly 

quarter; all owsnee 

i?bo 

?lo 

73 

16 

60 

16 

51 

12 

07 

12 

22 

6 

16 

8 




EH LI STEP MEN. AIK COUPS 



Monthly 

—Pay 

- Monthly 

Quarters Allovi&nce 

Technical Sergeant .......... 


Pl6 

*1 £ 

Staff Sergeant 


JLO 
1 A 

First Sergeant .............. 


ID 
1 £ 

Sergeant 


XO 

1 O 

Corporal 


X< 
1 o 

private First Class ......... 


X(L 

fk 

Private 


O 

3 


Provided that no man shall suffer a reduction in pay by reason of 
this Executive Order. 

Cone at the seat of Government in the Field, this tenth day of 
March, in the year of Our Lord* nineteen Hundred and Forty Two, and 
the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the seventh. 

MANUEL L. QUEZON 
President of the Philippines 


4 ' 


74 - 


\ 


A. P&IDIX III ' 


PK0GI^!iATI0N3, A^'O’ISTPATIVE ORDERS, AND GINEPAL ORDERS * * 


A. Proclamations 

Ho. 23. Registration of young msa fur military instruction, January 11, 
1936. . 

Ho. 50. Recognition of military Instruction at thu Oniver. ity of the 
hill inee, t-aroh 31, 1936. 

Ho. 69.' Selection of trainees for military service, J-dj 16, I700. 

< 

Ho. 342; publishing the proclamation dated April 10, 1940, of eta 
presxcient of the United States, relative i; tho definition of • 
combat urea, and the announcement issued on the same cute by the 
Secretary of State, regarding travel on combat arc.i, lay 3, 1940. 

Ho. 740. publishing provident Roosevelt* : order incor ;or tin., the 
Philippine Army into the 1,8* Army, August 10, 1941. 


Bi idninit. tro tlve Orders 

Ho. 64. Restoration of name of Philippine Constabulary Band, December 
28, 1933. 

Ho. 95. Designation of Drigaditr General Vicente Liifl -e. Deputy Chief 
of Staff of' the Philippine Army, M&y 3, 1939. 


C.. 1 I trhors 

No. c. Composition of the Central. 0 ncral St f. o*- ■’hil' 1 - tJ‘-Ue •• : ! V> 
J iia. hi, 1939 . 

No. 9. Design Uos of Philippine Army st ti >n ut Run Fernando, P*»- 
panga, as Comp Julian Olivos, July 14, 193v* 


- - 

* proclamations relating to reserving land for military district , are 
omitted. Documents marked by an asterisk are reprinted. 


- 75 - 


A. ' INCORPORATION OF PHILIPPINE ARM! INTO THE UNITED STATES ARM! 


Melaeanan ? ltea 
Manila 


By the President of the Philippines 
Proclamation No. 740 


PUBLISHING Tik MILITARY ORDER OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, DATED 
JJLI 26, 1941, INCORPORATING THE PHILIPPINE AMY INTO THE UNITED 
STATES AMI, 

For the information and guidance of ail concerned, I, 'lifJEL L. 
QUEZON, President cf the pnili mines, do hereb;. ublish the follow! i,; 
Military Order of tae President of the United States, dated July 26, 1941: 


•Military Order 

"ORGANIZED MILITARY FORCES OF THE GOVERNMENT OF TH NWEALTH OF THE 

PHILIPPINES CALLED INTO SERVICE OF THE ARMED FORCES OF THE UNITED 
STATES. 

•under and by virtue of the authority vested In me by the Consti- 
tution of the United States, by section 2 (a) (12) of the Philippine 
Independence Act of March 24, 1934 (48 Stet. 457), and by the cor- 
responding provision of the Ordinance appended to the Constitution 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippine: , and at Co o ander-in-Chief of the 
Anay «i id Navy of the United States, I hereby call and order into the 
service of the armed ''forces of the United States for the period of the 
existing emergency, and place under the command of a general officer, 
United States Army, to be designated by the Secretary of her from time 
to time, all of the organised military forces of the Government of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines: Provided , That all naval components 

thereof -cha 1 1 be placed, under the command of the Commandant of the f if- 
teenth Navel District, United States Navy. 


•This Order shall take effect with relation to all unite and person- 
nel of the organized military forces of the Government of tlio Com- 
monwealth of the Philippines, from and after the days and hours, 
respectively, indicated in orders to be issued from time to time by 
the general officer, United States Army, designated by the Secretary 
of War. N 


•FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT 

"The White House, Juiy 26; 1949 ." 

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the sen 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed. 


Done at the city of Manila, this tenth d c; of August, in the ye r of 
our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-one, and of tne Commonwealth of to 
Philippines, the sixth. 

iavjd.) MANUEL L. QUEZON 

President of the Philippines 


By the president: 

Jorge B. Vargas 

.Secretary, to the President 

- 76 - 


B. COMPOSITION OF THE C w MTRiL OKSlRAL CT„FP OF THE PHILIPPIN!*. ASH 

Uslao~n*» pelace 

G*aera_ Orders Ko. b 


June* <;i, 193 * 


cov.^oolTTc:: 


.2 tu' : :t;~~ : « :r; r v-r x 


I. Under vtheKt} •■' tain I in eoticn .-.3 -*f Vu-. . vionol Eaienee 
/.ct, tlx c-.'Tr... "i. v • 11, her after* 

Ut«r. Clviw" oi .'t ff, tb» Jtejnit;-' Chief of - flv.i -aeiet- at 

Chief- vi t-ff, the 5. -cr v> the Cxner 1 ‘ t iT, * v.; -ucF other 
officers of the Ac*y as «sy fraatiae to tin* be* . vt-cot. .-.cr .v.. 

Chief f staff . • ■ ntnei General Staff end approved by 

•tho > .f.f, • 1 <3 r-:- o 'vinf, on * -tu 

the . atr l G-; n< ■ i * . ff :.r ,-i. • x u ..x . lb i. ru :>i 0 c*, ora* 

"tfcff o* burs , .ire design*, teti *• ncibtx.- of two Centre- ' wior? . dt-fi 

Cc-r, ■ , T XI- f c . I,-:, r.r.t •. i • >;. . : ir* " Q. v '. ' 

Do i «ccM ■•■bif.heci upon i*eo.'.riwnr.i.i.on c* tic jhL&l' ol Stuff, hen #,;AWd 
try the president. 

a* The Central O«nor»i Staff , er.cept for the Chi' * toff* thfc 

Do pi ity chief of Staff -»n- in Seor^ttr. to the General f.h-_l f, shell be 

orgt"»i*ed into five divtoiona, earn *n«hr the direction f-'n -,i.6ie- 
tuat chief of r.taff* To the first division *haii be tri^a^d functions 
,na until*? ’ to Eirt/tagl*; --wr '*nd h- >eervc *i'~ . . aployrrsht j 

to tho ceoad division, Operrti* u>, Training sad Int«LU< : . noe; to 
the third ?tviai<>n, aad Iridutitria*. r '•‘•'-ru., * • •* ■ *»rt— 

alvioioa, ’ t} ereo»nelj and t Ut»- fifth, buhtut. 

3 , Upon receipt of this Grasr, the Chief of tuff shall prepare 
a iirt of «.’l officers nc»v ^rlerain* General Staff uu.U. iu *r*t 
Rewh.ua. ter>, - oi ^ueh edditionoi. officers as -aay b- rceo^ndoo by 
hia for eaei^uaont to the CftStral 0 «»«rel Staff under the pr of 

tnin • -r&er* Twin >oget n«r t-ui - wt.to.i-. ’ - i h- c “ 

indiviiiur.i. nafjai th**reon jIXI hi . ubsltted for tu\ :•>•.». i -h- 
President. 

4; Tuiu 'jxder nh:viJL i. .a .ifn ct i-ir-C te.ty* 

MASHEL L. '.UEX3R 
? £j il deat ui* bite pnii.i-iapfnee 


By the Pre aid entt 

Jorge B. Varsi.a 

Secret:- • t ; -> the T *t 


- 77 


ivla -v 


s&K .G 7 SU2 ? KSZBST TO IT.. ■ A 

Rsuixua ro Si\u,.:;.L iispsyy* 


Ss.tlc .-~ isoUmuti? f*v ib.u* *5, 1935 4 

i.i.,aislstlcn, ... i>k ivr .^c .t . txit . ;. . ■! s ='••■ 'u- : .•••,.» •- • • -.4.*. n* 

a-oi ;avwrru.i.*it .ic . r »t! ■_ ;:y: ;;r-..;.ber i), ... /*>. 

Sap&ratioft of Con 'tabular} f»n Thill.*/ '•••:» • A.Ti... >j, IV. . 

Rani; and -on of effiae «£ Ohlli^ina .-.r.^ c*f ~~ff, 'i-j U, -9j8. 

A prcv: ' .*f bill .1 „v T :-.onfc of in<ti;4' .fr. i •. *. r : r. ::... . .ru; 

-arrict.- of rhlltv^Ls- .-,• , 8©pi'3bcr li, I9cb* 

ci' tt? fotion and i** orv n» ?cor •aic roM- r-o, r<::. r.t f.i* 

f^.cnin;; of thw £ir;,t js-ss.-f-ior f xir; . .-..ri. ‘-:.tivx.al ; 
tA^xsl r t ivo i uliding, Stenil?, J>mu ry >4* D39. 



* 


\ 


* 


- 78 - 


APPENDIX V 


LETTERS, PRESS STATEMENTS, ETC. OF THE PRESIDENT 


Press statement, on administration of Philippine Army officer corps, 
January 11, 1936* 

On national defense, at the U.P. Campus, Manila, February 12, 1936. 

Letter, on preparatory military training in all public and private 
eohoole, February 19, 1936. 

On government cooperation and military training, at Tuguegarao, Cagayan, 
February 2$, 1936. 

On virtue of military service at Tuguegaruo, Cagayan, February 29, 1936. 

On the MacArthurs in Philippine history, at a dinner in honor of Field 
Marshal Douglas MaoArthur at Malaoanan Palace, Manila, A tig us t 24, 

1936. 

On national defense, at the Reserve Officers* Service School, Baguio, 
September IB, 1936. 

Memorandum, upon signing Bill No. 2029, giving longevity privileges to 
coaimissioned officers of the United States Army joining the Philip- 
pine Army, November 8, 1936. 

National Defense, University of the Philippines, .Manila, January 18, 

1937. 

Sooial Justice and National Defense, Malacanan Palace, Manila, January 
20, 1937. 

Status of the Commonwealth and National Defense, Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, 
February 20, 1937. 

Soanish-American War and National Defense, Willard Hotel, Washington, 
D.C., February 27, 1937. 

Philippine Constitution and Polioies of the Goiomonwealth Government, 
Hotel Astor, Hew York City, April 3, 1937. 

Restoration of Old Pensions to Retired Employees, September 9, 1937. 

Retention of Marshal Douglas MaoArthur as Military Adviser of the Com- 
monwealth, December 31* 1937. 

Provisional appointment of reserve officers to the Philippine Army 


- 79 - 


regular force, June 13, 1938. 

Transfer of Philippine Army officers to Constabulary, July 5, 1938. 

Compensation of Commonwealth Military Adviser, October 10, 1938. 

National policies, nationalism, and economic security , delivered at the 
29th commencement exercises of the University of the Philippines, 

Ma n 1 1a , April A, 1939* 

Military training camps as fields of instruction for deuooraay, delivered 
at Camp Murphy, Eizetl, ?J&y 8, 1939. 

Quality of officers of the Philippine Army, delivered on the occasion 
of the taking, of oath of office of Brigadier-General Vicente Lim 
as Deputy Chief of Staff of the Philippine Army, at Malacanan, 
Manila, May 17, 1939. 

Payment of pension or gratuity to Philippine Army officers separated 
from the service, October 30, 1939* 

Creation of Department of National Defense, delivered during induction 

into office of Hon. Toofilo Sison, as Secretary of National Defense, 
Malacanan, Manila, November 1, 1939. 

Cuimnon^'eelth anniversary address, delivered ut the Lurie tt , November 15, 

19 / 1 , official O.sette, Vol. 40, No. 21, November 22, 1941, PP* 4228- 
4231* 


- 80 - 


APPENDIX VI 


DOCUHENTf since the rstukh of the commonwealth government 

TO THE PHILIPPINES 


Executive Order No , 21« Declaring to be on active service in the 
Philippine Army all persons now actively serving in recognized 
ruilit M-y forces in the Philippine :, October 28, 1944. 

Executive: Order No. 22. Fixing the salaries of the officers and oruist- 
ed men of the Philippine Army, October 2B, 1944. 


- 81 - 


* 

f 

{■ k * acospoi'ATioa of active ?iilitart forces into ire Philippine xm 

tti# president of too Philippines 
executive Order So- 21 

mu&m to m m xcro:- osmcR is m phili-pins mxt all - h: v, 

/iCTIV wX SSHVIHO III BECOQfifIZEO MILITIA BY FORC IS THE PHXU’^TN, 


, Ban? civilians residing in toe Philippines Filipino, 
^rioen uaa other foreign oitiaenahipe, «U Officers :,uo ; nUstod ,;an 
oi ?uiii ;>toe Array, of tho araed forces of the United : totes end oJ 
Allied nations, have continued ,.sa*d reoiawnce against tho ! •. erit 
Japanese Government sines the ;ixth of Hay 1942; 

AHiHEAL, t. .it, action huu written in blood an ©pic of coor-..-., 
devotion and loyalty to the Government and toe people of the P hi i i p- \r ; 

■■HfcREAh* ‘these allituxy forces iv-vu contributed in a lurg-.< .at ■ to*-- 
to the Allied .Ailitory effort end to the liberation of tho Filioinc 
people Jtroui toe yoke of the Ja;.:»rifce« invader; 

t.-HBR&A :.- 1 it is too desire of too Govurniut-nt of tho Philippines to 
recognise this allegioxce; 

NOT.', THEREFORE, I, f ~*QiO 06SEBA, President of the Philippine*, by 
virtue of the authority vetted in sc by too Emcryanoy power.- Law/ lec- 
tion 21 and Lection ..V oi Co. :i .om ^ith ct Ncubv-red One notwithat rcluy, 
do hereby ordain and proauig&te toe folio vingi 

1. All persons, of «ny nationality or citizenship, mho r active ..y 
aervtog in recognised military forces la the Phili. inet * ere hereby 
considered to be on active service in the Philippine Ar«y. 

2* TL-. fcfettpoivjy gr-i a*, of Enlist 'd *.*on, enii ted or promoted in 
the field by Coiio&ndore of recognized military force, ox* by their 
delegated authority, uru hereby coaflrnud* 

3# Tho temporary r iks of ell officers, appointed or promote',: in 
tie field prior to this d< t< by Commander. of recognleod ai -itary fore a, 
are hereby confirmed. 

4* The date of entry into active service in the Phil i pins Army 
will b th.t of joining u recognized jaimitory force. 

5. The affective Into of ruui t for ooisxdsiicaeu officer^ and An- 
listed gun wiil be the date an whiou uxay were appointed or promoted to 
such rank by toe Co^-suac^re if r«*c jgeisea ailit-ry forces. 

6. A recognised ailitary fores, as used herein, i - define*- • i 
force under co.aasr.dsr who has taco, uppoinbid, designate*. ox xvcog mzeci 
by to* Con— r.uor-in-Chie f ' outivu t pacific ,xr»s. 


- 62 - 


Docs , t ol OovertJ.^tut in tfcu Field, thi& kith duy of 

October, in tfc yia.-r of our Lord, nineteen hundred mu forty four, und 
of the Cc.uaon of the Phi 11 *ia«s«, tfet ninth. 



By the President: 



(sgd.) sebsio 0P«5»A 

President of the- phixi. oine.v 


(Sgd.) AKIUTtf) 8. ROUGH 
Secretary to the President 


















:.«r 




. 

l S.V - / . . SALARIES OF THS OFFft nn rttf T , m -. 

f : nVZ ASMX WW0H ® mD SSUoTtD rfSR OF THK FHILIP- 

&• ' • 

tnv of the raiU„ v ine£, 

Executive Order Sfo, i* 

£ "£ N « - 2 £ : or nos om- rrs 

• .0 -HLISTiJ) WH OF JHl paiili'FIR? llInI 

**r. «* 

of the PMii.,,ln„ a , *> ;« E ori£ tu ° **?*•'• »•>•»*■» 

r ; .Uo «U ,u..rtcr t e .io, *f ***** 

Pfcili, t-iao Arqy, effective on dote- . J?T t d tie 

ior tt»w duration oi the t,ur ar<j *‘ or . ^ *. “*’ w * eu herein, end extending, 

ternlnutid by content uutiioritj . " lK>ntas there^tur unless* sooner 



amctRL 

lank 

annum lay 

Major General 
Briti&aicr General 

Colonel 

Lieutenant Colonel 

Major 

Captain 

First lieutenant 
Second lieutenant 
Third Lieutenant 

206,000 

lx,000 

8,000 

7.000 

6.000 
4,80w 

4.000 

1.000 
<£,400 


loathly 

vu^rtcr,; 

?100 

moo 

200 

200 

160 

140 

loO 

80 

60 


zMSfrP Bis« 


Gr^de 

ateetar Sergeant 
First Sergeant 
Techaioel SergOf.nt 
Staff Sergeant 
Sergeant 
Corporal 

Private First Class 
Private 


Monthly Pay 

^76 
x 76 
aia 
192 
13 6 
1>: 

108 

100 - 


> 

.ff.otiL’ri!* “i*** **«Uou««om pMsorlbed herein mu.ll keen; : 

£[tl?£ 2 £? 2 ““" ~ <* ^ •»* «p« to* «TL 

& * viTTlC;(. to Oi* CO&StitrUtfcd. UUdt?A* QZVi&niSfcrt lxi.tr r 

^ STw «£«& or, 

» cn . .,11: :* ? y u ““r «•«.<**■* *uit n »=«t ro i a u ,, , it: 

US ninS l ” r U, ‘ *** ° r ««** <**»!«, bu* «u*t,m for 

batod can * iv 1 e f ed b . hel-)g returned to or eon&ti- 

Lfc atdn by thM&» • ^nd'^ W-h * C on **“ 4 t -- of wmouncerjtnt teer- o 

■> 741 Co< — *nder-ln-Ouaf , outnwest, Paoific . 


34 - 


I 

\ 


50 increase of pay or ailoasaeas shall accrue because of foreign 


Buriix^ tnfl -jorioa that the rates of p*»y norcin prescribed ,*.r« effoo- 
*jlra t there wall not.be paid to any person ta *aorea, « of pay or *1- 
Lwaaces by reaeon of length of service. 

• _ a * r • ‘-O . » 5 

During, the period that the r< tae of p..y herein prescribed so ef- 
fective, there shall not he 4 -uid to any person an inora&se of "a. for 
dity requiring regular and frequent aerial flights* 

; „ ' l 

i-.n> provision^ of existing Bxeeutivj Orficre in conflict herewith 
are hereby superseded, 

■ _ _ - ■ - ' : 

Done at the seat of Govcmfoant in th Fields thin *>ctii buy of 
October, in th y ur ;■£ Our Lot c , nineteen Hundred .nd Forty-Four, aid 
of the Conawni cnlth of tUo Philippine*, the ninth. 


service* 


By the President: 


(tGu.) JtfSUJFO B. P050R 
Secretary to the Prosit 




- 81 - 


I26 1 



nr 


l2Cf 


nr 


IS 7 



PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 

Scate of kilooMien 


pCAJCCRJIN 


i.tfitVwh* 


1 % / • t 

^TABLAC, 1 


•ii r-lT'-A 

’BULACAN/^ 

'"V/wiaia 


bj C AP I z V 

|f v a'n a'y/ 

^ ILOILO r^V 


CantUan 


^UKIDNON 


'lUano 

Bay 


Ml 4pm! 


Ml 

Ihtutvm x 


i2Cf Longitude 


161 




10* 


S s 


