• h '■ 




CIVIL CENSORSHIP DETACHMENT 
OFFICE of AC of S, G-2 
ADVANCED ECHELON USAFFE 
APO 72 





14 November 1944 



SUBJECTS ON VfflICH GOVERNMENT OF PHILIPPINE CCMiONyffiALTH DESIRES CCMjENT SHEETS , 

Agents, collaborationists. 

Agricultural, fishing, hemp, copra and other industries. 

Assembly of groups. 

Atrocities by Japanese, 

Bank accounts of collaborationists, Japanese or Germans, 

Black markets. 

Bombing or strafing of civilians, bomb damage. 

Censorship, criticism of. 

Communication with the enemy. 

Communications in Japanese. 

Constabulary. 

Currency, dealings in prohibited; movements. 

Customs, violation of local religion or other customs by troops. 

Damage by troops. 

Demonstrations in liberated or enemy-occupied territory^ 

Economic conditions. 

Emergency currencies, reference to supplies hf. 

Enemy, relations with. 

Epidemics. 

Financial interests in Philippines by Japanese' or Geiman interests. 

Food, including criticism of food condition in island#, 

Guerilla activities - relations with other civilians. 

Health of population in Japanese occupied areas of common_wealth, appearance 
of deficiency diseases in children, eog, anaemia, neuritis, pellagra, 
rickets, xerophthalmia; reaction to Public Health service program. 

Hospitals, particularly treatment of patients in occupied territory, 

condition of equipment, supplies or shortage of drugs and other necessities. 
Hostility to Commonwealth or U, So 
Infiltration of enemy commercial interests, 

Intemees, refugees and repatriates. 

Labor conditions, including recruitment of civilians as army employees. 

Law violations, local. 

Loot or looting, thefts by Japanese, 

Loyalty of individuals, comments on. 

Mails, routes in occupied areas or complaints on postal service. 

Morale of civilian population in; liberated and occupied areas, morale of 
Filipino troops. 

Narcotics, evidence of distribution by Japanese or traffic in. 

Philippine occupation, comments on. 

Political parties, new. 

Prices, particularly evasion of ceiling prices of supplies provided by U.S; 



blank market dealings in any supplies 

- 1 - 




J 

V 



Proclamations^ reaction to» 

Pro-Japanese or pro-German sympathy* 

Propaganda, reaction to* 

Puppet government, references to. 

Race cooperation or friction* 

^tioiung, evasions ofj favarable or adverse comment 
ixeconstruction plans, comment on* 

comments on method and results* 

Schools, Japanese methods in* 

Snuggling* 

TeleCconmnmications, condition of. 

Transportation in occupied areas* 

Transfer of assets. 

War Cabinet, comment on. 

Welfare, including comment on puericulture. 



4 



- 2 - 



