74th Congress, 2d Session 


House Document No. 400 


COMPILATION OF DOCUMENTS RELATING 
)to THE INAUGURATION OF THE GOVERN- 
MENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF 
THE PHILIPPINES 


COMMUNICATION 

FROM 

THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES 

TRANSMITTING 

A COMPILATION OF DOCUMENTS RELATING TO THE 
INAUGURATION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 


January 27, 1936. — Referred to the Committee on Insular Affairs 
and ordered to be printed 


UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 
WASHINGTON : 1936 

★ 2-7-30 






r 




1 




CONTENTS 


Page 


Concurrent Resolution of the Philippine Legislature accepting the Ty dings- 

McDuffie Act 1 

Act 4125 of the Philippine Legislature providing for the election and 

holding of the Constitutional Convention 2 

Constitution of the Philippines: 

(a) The President’s certification 24 

(b) The President’s Message to Congress 24 

(c) The President’s public statement 24 

Proclamation 784 by the Governor General calling special session of the 

Legislature to provide for the submission of the Constitution to the 

Filipino people 25 

Act 4200 of the Philippine Legislature providing for the submission of the 

Constitution to the people at an election 26 

Proclamation 810 by the Governor General calling special session of the 
Legislature to canvass the returns of the constitutional ratification and 

to provide for the election of officers 29 

Concurrent Resolution 20 of the Philippine Legislature certifying the 

ratification of the Constitution 30' 

Proclamation 816 by the Governor General fixing the date for election of 

officers 31 

Act 4203 of the Philippine Legislature providing for the holding of the first 

election of officers of the Commonwealth Government 32 

Resolution of the Philippine Legislature announcing the result of the 

election 38 

Certification by the Governor General of the Philippine Islands of the 

election of officers 39 

Proclamation 860 by the Governor General calling special session of the 
Legislature to provide for the inauguration of the Commonwealth 

Government 42 

Speech of Hon. John N. Garner, Vice President of the United States, at 

joint session of the Philippine Legislature 42 

Speech of Hon. Joseph W. Byrns, Speaker of the House of Representa- 
tives, at joint session of the Philippine Legislature 46 

Message of Governor General Murphy to the Philippine Legislature in the 

final joint session 48 

INAUGURAL CEREMONIES 

Invocation 68 

Introduction of the Secretary of War 111111111 69 

Address of the Secretary of War I-IIIIIIIIII 69 

Proclamation of the President announcing the election of officers under 

the Constitution 65 

Proclamation of the Secretary of War announcing the change of govern- 
ment 73 

Inaugural address of the President of the Philippines II" ~_II 74 


m 


y 




LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL 


• The White House, January 27, 1986 . 
To the Congress of the United States: 

I transmit herewith, for the information of the Congress, a com- 
pilation of documents relating to the inauguration of the govern- 
ment of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, as provided in the 
Philippine Independence Act (Public, No. 127, 73d Cong.), ap- 
proved March 24, 1934. 

Inasmuch as it is believed that this compilation would be of great 
historical value and of general interest as a source of information, 
I concur in the recommendation of the Secretary of War that it 
be printed as a Congressional document. 

Franklin D. Roosevelt. 



LETTER OF SUBMITTAL 


War Department, 

W ashing ton, January 25, 1936 . 

The President, 

The White House. 

Dear Mr. President: I am enclosing herewith a compilation of 
documents relating to the inauguration of the government of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands as provided in the Philip- 
pine Independence Act (Public, No. 127, 73d Cong.), approved 
March 24, 1934. 

It is believed it would be in the interest of the public if these 
papers could be published in a single Congressional document. 
Such a publication would meet an extensive demand for information 
regarding this historical event, and would be of great historical 
value. 

It is accordingly recommended that they be transmitted to Con- 
gress with the recommendation that they be published as a Con- 
gressional document. 

Respectfully yours, 

Geo. H. Dern, 
Secretary of War. 


Enclosure : 

Compilation, as stated. 


VII 









2*0 
















COMPILATION OF DOCUMENTS RELATING TO THE INAUGURA- 
TION OF THE GOVERNMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF 
THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS AS PROVIDED IN THE PHILIPPINE 
INDEPENDENCE ACT 1 (PUBLIC, NO. 127, 73D. CONG.), AP- 
PROVED MARCH 24, 1934. 


Ninth Philippine Legislature 1 
Third Special Session J 

Concurrent Resolution Accepting Public Act Numbered One 
Hundred Twenty-seven of the Congress of the United States, 
Commonly Known as the Tydings-McDuffle Act, and Express- 
ing the Gratitude of the Philippine Legislature and the 
Filipino People to the President and Congress of the United 
States and the American People. 

Whereas, the Seventy -third Congress of the United States of 
America has enacted Public Act Numbered One hundred twenty- 
seven, entitled “An Act to provide for the complete independence of 
the Philippine Islands, to provide for the adoption of a constitution 
and a form of government for the Philippine Islands, and for other 
purposes,” and commonly known as the Tydings-Mcl)uffie Law ; 

Whereas, section seventeen of the aforesaid Act requires the 
acceptance thereof by concurrent resolution of the Philippine Legis- 
lature or by a convention called for the purpose of jiassing upon 
that law before the same shall take effect; 

Whereas, although the Philippine Legislature believes that cer- 
tain provisions of said Act need further consideration, the said 
Legislature deems it its duty to accept the proffer of independence 
thus made by the Government of the United States ; 

(a) Because the Filipino people cannot, consistent with their 
national 'dignity and love of freedom, decline to accept the inde- 
pendence that the said Act grants ; 

(&) And because the President of the United States in his message 
to Congress on March two, nineteen hundred and thirty-four, rec- 
ommending the enactment of said law, stated : “I do not believe that 
other provisions of the original law need be changed at this time. 
Where imperfections or inequalities exist, I am confident that they 
can be corrected after proper hearing and in fairness to both peo- 
ples” ; — a statement which gives to the Filipino people reasonable 
assurances of further hearing and due consideration of their views ; 
now, therefore, be it 

Resolved by the Senate , the Bouse of Representatives of the 
Philippines concumna , That Public Act Numbered One hundred 
twenty-seven of the Seventy-third Congress of the United States, 

73d on * wa s'^a^ r 24° C 13 94? dependence Act (Public, No. 127, 

1 


2 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


entitled “An Act to provide for the complete independence of the 
Philippine Islands, to provide for the adoption of a constitution and 
a form of government for the Philippine Islands, and for other pur- 
poses, 55 commonly known as the Tydings-McDuffie Law, be, and is 
hereby accepted by the Philippine Legislature in accordance with 
the provisions of section seventeen thereof; 

Resolved , further , That the Philippine Legislature, in its own be- 
half and in behalf of the Filipino people, express, and does hereby 
exx^ress, its ax^reciation and everlasting gratitude to the President 
and the Congress of the United States and the American peoxde. 

Adopted in joint session, May 1, 1934. 

(Signed) MANUEL L. QUEZON, 

President of the Senate. 

QUINTIN PAREDES, 

Speaker of the House of Representatives. 

TVe hereby certify that the foregoing Concurrent Resolution was 
adopted py the Senate and House of Rexoresentatives of the Philip- 
pines m joint session on May 1 1934. 

(Signed) FERMIN S. TORRALBA, 

Secretary of the Senate. 

JULIAN La O, 

Acting Secretary of the House of Representatives. 

(Official Seal: Philippine Senate and House of Representatives.) 


^ IN ™ Philippine Legislature! t T opoo 

Third Special Session j H * No ‘ 3638 

[No. 4125] 

An Act to Provide for the Election and Holding of the Con- 
stitutional Convention Authorized by the Act of the Congress 
of the United States of March Twenty-Fourth, Nineteen 
Hundred and Thirty-Four, Appropriate Funds Therefor, and 
for Other Purposes. 

Beit enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
m Le V klatur e assembled and by the authority of the 

ELECTION OF DELEGATES FOR THE CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION 

a ? E Sr TI0 ‘7 L T*> 6 Constitutional Convention authorized by Public 
Act Numbered One hundred and twenty-seven of the Seventy -third 
Congress of the United States, approved March twenty-fourth, nine- 
teen hundred and thirty-four entitled “An Act to provide for the 
adoption ofr"^ 6 0f ^ Philippine Islands, to provide for the 
nine £ a co \ lstlt »tion and form of government for the Philip- 
h&Sd and’ t and t or other purposes,” shall be composed of two 
and two elective delegates distributed at the ratio of two 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


3 


delegates for each representative district, except in the special prov- 
inces of Mindanao and Sulu which shall each have two delegates, 
and except in the Mountain Province which shall have two delegates 
for each subprovince thereof and two delegates for the City of 
Baguio. 

Sec. 2. The office of delegate shall be honorary and shall be com- 
patible with any other public office not subject to the civil service 
rules. 

Sec. 3. No person shall be eligible for delegate who has not the 
qualifications required by existing law for eligibility for repre- 
sentative. 

Sec. 4. The election of delegates shall be held on June twenty- 
sixth, nineteen hundred and thirty-four,** in accordance with the 
provisions of the Election Law governing special elections for rep- 
resentative, except as herein otherwise provided. For good reasons, 
the Governor-General may postpone the election to a date not later 
than July sixteenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-four, in which 
case the Constitutional Convention shall be held on the thirtieth 
of the same month and year, at eleven o’clock in the morning. 

Sec. 5. The delegates shall be elected as follows : 

(a) The delegates of the elective representative districts and 
those of Nueva Vizcaya, Baguio, Agusan, Davao, and Zamboanga 
shall be elected by a plurality of the votes of the qualified electors 
registered in the list of voters of the general election of nineteen 
hundred and thirty-four in the respective districts or provinces, 
as the case may be. The voters of Tagudin, Cervantes, Anga i, 
San Emilio, Concepcion, Sigay, Suyo, Alilem, and Sugpon, ol 
the Province of Ilocos Sur, shall vote at the election of delegates 
of the second district of said province, and the voters of 1 ll g°> 
Burgos, San Gabriel, Santol, and Sodipen, of the Province of Fa 
Union, shall vote at the election of delegates of the first 
of the latter province. No new voters shall be admitted at tnis 

election ; and . ~ , . 

(&) The delegates of the Mountain Province, Bukidnon, CotaDato, 
Lanao, and Sulu shall be elected by secret ballot and by a plurality 
of the votes of the members present at a meeting to Qe held m then 
respective localities at nine o’clock in the morning of the day of the 
election of delegates, by the presidents, vice-presidents, and councilors 
of the municipalities and municipal districts, and the respective 
municipal secretary shall certify to the result of the balloting and 
the provincial board shall act as provincial board of canvassers. 

Sec. G. The certificates of candidacy of the candidates for delegate 
shall be filed at least ten days before the election by the candidates 
themselves or by ten or more electors of the district or province in 
which they are* to be elected, and need not contain any statement 
regarding their political affiliation. 

Sec. 7. The election inspectors and poll clerks shall be paid a per 
diem of three pesos for each day of service in carrying out the 
election herein provided for. 

Sec. 8. The Secretary of the Interior shall prescribe the forms for 
the official ballots which shall be numbered but shall not have any 
coupons nor any printing on the back; the types of ballot boxes 
which shall not require more than two padlocks each the keys wliere- 


* Postponed to July 10 by Governor General’s Proclamation No. 704. 


4 DOCUMENTS DELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 

of shall during the election be in the keeping of inspectors of oppos- 
ing parties and shall after the election be surrendered to the clerk 
of the Court of First Instance and the provincial commander of the 
Constabulary; the forms for the statements of the results of the 
election, and the forms for the telegraphic transmission of the results. 
The statements and official telegrams relative to the results of the 
election shall be received and transmitted by the Bureau of Posts 
without delay and free of charge, and shall be given the preference 
over other matter. 


MEETING OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION 

Sec. 9. The Constitutional Convention shall meet in the Session 
Hall of the House of Representatives on July fourth, nineteen 
hundred and thirty-four, at eleven o’clock in the morning. A 
majority of its members shall constitute a quorum to do business 
but a smaller number may meet, adjourn from day to day, and* 
compel the attendance of absent members. The Convention shall be 
the sole judge of the elections, returns, and qualifications of its mem- 
bers; it may organize and adopt such rules as it may see fit, punish 
its members for disorderly behavior, and, with the concurrence of 
two-thirds, expel them. 

Sec. 10. The laws relative to the parliamentary immunity of the 
members of the Legislature and the protection of the sessions of the 
same and its committees against disturbance and molestation and 
the penalties provided for the violation of said laws shall be a V>y>li 
cable to the members of the Constitutional Convention and to t,h 
sessions of the same and of its committees. ne 

Sec. 11. The Secretaries of the Houses of the Legislature shall 
place at the disposal of the Constitutional Convention such perso 
nel, premises and furniture thereof as can, in their judgment h 
spared without detriment to the public service, without cost refn i 
or additional pay. ’ uncl 

apfropriation of funds 

Sec. 12. The sum of five hundred thousand pesos, or so mn(1 u 
thereof as may be necessary, is hereby appropriated out of 
general funds not otherwise appropriated, (a) for the payment r 
the expenses of the election, subject to the approval of the Secret 01 
of the Interior; (b) for the expenses of fitting the session hall? 
the House of Representatives and the necessary rooms for the n • °r 
the Constitutional Convention; and (e) for the payment 0 f ° . 

diems to the members of the Convention not receiving govern m^t 
salary in any other capacity at the rate of five pesos for each da 
session of said Convention actually attended by them ; for th J ° 
penses of going to and returning from the sessions of ’the Convef" 
tion, to the same extent to which such expenses are allowed to m 
bers of the House of Representatives, and for other incidental p* 
penses of the Convention, subject to the approval of the rim 
or acting chairman of the Convention. ‘ 1 

DATE OF TAKING EFFECT 

Sec. 13. This Act shall take effect on its approval. 

Approved, May 26, 1934. 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 5 

The election of delegates to the Constitutional Convention was held 
on July 10, 1934; the Convention convened in Manila on July 30, 
1934, and completed the task of drafting a Constitution on February 
8, 1935. A committee of members of the Constitutional Convention 
came to the United States to present the Constitution to the Presi- 
dent, and on March 23, 1935, it was certified by the President as con- 
forming substantially with the provisions of the Independence Act. 


Constitution of the Philippines Adopted by the Philippine 

Constitutional Convention at the City of Manila, Philippine 

Islands, on r rnE Eighth Day of February, Nineteen Hundred 

and Thirty-Five 

CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION, MANILA 

Hon. Claro M. Recto, President. 

Hon. Ruperto Montinola, First Vice-President. 

Hon. Teodora Sandiko, Second Vice-President. 

N. Pimentel, Secretary. 

Constitution of the Philippines 

Hie Filipino people, imploring the aid of Divine Providence, in 
order to establish a government that shall embody their ideals, con- 
serve and develop the patrimony of the nation, promote the general 
welfare, and secure to themselves and their posterity the blessings 
of independence under a regime of justice, liberty, and democracy, 
do ordain and promulgate this Constitution. 

ARTICLE I. THE NATIONAL TERRITORY 

Section 1 . The Philippines comprises all the territory ceded to 
the United States by the treaty of Paris concluded between the 
United States and Spain on the tenth day of December, eighteen 
hundred and ninety-eight, the limits of which are set forth in Article 
III of said treaty, together with all the islands embraced in the 
treaty concluded at Washington, between the United States and 
Spain on the seventh day of November, nineteen hundred, and in 
the treaty concluded between the United States and Great Britain 
on the second day of January, nineteen hundred and thirty, and all 
territory over which the present Government of the Philippine 
Islands exercises jurisdiction. 

ARTICLE II. DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES 

Section 1. The Philippines is a republican state. Sovereignty 
resides in the people and all government authority emanates from 
them. ” 

Sec. 2. The defense of the State is a prime duty of government, 
and in the fulfillment of this duty all citizens may be required by 
law to render personal military or civil service. 

Sec. 3. The Philippines renounces war as an instrument of 
national policy, and adopts the generally accepted principles of 
international law as a part of the law of the Nation. 


6 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


Sec. 4. The natural right and duty of parents in the rearing of 
the youth for civic efficiency should receive the aid and support of 
the Government. 

Sec. 5. The promotion of social justice to insure the well-being 
and economic security of all the people should be the concern of 
the State. 


ARTICLE III. BILL OF RIGHTS 

Section 1. (1) No person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or 
property without due process of law, nor shall any person be denied 
the equal protection of the laws. 

(2) Private property shall not be taken for public use without 
just compensation. 

(3) The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses 
papers, and effects against unreasonable searches and seizures shall 
not be violated, and no warrants shall issue but upon probable 
cause, to be determined by the judge after examination under oath 
or affirmation of the complainant and the witnesses he mav produce 
and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons 
or things to be seized. 

(4) The liberty of abode and of changing the same within the 
limits prescribed by law shall not be impaired. 

(5) The privacy of communication and correspondence shall be 
inviolable except upon lawful order of the court or when public 
safety and order require otherwise. 

(6) The right to form associations or societies for purposes not 
contrary to law shall not be abridged. 

(7) No law shall be made respecting an establishment of relio-Jon 
or prohibiting the free exercise thereof, and the free exercise^and* 
enjoyment of religious profession and worship, without discrimina- 
tion or preference, shall forever be allowed. No religious test shall 
be required for the exercise of civil or political rights. 

(8) No law shall be passed abridging the freedom of speech or 
of the press, or the right of the people peaceably to assemble and 
petition the Government for redress of grievances. 

(9) No law granting a title, of nobility shall be enacted, and no 
person holding any office of profit or trust shall, without the consent 
of the National Assembly, accept any present, emolument, office or 
title of any kind whatever from any foreign state. 

(10) No law impairing the obligation of contracts shall be passed 

(11) No ex post facto law or bill of attainder shall be enacted 

(12) No person shall be imprisoned for debt or nonpayment of a 
poll tax. 

(13) No involuntary servitude in any form shall exist except as 

a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been dnlv 
convicted. . 7 

(14) The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be sus- 
pended except in cases of invasion, insurrection, or rebellion when 
the public safety requires it, in any of which events the same may be 
suspended wherever during such period the necessity for such sus- 
pension shall exist. 


DOCUMENTS DELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 7 

(15) No person shall be held to answer for a criminal offense 
without due process of law. 

(16) All persons shall before conviction be bailable by sufficient 
sureties, except those charged with capital offenses when evidence 
of guilt is strong. Excessive bail shall not be required. 

(17) In all criminal prosecutions the accused shall be presumed 
to be innocent until the contra^ is proved, and shall enjoy the 
right to be heard by himself and counsel, to be informed of the 
nature and cause of the accusation against him, to have a speedy 
and public trial, to meet the witnesses face to face, and to have com- 
pulsory process to secure the attendance of witnesses in his behalf. 

(18) No person shall be compelled to be a witness against himself. 

(19) Excessive fines shall not be imposed, nor cruel and unusual 
punishment inflicted. 

(20) No person shall be twice put in jeopardy of punishment for 
the same offense. If an act is punished by a law and an ordinance, 
conviction or acquittal under either shall constitute a bar to another 
prosecution for the same act. 

(21) Free access to the courts shall not be denied to any person 
by reason of poverty. 


ARTICLE IV. CITIZENSHIP 

Section 1 . The following are citizens of the Philippines : 

(1) Those who are citizens of the Philippine Islands at the time 
of the adoption of this Constitution. 

(2) Those born in the Philippine Islands of foreign parents who, 
before the adoption^of this Constitution, had been elected to public 
office in the Philippine Islands. 

(3) Those whose fathers are citizens of the Philippines. 

(4) Those whose mothers are citizens of the Philippines and, upon 
reaching the age of majority, elect Philippine citizenship. 

(5) Those who are naturalized in accordance with law. 

Sec. 2. Philippine citizenship may be lost or reacquired in the 
manner provided by law. 

article v. suffrage 

Section 1. Suffrage may be exercised by male citizens of the 
Philippines not otherwise disqualified by law, who are twenty-one 
years of age or over and are able to read and write, and who shall 
have resided in the Philippines for one year and in the municipality 
wherein they propose to vote for at least six months preceding the 
election. The National Assembly shall extend the right of suffrage 
to women, if in a plebiscite which shall be held for that purpose 
within two years after the adoption of this Constitution, not less 
than three hundred thousand women possessing the necessary quali- 
fications shall vote affirmatively on the question. 

article vi. legislative department 

Section 1 . The Legislative power shall be vested in a National 
Assembly. The Members of the National Assembly shall not exceed 


8 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


one hundred and twenty, shall be chosen every three years, and shall 
be apportioned among the several provinces as nearly as may be 
according to the number of their respective inhabitants, but each 
province shall have at least one Member. The National Assembly 
shall by law make an apportionment within three years after the 
return of every enumeration, and not otherwise. Until such appor- 
tionment shall have been made, the National Assembly shall consist 
of ninety-eight Members, of whom eighty-seven shall be elected by 
the representative districts as now provided by law; and three by 
the Mountain Province, and one by each of the other eight existing 
special provinces. The Members of the National Assembly in the 
provinces of Sulu, Lanao, and Cotabato shall be chosen as may be 
determined by law ; in all other provinces they shall be elected by the 
qualified voters therein. 

Seo. 2. No person shall be a Member of the National Assembly 
unless he has been five years a citizen of the Philippines, is at least 
thirty years of age, and, at the time of his election, a qualified 
elector, and a resident of the province in which he is chosen for not 
less than one year immediately prior to his election. 

Sec. 3. (1) In case of vacancy in the National Assembly a special 
election may be called in the corresponding district, in the manner 
prescribed by law, but the Member thus elected shall serve only f or 
the unexpired term. J 

(2) Elections for the National Assembly shall be held on the daf p 

fixed by law. ' es 

(3) The National Assembly shall convene in regular session on • 
every year, on the second Monday of the month immediately foj 6 
lowing that on which the election of its Members was held uni 

a different date is fixed by law. The National Assembly n lav G ^ s 
called in special session at any time by the President to cons ] 
general legislation or only such subjects as he may desio- nate C i$ r 
special session shall continue longer than thirty days and*no rem i7°. 
session longer than one hundred days, exclusive of Sundays toUlar 

(4) The National Assembly shall choose its Speaker, a secret nr 

a sergeant-at-arms, and such other officers as may be required a* 
majority of all the Members shall constitute a quorum to do h • 
ness, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day and ° US1 ’ 
compel the attendance of absent Members, in such manner and 
such penalties as the National Assembly may provide * Uncier 

(5) The National Assembly may determine the rules of its 

ceedings, punish its Members for disorderly behavior, and with 
concurrence of two-thirds, expel a Member. It shall keep a Trm , 
of its proceedings, and from time to time publish the same evr^T 
ing such parts as may in its judgment require secrecy; and Wp 1 
and nays on any question shall, at the request of one-fifth J-T 
Members present, be entered in the Journal 1 lts 

Seo. 4. There shall be an Electoral Commission composed nf 
three Justices of the Supreme Court designated by the Chief T 1 
tice, and of six Members chosen by the National Assembly thrl’ 
of whom shall be nominated by the party having the largest m,m! 
ber of votes,' and three by the party having the second laro-c^t 
number of votes therein. I he senior Justice in the Commission 


DOCUMENTS DELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


9 


shall be its Chairman. The Electoral Commission shall be the sole 
judge of all contests relating to the election, returns, and qualifica- 
tions of the Members of the National Assembly. 

Seo. 5. The Members of the National Assembly shall, unless 
otherwise provided by law, receive an annual compensation of five 
thousand pesos each including per diems and other emoluments or 
allowances and exclusive only of travelling expenses to and from 
their respective districts when attending sessions of the National 
Assembly. No increase in said compensation shall take effect until 
after the expiration of the full term of the Members of the Na- 
tional Assembly elected subsequent to the approval of such increase. 
The Speaker of the National Assembly shall receive an annual com- 
pensation of sixteen thousand pesos until otherwise provided by law. 

Sec. 6. The Members of the National Assembly shall in all cases 
except treason, felony, and breach of the peace, be privileged from 
arrest during their attendance at the sessions of the National As- 
sembly, and in going to and returning from the same; and for any 
speech or debate therein, they shall not be questioned in any other 
place. 

Sec. 7. The National Assembly shall elect from among its Mem- 
bers, on the basis of proportional representation of the political 
parties therein, a Commission on Appointments and a Commission 
on Impeachment, each to consist of twenty-one members. These 
Commissions shall be constituted within thirty days after the Na- 
tional Assembly shall have been organized with the election of its 
Speaker, and shall meet only while the National Assembly is in 
session, at the call of their respective Chairmen or a majority of 
their members, to discharge such powers and functions as are herein 
conferred upon them. 

Sec. 8. (1) No Member of the National Assembly may hold any 
other office or emplo^yment in the Government without forfeiting his 
seat, nor shall any such Member during the time for which he was 
elected, be appointed to any civil office which may have been created 
or the emoluments whereof shall have been increased while he was 
a Member of the National Assembly. 

(2) No Member of the National Assembly shall directly or indi- 
rectly be financially interested in any contract with the Govern- 
ment or any subdivision or instrumentality thereof, or in any 
franchise or special privilege granted by the National Assembly dur- 
ing his term of office ; nor shall any such Member appear as counsel 
before the Electoral Commission ‘ or any court in any civil case 
wherein the Government or any subdivision or instrumentality 
thereof is the adverse party, or collect any fee for his appearance in 
any administrative proceedings or in any criminal case wherein an 
officer or employee of the Government is accused of an offense com • 
mitted in relation to his office. No Member of the Commission on 
Appointments of the National Assembly shall appear as counsel 
before any court inferior to the Supreme Court. 

Sec. 9. (1) The President shall submit within fifteen days of the 
opening of each regular session of the National Assembly a budget 
of receipts and expenditures, which shall be the basis of the general 
appropriation bill. The National Assembly may not increase the 

H. Doc. 400, 74-2 2 


10 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


appropriations recommended by the President for the operation of 
the Government as specified in the Budget, except the appropriations 
for the National Assembly and the Judicial Department. The form 
of the Budget and the information that it should contain shall be 
prescribed by law. 

(2) No provision or enactment shall be embraced in the General 
appropriation, unless it relates specifically to some particular*appro- 
pnation in the bill; and any such provision or enactment shall be 
limited in its operation to such appropriation. 

Sec. 10. The heads of departments upon their own initiative or 
upon the request of the National Assembly may appear before and 
be heard by the National Assembly on any matter pertaining to their 
departments, unless the public interest shall require otherwise and 
the President shall so state in writing. 

Sec. 11. (1) Every bill which shall have passed the National 
Assembly shall, before it becomes a law, be presented to the Presi- 
dent. If he approve the same, he shall sign it; but if not, lie shall 
return it with his objections to the National Assembly, which shall 
enter the objections at large on its Journal and proceed to recon- 
sider it. If, after such reconsideration, two-thirds of all the Mem- 
bers of the National Assembly shall agree to pass the bill, it shall 
become a law. In all such cases the votes of the National Assemblv 
shall be determined by yeas and nays , and the names of the Membe • 
voting for and against shall be entered on the Journal. If anv biV? 
shall not be ‘returned by the President as herein provided withh 
twenty days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented 
to him, the same shall become a law in like manner as if he had 
signed it, unless the National Assembly by adjournment prevent its 
return, in which case it shall become a law unless vetoed by tl 
President within thirty days after adjournment. 

(2) The President shall have the power to veto any particula 
item or items of an appropriation bill, but the veto shall not aff 0 f 
the item or items to which he does not object. When a provisio 
of an appropriation bill affects one or more items of the same t] 
President cannot veto the provision without at the same time vet G 
ing the particular item or items to which it relates. The item n "• 
items objected to shall not take effect except in the manner heret 1 
fore provided as to bills returned to the National Assembly with °l 
the approval of the President. If the veto refers to a bill or ° Ut 
item of an appropriation bill which appropriates a sum in ex ai ^ 
of ten per centum of the total amount voted in the approprint* eSS 
bill for the general expenses of the Government for the preced* 011 
year, or if it should refer to a bill authorizing an increase of fu® 
public debt, the same shall not become a law unless approved i 
three-fourths of all the Members of the National Assembly Dy 

(3) The President shall have the power to veto any separate it 

or items in a revenue or tariff bill, and the item or items vetoed sh G1 ll 
not take effect except in the manner provided as to bills vetoed l 
the President. Q 

Sec. 12. (1) No bill which may be enacted into law shall embrace 
more than one subject which shall be expressed in the title of the 

Li 1 1 ’ kue 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


11 


(2) No bill shall be passed or become a law unless it shall have 
been printed and copies thereof in its final form furnished the 
Members at least three calendar days prior to its passage by the 
National Assembly, except when the President shall have certified to 
the necessity of its immediate enactment. Upon the last reading 
of a bill no amendment thereof shall be allowed, and the question 
upon its final passage shall be taken immediately thereafter, and the 
yeas and nays entered on the Journal. 

Sec. 13. (1) All money collected on any tax levied for a special 
purpose shall be treated as a special fund and paid out for such 
purpose only. If the purpose for which a special fund was cieated 
has been fulfilled or abandoned, the balance, if any, shall be trans- 
ferred to the general funds of the Government. 

(2) No money shall be paid out of the Treasury except m pur- 
suance of an appropriation made by law. . , 

(3) No public money or property shall ever be appropriated, 
applied, or used, directly or indirectly, for the use, benefit, or support 
of any sect, church, denomination, sectarian institution, or system 
of religion, or for the use, benefit, or support of any priest, preacher, 
minister, or other religious teacher or dignitary as such, except 
when such priest, preacher, minister, or dignitary is assigned to 
the armed forces or to any penal institution, orphanage, or 


leprosarium. 

Sec. 14. (1) The rule of taxation shall be uniform. 

(2) The National Assembly may by law authorize the President, 

subject to such limitations and restrictions as it may impose, to nx 
within specified limits, tariff rates, import or export quotas, ana 
tonnage and wharfage dues. . 

(3) Cemeteries, churches, and parsonages or convents appuiic- 
nant thereto, and all lands, buildings, and improvements used exclu- 
sively for religious, charitable, or educational purposes sha 

empt from taxation. ... n t 

Sec. 15. The National Assembly shall, with the concunence 
two-thirds of all its Members, have the sole power to declare war. 

Sec. 16. In times of war or other national emergency, the National 
Assembly may by law authorize the President, for a limited period 
and subject to such restrictions as it may prescribe, to promulgate 
rules and regulations to carry out a declared national policy. 


ARTICLE VII. EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT 

Section 1. The Executive power shall be vested in a President of 

the Philippines. _ . 

Sec. 2. The President shall hold his office during a term ot six 
vears and together with the Vice-President chosen for the same 
term,’ shall be elected by direct vote of the people. The election re- 
turns for President and Vice-President, duly certified by the board 
of canvassers of each province, shall be transmitted to the National 
Assembly. Upon receipt of such returns the National Assembly 
shall forthwith, in public session, count the votes, and proclaim the 
persons elected President and Vice-President. The persons respec- 
tively having the highest number of votes for President and V lce- 
President shall be declared elected, but in case two or more shall have 
an equal and the highest number of votes for either office, the Na- 


12 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


tionah Assembly shall, by a majority vote of all its Members, elect 
one of said persons as President or Vice-President 

Sec 3. No person may be elected to the office of President or Vice- 
^ 1 V. P*’ unless he be a natural-born citizen of the Philippines a 
quahhed^oter, forty years of age or over, and has been a resident 

ekctioiT llliPPm6S ±0r at leaSt ten y ears immediately preceding the 

Sec. 4. No person elected President may be reelected for the fol- 
lowing term, nor shall the Vice-President or any other person who 
may have succeeded to the office of President asVrefn provided it 

Son * fo, ' e the election > b » cli S ibI ® *> <J» office <5 President 
Sec. 5. Elections for President and Vice-President shall be held 

at noon on the thirtieth day of December fonowi’n^e^iSSin^f 

i^zt ct,on ’ and tb ® *■» * tbS^isssKU 

President, tile President-elect sha U ' h iwtf 'dwt V® t6 p m 4® 
elect shall become President Tf „ p vi U Vice-President- 
chosen before the time fixed for 1 1 i iasiden t shall not have been 
President-elect shall have failed t oi ' hls term > or lf the 

shall act as President ultil a T&S the Vice-President 

National Assembly may bv law n S f al V have qualified, and the 
a President-elect nor a Vi™ -P*°Y lc t e f °r t le case wherein neither 
declaring who shall then act a"« TWn 6Ct have 9 ua hfied, 

one who is to act shall be i iesiden t? 01> the manner in which 

ingly until a President or vl!p? al } d ® U( ; h Person shall act accord 
Sec. 8. Before he on/1, ^ce-Presiderxt shall have qualified. 


Sec. 8. Before lie enter on tlip resideat sha11 have qualified, 
shall take the following oatl/o? affitanation^ ^ ° ffice ’ the Presid ent 
“I do solemnly swear fnmffi. 

fulfill my duties as President U nf faithful ly and conscientiously 

Constitution, execute its laws dn iir Philippines, preserve and defend its 
to the service of the Nation ’ ^ i , stlce to ' every man, and consecrate myself 
sentence will be omitted.) aeJ P me G°d- (In case of affirmation, last 

Sec. 9. In the event nf +u„ 

of his death, resignation n r - em oyal of the President from office or 
duties of the said office the iiY , to discharge the. powers and 
and the National Assemblv fM 11 devolve on the Vice-President, 
removal, death, resignation „ - U ,-Y- hiw provide for the case of 
Vice-President, declaring^bV lnabl hty, both of the President and 
and such officer shall act’ accord in?? 081 ’I-^ , th ° n act as President, 
or a President shall be elected ^ y ’ llrdd the disability be removed, 

a compensation to be en 4certained e b an 1 ° fficial Y esid ence and receive 
increased nor diminished durhio- tl by la ^ ] vhlch shall be neither 
been elected, and he sha 1 no t fj Z per J?, d • fo1 ; which he shall have 
Silent from the Crovernmen^Tnv^it" th *V P ^° d “X <*h er 
mentalities. Until the National Assemblv ? ^hchvisions cn mstru- 
the President shall receive an annual /l 1 provide otherwise, 
pesos. The Vice-President, w" “ » ° a 

ss-w^VovS r.rr t,on ° f «*» p— ss 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 13 

Sec. 11. (1) The President shall have control of all the executive 
departments, bureaus, or offices, exercise general supervision over 
all local governments as may be provided by law, and take care that 
the laws be faithfully executed. 

(2) The President shall be commander-in-chief of all armed 
forces of the Philippines and, whenever it becomes necessary, he 
may call out such armed forces to prevent or suppress lawless vio- 
lence, invasion, insurrection, or rebellion. In case of invasion, in- 
surrection, or rebellion, or imminent danger thereof, when the public 
safety requires it, he may suspend the privileges of the writ of 
habeas cw'pus, or place the Philippines or any part thereof under 
martial law. 

(3) The President shall nominate and with the consent of the 
Commission on Appointments of the National Assembly, shall ap- 
point the heads of the executive departments and bureaus, officers 
of the Army from the rank of colonel, of the Navy and air forces 
from the rank of captain or commander, and all other officers of 
the Government whose appointments are not herein otherwise pro- 
vided for, and those whom he may be authorized by law to appoint; 
but the National Assembly may by law vest the appointment of 
inferior officers, in the President alone, in the courts, or in the heads 
of departments. 

(4) The President shall have the power to make appointments 
during the recess of the National Assembly, but such appointments 
shall be effective only until disapproval by the Commission on Ap- 
pointments or until the next adjournment of the National Assembly. 

(5) The President shall from time to time give to the National 
Assembly information of the state of the Nation, and recommend 
to its consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and 
expedient. 

(6) The President shall have the power to grant reprieves, com- 
mutations, and pardons, and remit fines and forfeitures, after con- 
viction, for all offenses, except in cases of impeachment, upon sue * 
conditions and with such restrictions and limitations as he may 
deem proper to impose. He shall have the power to grant amnesty 
with the concurrence of the National Assembly. 

(7) The President shall have the power, with the concurrence ox 
a majority of all the Members of the National Assembly, to make 
treaties, and with the consent of the Commission on Appointments, 
he shall appoint ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls. 
He shall receive ambassadors and other ministers duly accredited 
to the Government of the Philippines. 

Sec. 12. (1) The executive departments of the present Govern- 
ment of the Philippine Islands shall continue as now authorized by 
law until the National Assembly shall provide otherwise. 

(2) The heads of departments and chiefs of bureaus or offices and 
their assistants shall not, during their continuance in office, engage 
in the practice of any profession, or intervene, directly or indirectly, 
in the management or control of any private enterprise which in any 
way may be affected by the functions of their office; nor shall they, 
directly or indirectly, be financially interested in any contract with 
the Government, or any subdivision or instrumentality thereof. 

(3) The President may appoint the Vice-President as a member 
of his cabinet and also as head of an executive department. 


14 DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


ARTICLE VIH. JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Section 1 . The Judicial power shall be vested in one Supreme 
Court and in such inferior courts as may be established by law. 

Sec. 2. The National Assembly shall have the power to define, 
prescribe, and apportion the jurisdiction of the various courts, but 
may not deprive the Supreme Court of its original jurisdiction over 
cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls, 
nor of its jurisdiction to review, revise, reverse, modify, or affirm on 
appeal, certiorari, or writ of error, as the law or the rules of court 
may provide, final judgments and decrees of inferior courts in — 

(1) All cases in which the constitutionality or validity of any 
treaty, law, ordnance, or executive order or regulation is in 
question. 

(2) All cases involving the legality of any tax, impost, assess- 
ment, or toll, or any penalty imposed in relation thereto. 

•(3) All cases in which the jurisdiction of any trial court is in 
issue. 

(4) All criminal cases in which the penalty imposed is death or 
life imprisonment. 

(5) All cases in which an error or question of law is involved. 

Sec. 3. Until the National Assembly shall provide otherwise 

the Supreme Court shall have such original and appellate jurisdic- 
tion as may be possessed and exercised by the Supreme Court of 
the Philippine Islands at the time of the adoption of this Con- 
stitution. The original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court shall 
include all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers and 
consuls. 

Sec. 4. The Supreme Court shall be composed of a Chief Justice 
and ten Associate Justices and may sit either en banc or in two divi- 
sions unless otherwise provided by law. 

Sec. 5. The members of the Supreme Court and all judo- es of 
inferior courts shall be appointed by the President with the consent 
of the Commission on Appointments of the National Assembly 

Sec. 6 . No person may be appointed member of the Supreme 
Court unless he has been five years a citizen of the Philippines is at 
least forty years of age, and has for ten years or more been a i ud 
of a court of record or engaged in the practice of law in the Philip- 
pines. 1 

Sec. 7. No judge appointed for a particular district shall be desio- 
nated or transferred to another district without the approval 0 f tf" 
Supreme Court. The National Assembly shall by law determine 
residence of judges of inferior courts. ‘ 110 

Sec. 8 . The National Assembly shall prescribe the qualifications 
of judges of inferior courts, but no person may be appointed iudo-e 
of any such courts unless he is a citizen of the Philippines and has 
been admitted to the practice of law in the Philippines. 

Sec. 9. The members of the Supreme Court and all judges of 
inferior courts shall hold office during good behavior, until theyreuch 
the age of seventy years, or become incapacitated to dis&larg e the 
duties of their office. They shall receive such compensation as may 
be fixed by law, which shall not be diminished during their con- 
tinuance in office. Until the National Assembly shall provide other- 


DOCUMENTS DELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 15 

wise, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court shall receive an annual 
compensation of sixteen thousand pesos, and each Associate Justice, 
fifteen thousand pesos. 

Sec. 10. All cases involving the constitutionality of a treaty or law 
shall be heard and decided by the Supreme Court en banc , and no 
treaty or law may be declared unconstitutional without the concur- 
rence of two-thirds of all the members of the Court. 

Sec. 11. The conclusions of the Supreme Court in any case sub- 
mitted to it for decision shall be reached in consultation before the 
case is assigned to a Justice for the writing of the opinion of the 
Court. Any Justice dissenting from a decision shall state the reasons 
for his dissent. 

Sec. 12. No decision shall be rendered by any court of record with- 
out expressing therein clearly and distinctly the facts and the law 
on which it is based. 

Sec. 13 . The Supreme Court shall have the power to promulgate 
rules concerning pleading, practice, and procedure in all courts, alid 
the admission to the practice of law. Said rules shall be uniform for 
all courts of the same grade and shall not diminish, increase, or 
modify substantive rights. The existing laws on pleading, practice, 
and procedure are hereby repealed as statutes, and are declared Rules 
of Courts, subject to the power of the Supreme Court to alter and 
modify the same. The National Assembly shall have the power to 
repeal, alter, or supplement the rules concerning pleading, practice, 
and procedure, and the admission to the practice of law in the 
Philippines. 

ARTICLE IX. IMPEACHMENT 

Section 1 . The President, the Vice-President, the Justices of the 
Supreme Court, and the Auditor General, shall be removed from 
office on impeachment for, and conviction of, culpable violation o 
the Constitution, treason, bribery, or other high crimes. 

Sec. 2. The Commission on Impeachment of the National Assem- ^ 
bly, by a vote of two-thirds of its Members, shall have the sole powei 

of impeachment. , , „ 

Sec. 3. The National Assembly shall have the sole power to try 
all impeachments. When sitting for that purpose the Members shall 
be on oath or affirmation. When the President of the Philippines is 
on trial, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court shall preside. ISo 
person shall be convicted without the concurrence of three-fourths 
of all the Members who do not belong to the Commission on 
Impeachment. . . 

Sec. 4. Judgment in cases of impeachment shall not extend furtner 
than to removal from office and disqualification to hold and enjoy 
any office of honor, trust, or profit under the Government of the 
Philippines, but the party convicted shall nevertheless be liable and 
subject to prosecution, trial, and punishment, according to law. 

article x. general auditing office 

Section 1 . There shall be a General Auditing Office under the di- 
rection and control of an Auditor General, who shall hold office for a 
term of ten years and may not be reappointed. The Auditor Gen- 


16 DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 

eral shall be appointed by the President with the consent of the Com- 
mission on Appointments, and shall receive an annual compensation 
to be fixed by law which shall not be diminished during his continu- 
ance in office. Until the National Assembly shall provide otherwise, 
the Auditor General shall receive an annual compensation of twelve 
thousand pesos. 

Sec. 2. The Auditor General shall examine, audit, and settle all 
accounts pertaining to the revenues and receipts from whatever 
source, including trust funds derived from bond issues ; and audit, in 
accordance with law and administrative regulations, all expenditures 
of funds or property pertaining to or held in trust by the Govern- 
ment or the provinces or municipalities thereof. He shall keep the 
general accounts of the Government and preserve the vouchers per- 
taining thereto. It shall be the duty of the Auditor General to bring 
to the attention of the proper administrative officer expenditures of 
funds or property which, in his opinion, are irregular, unnecessary, 
excessive, or extravagant. He shall also perform such other func- 
tions as may be prescribed by law. 

Sec. 3. The decisions of the Auditor General shall be rendered 
within the time fixed by law, and the same may be appealed to the 
President whose action shall be final. When the aggrieved party is 
a private person or entity, an appeal from the decision of the Audi- 
tor General may be taken directly to a court of record in the manner 
provided by law. 

Sec. 4. The Auditor General shall submit to the President and the 
National Assembly an annual report covering the financial condition 
and operations of the Government, and such other reports as may be 
required. 

ARTICLE XI. CIVIL SERVICE 

Section 1. A Civil Service embracing all branches and subdivisions 
of the Government shall be provided by law. Appointments in the 
Civil Service, except as to those which are policy-determining, pri- 
marily confidential or highly technical in nature, shall be made only 
according to merit and fitness, to be determined as far as practicable 
by competitive examination. 

Sec. 2. Officers and employees in the Civil Service, including 
members of the armed forces, shall not engage directly or indirectly 
in partisan political activities or take part in any election except to 
vote. 

Sec. 3. No officer or employee of the Government shall receive ad- 
ditional or double compensation unless specifically authorized by 
law. 

Sec. 4. No officer or employee m the Civil Service shall be removed 
or suspended except for cause as provided by law. 

ARTICLE XII. CONSERVATION AND UTILIZATION OF NATURAL RESOURCES 

Section 1 . All agricultural, timber, and mineral lands of the pub- 
lic domain, waters, minerals, coal, petroleum, and other mineral oils, 
nil forces of potential energy, and other natural resources of the 
Philippines belong to the State, and their disposition, exploitation, 
development, or utilization shall be limited to citizens of the Philip- 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 17 


pines, or to corporations or associations at least sixty per centum 
of the capital of which is owned by such citizens, subject to any 
existing right, grant, lease, or concession at the time of the inaugura- 
tion of the Government established under this Constitution. Nat- 
ural resources, with the exception of public agricultural land, shall 
not be alienated, and no license, concession, or lease for the exploita- 
tion, development, or utilization of any of the natural resources shall 
be granted for a period exceeding twenty-five years, renewable for 
another twenty-five years, except as to water rights for irrigation, 
water supply, fisheries, or industrial uses other than the develop- 
ment of water power, in which cases beneficial use may be the meas- 
ure and the limit of the grant. 

Sec. 2. No private corporation or association may acquire, lease, 
or hoid public agricultural lands in excess of one thousand and 
twenty-four hectares, nor may any individual acquire such lands by 
purchase in excess of one hundred and forty-four hectares, or by 
lease in excess of one thousand and twenty-four hectares, or by 
homestead in excess of twenty-four hectares. Lands adapted to 
grazing, not exceeding two thousand hectares, may be leased to an 
individual, private corporation, or association. 

Sec. 3. The National Assembly may determine by law the size of 
private agricultural land which individuals, corporations, or associa- 
tions may acquire and hold, subject to rights existing prior to the 
enactment of such law. . « 

Sec. 4. The National Assembly may authorize, upon payment of 
just compensation, the expropriation of lands to be subdivided into 
small lots and conveyed at cost to individuals. b . 

Sec. 5. Save in cases of hereditary succession, no private agricul- 
tural land shall be transferred or assigned except to individuals, 
corporations^ or associations qualified to acquire or hold lands of the 
public domain in the Philippines. 

Sec. G. The State may, in the interest of national welfare and 
defense, establish and operate industries and means of transportation 
and communication, and, upon payment of just compensation, trans- 
fer to public ownership utilities and other private enterprises to be 
operated by the Government. 

article xiii. general provisions 

Section 1. The flag of the Philippines shall be red, white, and 
blue, with a sun and three stars, as consecrated and honored by the 
people and recognized by law. ^ 

Sec. 2. All public officers and members of the armed foices - 
take an oath to support and defend the Constitution. 

Sec. 3. The National Assembly shall take steps toward 
velopment and adoption of a common national language 
one of the existing native languages. Until otherwise P * J 

law, English and Spanish shall continue as official langin ^ ‘ • 

Sec. 4. The State shall promote scientific research and wenmm. 
Arts and letters shall be under its patronage. The ex ^ 
to writings and inventions shall be secured to authors ancl m ois 
for a limited period. _ ,, 

Sec. 5. All educational institutions shall be under the supervision 
of and subject to regulation by the State. The Government shall 


18 DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 

establish and maintain a complete and adequate system of public 
education, and shall provide at least free public primary instruction, 
and citizenship training to adult citizens. All schools shall aim 
to develop moral character, personal discipline, civic conscience, and 
vocational efficiency, and to teach the duties of citizenship. Optional 
religious instruction shall be maintained in the public schools as 
now authorized by law. Universities established by the State shall 
enjoy academic freedom. The State shall create scholarships in arts, 
science, and letters for specially gifted citizens. 

Sec. 6. The State shall afford protection to labor, especially to 
working women and minors, and shall regulate the relations between 
landowner and tenant, and between labor and capital in industry 
and in agriculture. The State may provide for compulsory arbi- 
tration. 

Sec. 7. The National Assembly shall not, except by general law, 
provide for the formation, organization, or regulation of private 
corporations, unless such corporations are owned or controlled by 
the Government or any subdivision or instrumentality thereof. 

Sec. 8. No franchise, certificate, or any other form of authorization 
for the operation of a public utility shall be granted except to citi- 
zens of the Philippines or to corporations or other entities organized 
under the laws of the Philippines, sixty per centum of the capital 
of which is owned by citizens of the Philippines, nor shall such fran- 
chise, certificate, or authorization be exclusive in character or for a 
longer period than fifty years. No franchise or right shall be granted 
to any individual, firm, or corporation, except under the condition 
that it shall be subject to amendment, alteration, or repeal by the 
National Assembly when the public interest so requires. 

Sec. 9. The Government shall organize and maintain a national 
police force to preserve public order and enforce the law. 

Sec. 10. This Constitution shall be officially promulgated in Eng- 
lish and Spanish, but in case of conflict the English text shall prevail 

article xiv. amendments 

Section 1 . The National Assembly, by a vote of three-fourths of 
all its Members, may propose amendments to this Constitution or 
call a convention for that purpose. Such amendments shall be valid 
as part of this Constitution when approved by a majority of the 
votes cast at an election at which the amendments are submittpd * 
the people for their ratification. 0 

article xv. transitory provisions 

Section 1. The first election of the officers provided in this Con 
stitution and the inauguration of the Government of the Common" 
wealth of the Philippines shall take place as provided in Public Act 
Numbered One hundred and twenty-seven of the Congress of the 
United States, approved March twenty-four, nineteen hundred and 
thirty-four. 

Sec. 2. All laws of the Philippine Islands shall continue in force 
until the inauguration of the Commonwealth of the Philippj nes * 
thereafter, such laws shall remain operative, unless inconsistent with 
this Constitution, until amended, altered, modified, or repealed by 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 19 

the National Assembly, and all references in such laws to the Gov- 
ernment or officials of the Philippine Islands shall be construed, in so 
far as applicable, to refer to the Government and corresponding 
officials under this Constitution. 

Sec. 3. All courts existing at the time of the adoption of this Con- 
stitution shall continue and exercise their jurisdiction, until other- 
wise provided by law in accordance with this Constitution, and all 
cases, civil and criminal, pending in said courts, shall be heard, tried, 
and determined under the laws then in force. 

Sec. 4. All officers and employees in the existing Government of 
the Philippine Islands shall continue in office until the National 
Assembly shall provide otherwise, but all officers whose appointments 
are by this Constitution vested in the President shall vacate their 
respective offices upon the appointment and qualification of their 
successors, if such appointment is made within a period of one ) r ear 
from the date of the inauguration of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines. 

Sec. 5. The Members of the National Assembly for the Mountain 
Province shall be elected as may be provided by law. The voters 
of municipalities and municipal districts formerly belonging to a 
special province and now forming part of regular provinces shall 
vote in the election for Members of the National Assembly in such 
districts as maj^ be provided by law. 

Sec. G. The provisions of this Constitution, except those con- 
tained in this article and in Article V, and those which refer to the 
election and qualifications of officers to be elected under this Con- 
stitution, shall not take effect until the inauguration of the Com- 
monwealth of the Philippines. 

ARTICLE XVI. SPECIAL PROVISIONS EFFECTIVE UPON THE PROCLAMATION 
OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Section 1 . Upon the proclamation of the President of the United 
States recognizing the independence of the Philippines — _ 

(1) The property rights of the United States and the Philippines 
shall be promptly adjusted and settled, and all existing property 
rights of citizens or corporations of the United States shall be 
acknowledged, respected, and safeguarded to the same extent as 
property rights of citizens of the Philippines. 

(2) The officials elected and serving under this Constitution shall 
be constitutional officers of the free and independent government of 
the Philippines and qualified to function in all respects as if elected 
directly under such Government, and shall serve their full terms of 
office as prescribed in this Constitution. 

(3) The debts and liabilities of the Philippines, its provinces, 
cities, municipalities, and instrumentalities, which shall be valid 
and subsisting at the time of the final and complete withdrawal of 
the sovereignty of the United States, shall be assumed by the free 
and independent government of the Philippines; and where bonds 
have been issued under authority of an Act of Congress of the 
United States by the Philippine Islands, or any province, city, or 
municipality therein, the Government of the Philippines will make 
adequate provision for the necessary funds for the payment of inter- 


20 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


est and principal, and such obligations shall be a first lien on all 
taxes collected. 

( 4 ) The Government of the Philippines will assume all continu- 
ing obligations of the United States under the Treaty of Peace 
with Spain ceding the Philippine Islands to the United States. 

( 5 ) the Government of the Philippines will embody the fore- 
going provisions of this article (except subsection (2) ) in a treaty 
with the United States. 

ARTICLE XVII. THE COMMONWEALTH AND THE REPUBLIC 

Section 1. The government established by this Constitution shall 
be known as the Commonwealth of the Philippines. Upon the final 
and complete withdrawal of the sovereignty of the United States 

of Ph^ppme independence, the Common- 
iTc ofthe Phmppmes mCS ShaU »e k»™ as the Repub- 

ORDINANCE APPENDED TO THE CONSTITUTION 

Section 1. Notwithstanding the provisions of the foregoing Con- 

Lei” ntv’of th^TNiif h l of* 1 and complete withdrawal of tlie sov- 
ereignty of the United States over the Philippines- 

United i^ates.* 26118 ° f ^ Phlll PP ines sha11 owe allegiance to the 

Phdi > p^nS y shSrL C l the Gov ? rnment °f the Commonwealth of the 
S EtS before entering upon the discharge of his duties, 

tfiat Ifi" an i° ath ° f *°% 6 ’ declai 'ing, among other things’, 
maintain f ■'il, an< l accepts the supreme authority of and will 
maintain true fjiith and allegiance to the United States. 

and n 0 A inhihhnm eratl ° r ° f reh S lons . sentiment shall be secured 
person or nron^rt^ reIl g 1 pus organization shall be molested in 
1 7 ° n f? 00 ?* of religious belief or mode of worship. 

andLS? 0Wned by the Umted States, cemeteries, churches, 
ini P and ?mf, eS ° r Con r ents a PP urt enant thereto, and all lands, build- 
education ni l 5rovements used exclusively for religious, charitable, or 
(51 Tmrlfr'T^ 63 sl u a11 exem Pt from taxation, 
shall bo upon thr Jons between the Philippines and the United States 
be?ed One P hunrTr^ S ! P * reSC1 ? bed in scct ion six of Public Act Num- 
States approved A-rff ' f twenty-seven of the Congress of the United 
four PP ed March twenty-four, nineteen hundred and thirty- 

brinch^ha^not exceed o?ESSft ail< fi h Sub ? rd ^ ate 

crrpQ <3 ni thp TTm'^ri i s n , ow or hereafter fixed by the Con- 

countries without th® approval of tKiin c ®^ ra ^d in foreign 
(7) The debts, liabifitiSK United States, 

ment of the Philippine Islands its p.oJin^! P.«sent Govern- 

SUbsisti T at the tim^of 51 ^^ 1 adoption 

of the Pdd by ^ G ° Vernmenfc 

Qhnf? Tlie Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines 

nnn 1 !u ab lSh i a f d an .adequate system of public schools, 

primarily conducted m the English language. 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 21 


(9) Acts affecting currency, coinage, imports, exports, and immi- 
gration shall not become law until approved by the President of the 
United States. 

(10) Foreign affairs shall be under the direct supervision and 
control of the United States. 

(11) All acts passed by the National Assembly of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines shall be reported to the Congress of the 

United States. . 

(12) The Philippines recognizes the right of the United States 
to expropriate property for public uses, to maintain military and 
other reservations and armed forces in the Philippines, and, upon 
order of the President of the United States, to call into the service 
of such armed forces all military forces organized by the Govern- 
ment of the Commonwealth of the Philippines. 

(13) The decisions of the courts of the Philippines shall be sub- 
ject to review by the Supreme Court of the United States as now 
provided by law, and such review shall also extend to all cases 
involving the Constitution of the Philippines. 

(14) Appeals from decisions of the Auditor General may be 
taken to the President of the United States. 

(15) The United States may, by Presidential proclamation, exer- 

cise the right to intervene for the preservation of the Government 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines and for the maintenance 
of the Government as provided in the Constitution thereof, and 
for the protection of life, property, and individual liberty and for 
the discharge of Government obligations under and in accordance 
with the provisions of the Constitution. . . 

(16) The authority of the United States High Commissioner 
to the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines as 
provided in Public Act Numbered One hundred and twenty-seven 
of the Congress of the United States approved March twenty - our, 
nineteen hundred and thirty-four, is hereby recognized. 

(17) Citizens and corporations of the United States shall enjo} 
in the Commonwealth of the Philippines all the civil lights o le 
citizens and corporations, respectively, thereof. 

(18) Every duly adopted amendment to the Constitution oi the 

Philippines shall be submitted to the President of the United States 
for approval. If the President approve the amendment or it the 
President fail to disapprove such amendment within six months 
from the time of its submission, the amendment shall take effect 
as a part of such Constitution. n . . 

(19) The President of the United States shall have authority to 
suspend the taking effect of or the operation of any law, contract, 
or executive order of the Government of the Commonwealth ox the 
Philippines, which in his judgment will result in a failure of the 
Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to fulfill its 
contracts, or to meet its bonded indebtedness and interest thereon 
or to provide for its sinking funds, or which seems likely to impair 
the reserves for the protection of the currency of the Philippines, 
or which in his judgment will violate international obligations of 
the United States. 

(20) The President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines shall 
make an annual report to the President and Congress of the United 


22 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE 


GOVERNMENT 


^ « ,, v -i „ n i; nT1 c of the Government of the 

States of the proceedings and operations oi 

Commonwealth of the Philippines and shall make such other 
ports as the President or Congress may request. 

1 Sec 2- Pending the final “and complete wxthdrawal of the sov- 
ereignty of the United States over the Philippines l there shall be a 
Resident Commissioner of the Philippines to the United States who 
shall be appointed by the President of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines with the consent of the Commission ± ppointments. 
The powers and duties of the Resident Commissioner ^h all be as 
provided in section seven, paragraph five of Public Numbered 
One hundred and twenty-seven of the Congress oi the United States, 
approved March twenty-four, nineteen hundred and thirty-four, 
together witli such other duties as the National Assembly may de- 
termine. The qualifications, compensation, and expenses of the 
Resident Commissioner shall be fixed by law. ^ 

Sec. 3. All other provisions of Public Act Numbered One hundred 
and twenty-seven of the Congress of the United States, approved 
March twenty-four, nineteen hundred and thirty-tour, applicable to 
the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines are hereby 
made a part of this Ordinance as if such provisions were expressly 
inserted herein. 

I hereby certify that this Constitution was adopted by the Con- 
stitutional Convention on February 8, 1935. 

Claro M. Recto, 

President , Constitutional Convention 
N. Pimentel, 

Secretary , Constitutional Convention 

Delegates to the Constitutional Convention 


Attest : 


Delegate 
from — 

Jesus Paredes Abra. 

Julio Borbon Bo. 

Apolonio D. Curato— Agusan. 

Delfin Gumban Do. 

Arabrosio Calleja Albay. 

Braulio Leonardo Do. 

Francisco Munoz — Do. 

Jose D. Conejero Do. 

Jesus B. Surban Do. 

Jose Bon to Do. 

Saturnino Benito Do. 

Toribio P. Perez Do. 

Angel Salazar Antique. 

Ramon Maza Do. 

Miguel Cuaderno Bataan. 

Roman A. Cruz Do. 

Juan C. Castillejos — Batanes. 
Mariano A. Lizardo— Do. 

Antonio Barrion Batangas. 

Claro M. Recto Do. 

Conrado V. Sanchez-- Do. 

Eusebio M. Lopez Do. 

Eusebio Orense Do. 

Jose P. Laurel Do. 


Delegate 
from — 

Anastaclo A. Mumar_. Bohol. 
Bernardino luting — Do. 

Gaudencio Cloribel — Do. 

Jose A. Clarin Do. 

Perfecto Balili Do. 

Teofilo G. Buslon Do. 

J. G. Sanvictores Bukidnon. 

Pedro D. Melendez — Do. 

Antonio Villarama — Bulacan. 

Manuel L. Sevilla Do. 

Nicolas Buendia Do. 

Teodoro Sandiko Do. 

Antonio Guzman Cagayan. 

Marcelo Adduru Do. 

Miguel P. Pio Do. 

Vicente Nepomuceno- Do. 

Baldomero M. Lapak Cam. Norte. 
Wenceslao Vinzons — Do. 

Exequiel S. Grageda Camarines Sur. 

Gabriel Prieto Do. 

Manuel Abella Do. 

Severo A. Cea Do. 

Antonio Arcenas Capiz. 

Cornelio Villareal™. Do. 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 23 


Delegates to the Constitutional Convention — Continued 


Delegate 
from — 

Jose Altavas Capiz. 

Jose M. Hontiveros— Do. 

Manuel Roxas Do. 

Teodulfo Suner Do. 

Demetrio B. Encar- 

nacion Cavite. 

Vicente J. Francisco- Do. 

Antonio Mansueto Cebu. 

Antonio B. Ybanez Do. 

Casiano S. Carin Do. 

Cesar Kintanar Do. 

Dionisio Niere Do. 

Felismeno V. Rivera— Do. 

Fi lemon Sotto Do. 

Hilario C. Moncado_. Do. 

Jesus M. Cuenco Do. 

Juanito T. Maramara Do. 

Manuel C. Briones — Do. 

Nicolas Rafols Do. 

Paulino Gullas Do. 

Vicente Sotto Do. 

Blali Sinsuat Cotabato. 

Menandang Piang Do. 

Pantaleon A. Pelayo_. Davao. 

Rafael S. Castillo Do. 

Francisco Ventura— Ilocos Norte. 

Irineo Ranjo Do. 

Maximino G. Bueno_ Do. 

Servando Castro Do. 

Artemio Abaya Ilocos Sur. 

Del fin Joven Do. 

Elpidio Quirino Do. 

V. Singson Encarna- 

cion Do. 

Tranquilino J. Divi- 

nagracia Iloilo. 

Fermin G. Caram Do. 

Jose Aldeguer Do. 

Jose C. Ganzon Do. 

Mariano Ezpeleta Do. 

Matias P. Yusay Do. 

Ruperto Montinola — Do. 

Sofronio M. Flores— Do. 

Tiburcio Lutero Do. 

Tomas Confesor Do. 

Elias Ocampo Isabela. 

Miguel B. Binag Do. 

Conrado Benitez Laguna. 

Domingo T. Zavalla— Do. 

.Tose M. Delgado Do. 

Pedro Guevara Do. 

Alauya Alonto— Lanao. 

Tomas L. Cabili Do. 

Alejandro de Guz- 
man — — — . La Union. 

Camilo Osias De- 

Enrique C. Sobre- 

pen a Do. 

Pio Ancheta Do. 

Atilano R. Cinco Leyte. 

Francisco Zialcita Do. 

Mamerto Ribo Do. 


Delegate 
from — 

Manuel Martinez Leyte. 

Mateo Canonoy Do. 

Norberto Romualdez_. Do. 
Quiremon Alkuino — Do. 

Rafael Martinez Do. 

Ruperto Kapunan Do. 

Victorino N. Salazar. Do. 

Gregorio Perfecto Manila. 

Manuel Lim Do. 

Rafael Palma Do. 

Salvador Araneta Do. 

Ricardo Nepomuceno. Marinduque. 
Timoteo P. Ricoher- 

moso Do. 

Jose Zurbito Masbate. 

Cipriano Liboro Mindoro. 

Juan Navarro Do. 

Alberto Crespillo Mountain. 

Bias Villamor Do. 

Clement Irving Do. 

Felipe E. Jose Do. 

Jose Fakangan Do. 

Jose Lorenzana Do. 

Jose M. Carino Do. 

Jose Velasco Do. 

Max Duguiang Do. 

Miguel Gumangan Do. 

Saturnino Moldero — Do. 

Sixto A. Gaerlan Do. 

Bonifacio Ysip Nueva Ecija. 

Eugenio Baltao Do. 

Exequiel M. Santos— Do. 

Florentino Ckioco Do. 

Demetrio Quirino Nueva Vizcaya. 

Leon Cabarroguis Do. 

Jose Ozamis Misamis Oc. 

Paulino Conol Do. 

Jose Artadi Misamis Or. 

Manuel C. Fernan- 
dez Do. 

Enrique J. C. Mon- 

tilla Negros Oc. 

Jesus Y. Perez Do. 

Jose C. Locsin Do. 

Juan L. Ledesma Do. 

Pedro C. Hernaez Do. 

Simplicio Lizares_ — Do. 

Hermenegildo Villa- 

nueva Negros Or. 

Jose E. Romero Do. 

Sergio G. Jumawan— Do. 

Vicente Lopez Do. 

EvaristoR. Sandoval- Palawan. 
Gaudencio E. Abordo- Do. 

David J. Gutierrez— Pampanga. 

F. B. Bautista Do. 

Jose Alejandrino Do. 

Juan B. Nepomuceno- Do. 

Anacleto B. Ramos— Pangasman. 
Bernabe de Guzman Do. 

Enrique Braganza Do. 

Eusebio V. Sison Do. 


24 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


Jose L. de Guzman 

Jose M. Aruego 

Juan Ventenilla 

Leoncio R. Esliza 

Numeriano Tanopo 

Pascual M. Beltran__ 

Castor P. Cruz 

Domingo T. Dikit 

Juan Ortega 

Mariano Mel entires 

Antonio J. Montesa_. 

Manuel F. Albero 

Agripino P. Escareal. 

Felipe Abrigo 

Juan L. Bocar 

Luciano Ortiz 

Pedro It. Arteclie_. 

Serafin Marabut Do. 

Adolfo Grafilo Sorsogon. 


To The Governor General of 


Delegate 
from — 

Francisco Arellano__. Sorsogon. 

Jose S. Reyes Do. 

Mario Guarina Do. 

Aroian Tulawi Sulu. 

Jose Montano Do. 

Clementino V. Diez__ Surigao. 

Montano A. Ortiz Do. 

Alejandro A. Galang. Tarlac. 

Enrique Maglanoc Do. 

Gregorio M. Banaga_ Do! 

Luis Morales Do. 

Fabian R. Millar Tayabas. 

Godofredo Reyes Do. 

Romualdo Enriquez__ Do. 

Vicente Salumbides— Do. 

Alejo Labrador Zambales. 

Potenciano Lesaca Do. 

Florentino Saguin Zamboanga. 

Pablo Lorenzo Do. 


The White House, 

March 23, 1935 . 
the Philippine Islands : 


The foregoing proposed Constitution of the Philippines, with ordi- 
nance appended thereto, having been submitted to me on March 18 
1935, I certify that the same conforms substantially with the provi- 
sions of the Act of Congress approved March 24, 1934 (U S Stat L 
vol. 48, pp. 456-465). *’ 

Franklin D. Roosevelt. 


Delegates to the Constitutional Convention — Continued 

Delegate 
from — 

Pangasinan. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Rizal. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Romblon. 

Do. 

Samar. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 


president’s message to congress 

To the Congress of the United States: 

I have pleasure in informing the Congress that I have today certi- 
fied to the Governor General of the Philippine Islands that the 
proposed constitution of the Philippines as adopted by the Philip- 
pine Constitutional Convention conforms substantially with the 
provisions of the act of Congress approved March 24, 1934 (U S 
Stat. 1 j., vol. 48, pp. 456-46o). ’ v 

rr Txr TT ,, 7 Franklin D. Roosevelt. 

The White House, March 23, 1935. 


The President’s public statement read as follows : 

I am happy to state that the Constitution submitted to me on holm if of 
the Phiiippine Constitutional Convention for certification under the §d in 4- 
McDuffie Independence Act conforms with the provisions of the act ' ngS 
The members of the Convention are congratulated on the satisfactory com 
pletion of a task so important and significant in the life of their neon^ 

In the event of ratification of this Constitution, the authority gVanted to 
the Commonwealth Government will permit exercise by the Filipino people 
off f- oneral control, subject only to a few important exceptions, of their local 

During the period of the Commonwealth there will remain with the Gov- 
ernment of the United States authority commensurate with and necessary 
ioi oi appropriate to the ultimate responsibilities of sovereignty. 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


25 


Animated solely by feelings of cordiality, sympathy and loyalty, the people 
of the United States and the people of the Philippine Islands have been con- 
ducting together a great experiment, and during the period of the Common- 
wealth Government this experiment will continue until the ultimate with- 
drawal of United States sovereignty and the establishment of complete 
independence. 


By the Governor-General op tiie Philippine Islands — a 
Proclamation 

No. 784 

Whereas, on the twenty-third day of March, nineteen hundred 
and thirty-five, the President of the United States certified that the 
Constitution of the Philippines, with the ordinance appended thereto, 
as adopted b}' the Constitutional Convention called and held under 
the authority of the Act of Congress of March fourth, nineteen 
hundred and thirty-four, being Act One hundred twenty-seven of 
the Seventy-third Congress of the United States, conforms substan- 
tially with the provisions of said Act ; 

Whereas, the said Act of Congress requires that within four months 
after such certification, the said Constitution, with the ordinance 
appended thereto, shall be submitted to the people of the Philip- 
pine Islands for their ratification or rejection at an election to be 
held on such date and in such manner as the Philippine Legislature 
may prescribed ; 

Whereas, it is considered advisabie that a special session of the 
Philippine Legislature be called for the purpose of passing the 
necessary legislation for the submission of said Constitution, with 
the ordinance appended thereto, to the people of the Philippine 
Islands; 

Now, therefore, I, Joseph Ralston Hayden, Acting Governor- 
General of the Philippine Islands, by virtue of the authority vested 
in me by section eighteen of the Act of Congress of August twenty- 
ninth, nineteen hundred and sixteen, hereby call the Philippine Leg- 
islature in special session to be held in the City of Manila for a 
period of three days beginning on Monda}', the eighth day of April, 
nineteen hundred and thirty-five, to consider the enactment of the 
legislation necessary for the submission of the Constitution of the 
Philippines, with the ordinance appended thereto, to the people of 
the Philippine Islands, at an election to be held for said purpose, 
and for the canvassing and certification of the results thereof. 

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the 
seal of the Government of the Philippine Islands to be affixed. 

Done at the City of Baguio, this twenty-seventh day of March, 
in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-five. 

[seal] Joseph R. Hayden 

Actinq Governor-General 


H. Doc. 400, 74-2 3 


26 DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 

H. No. 1601 

[No. 4200] 


Tenth Philippine LegislatureI 
Special Session ] 


An Act to Submit to ti-ie Filipino People, for Ratification ok 
Rejection, the Constitution of the Philippines With tH e 
Ordinance Appended Thereto, to Appropriate Funds Tiierefoil 
and for Other Purposes. 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
Philippines in Legislature assembled and by the authority of th e 
same : 

Section 1 . The Constitution of the Philippines with the Ordi- 
nance appended thereto, approved by the Philippine Constitutional 
Convention on February eight, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, 
and pertified by the President of the United States on March twenty- 
three, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, to conform substantially 
with the provisions of the Act of Congress of March twenty-four, 
nineteen hundred and thirty-four (being Act Numbered One hun- 
dred twenty-seven of the Seventy-third Congress of the United 
States) is hereby submitted to the people of the Philippine Islands, 
for ratification or rejection, and for this purpose registered qualified 
voters shall vote either for the ratification or the rejection of said 
Constitution, with the Ordinance appended thereto, in an election 
to be held on Tuesday, May fourteen, nineteen hundred and thirty- 
five, in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 

C „ ' 1 TTirifL fVio Orrlirmnr»o onnnn J 



and a printed copy of said Constitution, with the Ordinance ap- 
pended thereto, shall be posted m a conspicuous place in each mu- 
nicipal and provincial government office building and in each polling 
place not later than the twenty-second day of April, nineteen 
hundred and thirty-five, and shall remain posted therein continually 
until after the termination of the election. At least ten copies of 
the Constitution with the Ordinance appended thereto, in English 
and in Spanish, shall be kept at each polling place available for 
examination by the qualified electors during election day. When- 
ever practicable, copies in the principal local dialects as may be 
determined by the Secretary of the Interior shall also be kept in 

each polling place. . ,, Lr»iriin«. 

Sec. 2. The provisions of the Election Law regarding t- ar ^ 
of special elections, insofar as they are not inconsistent here^^ 
hereby declared applicable to the election provided for branc j leg Qr 
The watchers shall be appointed by the political P artl ^’ vo t es j n t ] le 
fractions thereof, or political groups which have P OI th(? rate of two 
preceding general election in each municipality a of or political 
watchers for each such party, branch or fraction Law shall if 

group. Acts and omissions penalized by the ^ connection tho™ 
committed during the holding of this election 01 law 

with, be punished with the penalties prescribed 3 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


27 


Sec. 3. In specially organized provinces, whenever necessary, the 
provincial boards shall, under the supervision of the Secretary of the 
Interior, provide for the formation of election precincts in every 
municipality or municipal district, shall designate the proper polling 
places, and shall appoint election inspectors and poll clerks with 
their respective substitute. 

Sec. 4. The existing boards of election inspectors shall meet, for 
the registration of new voters and revision of the list of voters, for 
the purposes of this Act. on the twenty-second and twenty-third days 
of April, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, between the hours of 
eight in the morning and five in the afternoon. 

Sec. 5. All judicial proceedings for the inclusion or exclusion of 
electors shall be filed not later than the thirtieth day of April, nine- 
teen hundred and thirty-five, and shall be finally decided on or before 
the ninth day of May, nineteen hundred and thirty-five. The board 
of election inspectors shall hold its last meeting on May eleven, nine- 
teen hundred and thirty-five, for the purpose specified in section four 
hundred and thirty-nine of the Election Law. 

Sec. 6 . The ballots to be used in the election shall be printed in 
English and in Spanish and shall conform to the following form: 

OFFICIAL BALLOT 
Balota Oficial 

TIIE CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 

with the Ordinance appended thereto, approved by the Constitu- 
tional Convention on February 8, 1935, and certified bv the President 
of the United States on March 23, 1935, to conform substantially 
with the provisions of the Act of Congress of March 24, 1934, known 
as the Tydings-McDufTie Act (being Act No. 127 of the 73rd Con- 
gress of the United States), is submitted in this election to the People 
of the Philippine Islands, for ratification or rejection, by virtue of 
the provisions of section 4 of said Act, the pertinent portions of 
which read as follows: 

“After the President of the United States has certified that the Constitution 
conforms with the provisions of this Act, it shall he submitted to the People 
of the Philippine Islands for their ratification or rejection at an election to he 
held within four months after the date of such certification, on a date to be 
fixed by the Philippine Legislature, at which election the qualified voters of the 
Philippine Islands shall have an opportunity to vote directly for or against the 
proposed Constitution and Ordinances appended thereto, * * *. If a ma- 

jority of the votes cast shall he for the Constitution, such vote shall he deemed 
an expression of the will of the People of the Philippine Islands in favor 
of the Philippine independence, * * *. If n majority of the votes cast are 

against the Constitution, the existing Government of the Philippine Islands 
shall continue without regard to the provisions of this Act.” 

To vote for the ratification of the Constitution, with the Ordinance 
appended thereto, write the word .“YES” in the blank space after 
the question; to vote for the rejection thereof write the word “NO.” 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


28 


LA CON STTTUCION DE FILIPINAS 

con la Ordenanza adscrita a la niisma aprobada por la Asamblea 
Constituyente el 8 de febrero de 1935, y ce: tificada por el Presidente 
de los Estados Unidos en 23 de marzo de 1935 de hallarse sustancial- 
mente conforme con la Ley del Congreso de 24 de marzo de 1934. 
conocida por Ley Tydings-McDuffie (que es la Ley No. 127 del 73.° 
Congreso de los Estados Unidos), se somete en este plebiscito al 
Pueblo de las Islas Filipinas para su ratificacion o rechazamiento, 
por virtud de las disposiciones del articulo 4 de la citada Ley, cuyas 
partes pertinentes son del tenor siguiente: 

“DespuGs de habeij certificado el Presidente de los Estados Unidos que la 
Constitucion esta de acuerdo con las disposiciones de esta Ley, dicha constitution 
serli sometida al Pueblo de las Islas Filipinas para su ratificacion o recha- 
zamiento en un plebiscito que se efectuara dentro de los cuatro meses siguientes 
a la fecha de dicha certificaciCn. En diclio plebiscito, cuya feclia se senalaril 
por la Legislatura Filipina, los electores habilitados de las Islas Filipinas 
tendril n oportunidad de votar directamente en pro o en contra de la propuesta 
Constitucion y de las Ordenanzas adscritas a la misma, * * *. Si la mayorla 

de los votos emitidos fuese en pro de la Constitucion, dichos votos serfm consi- 
derados como expresiOn de la voluntad del Pueblo de las Islas Filipinas en 
favor de la independencia filipina, * * *. Si una mayorla de los votos 

emitidos fuese cQjitraria a la Constitucion, el actual Gobierno de las Islas 
Filipinas continual’^ no obstante las disposiciones de esta Ley.” 

Para votar por la ratificacion de la Constitucion, con la Ordenanza 
adscrita a la misma, escriba la palabra “Si” en el encasillado en 
bianco despues de la pregunta; para votar por el rechazamiento, 
escriba la palabra “NO.” 


Do you vote for the ratification of the Constitution 
of the Philippines, with the Ordinance appended 
thereto? 

£Votn Vd. en favor de la ratificacion de la Con- 
stitucion de Filipinas, con la Ordenanza adscrita a la 
misma? 


Sec. 7. The boards of inspectors shall prepare only four copies 
of the returns of the election in their respective polling places on a 
form to be prescribed by the Secretary of the Interior. One copy 
shall be deposited in the ballot box for the valid ballots and the 
three copies shall be delivered to the proper municipal treasurer, 
who shall immediately forward, by registered mail, one copy to 
the Secretary of the Senate, one copy to the Secretary of the House 
of Representatives and the other copy to the Secretary of the In- 
terior. The Bureau of Posts shall accept and transmit without 
delay and free of charge all returns of the election and any official 
report or telegram connected therewith. 

Sec. 8. Within thirty days after the election, the presiding officers 
of both Houses of the Philippine Legislature shall request the 
Governor-General to call the Legislature in special session for the 
purpose of canvassing the returns and certifying the result thereof 
to the Governor-General. Such certification shall include a state- 
ment of the votes cast, and a copy of said Constitution with the 
Ordinance appended thereto. 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 29 

Sec. 9. The sum of three hundred and fifty thousand pesos or so 
much thereof as may be necessary is hereby appropriated out of any 
funds in the Insular Treasury not otherwise appropriated for the 
payment, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, 
of the expenses incurred in connection with the holding of the elec- 
tion provided for in this Act, and for the expenses necessary for 
the printing, publication, posting and free distribution of five 
hundred thousand copies of the Constitution with the Ordinance 
appended thereto in English and in Spanish and, whenever prac- 
ticable, in the principal local dialects. Each election inspector 
and poll clerk shall receive two pesos for each day of actual service 
rendered by him. 

Sec. 10. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 

Approved, April 8, 1935. 


By the Governor-General of the Philippine Islands — A 

Proclamation 

No. 810 

Whereas, in pursuance of the Act of Congress, known as the 
Tydings-McDuffie Act, and Act Numbered Forty-two hundred of the 
Philippine Legislature, the Constitution of the Philippines, with the 
Ordinance appended thereto, was submitted to the registered quali- 
fied voters of the Philippine Islands for the ratification or rejection 
thereof, on the fourteenth day of May, nineteen hundred and thirty- 
five ; 

Whereas a formal request has been made by the presiding officers 
of both Houses of the Philippine Legislature that a special session 
of the present Legislature be called for the purpose of canvassing 
the returns and certifying the results of the election so held on May 
fourteenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-five; 

Whereas it is necessary to provide for the election of the officers of 
the Commonwealth provided for in the Constitution ; and 

Whereas the Tydings-McDuffie Act requires that the present Gov- 
ernment shall provide for the orderly transfer of its functions to 
the Commonwealth Government; 

Now, therefore, I, Joseph II. Hayden, Acting Governor-General 
of the Philippine Islands, by virtue of the authority vested in me 
by section eighteen of the Act of Congress of August twenty-ninth, 
nineteen hundred and sixteen, hereby call the Philippine Legislature 
in special session to be convened in the City of Manila on the twelfth 
day of June, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, to receive and canvass 
the returns and certify the results of the election held on May four- 
teenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-five; to enact necessary legisla- 
tion for the election of the officers of the Commonwealth Government 
as provided in the Constitution and for the determination of the 
results thereof; to provide for the orderly transfer of the functions 
of the present Government of the Philippine Islands to the Govern- 
ment of the Commonwealth and all matters appertaining thereto;, 
and to consider and enact other legislation. 


30 DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the 
seal of the Government of the Philippine Islands to be affixed. 

Done at the City of Manila, this fifth day of June, in the year of 
our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-five. 

[seal] Joseph E. Hayden 

Acting Governor- General. 


Tenth Philippine Legislature 
Second Special Session 

[Concurrent Eesolution No. 20] 

Concurrent Eesolution Ci-Rthtying to the Governor-General 

THE EaTIFICATION OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES, WITH 

the Ordinance Appended Thereto, by the People of the 

Philippine Islands. 

Whereas, in pursuance of section 4 of Public Act Numbered One 
hundred twenty-seven of the Seventy-third Congress of the United 
States, commonly known as the T y dings -M cDuffie Act, and Act 
Numbered Forty-two hundred of the Philippine Legislature en- 
titled i4 An Act to submit to the Filipino People, for ratification or 
rejection, the Constitution of the Philippines with the Ordinance 
appended thereto, to appropriate funds therefor, and for other pur- 
poses,” the Philippine Legislature has canvassed the returns of the 
election held on the 14th day of May ; 1035, for the purpose of sub- 
mitting the Constitution of the Philippines, with the Ordinance 
appended thereto, to the people of the Philippine Islands, and has 
found that one million two hundred thirteen thousand and forty-six 
(1,213,046) qualified electors have voted for the ratification of the 
said Constitution and forty-four thousand nine hundred and sixty- 
three (44,963) have voted for its rejection: Now, therefore, be it 
Resolved by the House of Representatives , the Philippine Senate 
concurring , To certify, as they hereby certify, to the Governor- 
General of the Philippine Islands, that the Constitution of the 
Philippines, with the Ordinance appended thereto, has been ratified 
by a majority of all the votes cast at the election held on Mav 14, 
1935; and 

Resolved , further , That the statement of the votes cast in said 
election duly certified by the Presiding Officers and hereto attached 
be, and the same hereby is, certified to the Governor-General of the 
Philippine Islands as a part of this Eesolution; and 

Resolved , finally , That the copy of the Constitution of the Philip- 
pines, with the Ordinance appended thereto, duly certified by the 
President and the Secretary of the Constitutional Convention and 
hereto attached be, and the same hereby is, certified as an official copy 
of the Constitution and Ordinance appended thereto that was sub- 
mitted to the people of the Philippine Islands, and ratified by them, 
at the said election. 

Adopted, June 12, 1935. 


IL Ct. E. 
No. 23 





DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 31 

By the Governor-General of the Philippine Islands — A 
Proclamation 

No. 816 

Whereas it has been certified to me by Concurrent Resolution 
Numbered. Twenty of the Philippine Legislature, adopted on June 
twelfth, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, and duly signed by the 
presiding officers and secretaries of the Senate and House of Repre- 
sentatives, that according to the returns of the election held on May 
fourteenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, pursuant to section 
four of Public Act Numbered One hundred twenty-seven of the 
Seventy-third Congress, entitled “An act to provide for the com- 
plete independence of the Philippine Islands, to provide for the 
adoption of a constitution and a form of government for the Philip- 
pine Islands, and for other purposes,” otherwise known as the 
Tydings-McDuffie Act, and as provided in Act Numbered Four 
thousand two hundred of the Philippine Legislature, for the ratifica- 
tion or rejection of the Constitution for the Commonwealth of the 
Philippine Islands and ordinance appended thereto adopted by the 
Constitutional Convention on February eighth, nineteen hundred 
and thirty-five, and approved by the President of the United States 
on March twenty-third, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, the said 
Constitution with the ordinance appended thereto was ratified by a 
majority of all the votes cast at the said election, and a statement of 
the votes cast in said election, duly certified, and a copy of the said 
Constitution and ordinance, duly certified b}^ the President and 
Secretary of the Constitutional Convention as an official copy 
thereof, have accompanied the said resolution of certification as 
provided by law; 

Now, therefore, I, Frank Murphy, Governor-General of the 
Philippine Islands, b y virtue of the authority vested in me by sec- 
tion four of the Act of Congress Numbered* One hundred twenty- 
seven, of March twenty-fourth, nineteen hundred and thirty-four, 
hereby call an election to be held on Tuesday, the seventeenth day 
of September, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, for the purpose of 
electing the following officers of the Government of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippine Islands provided for in the constitution 
thereof : 

A President, a vice-president, members of the National Assembly, 
of whom eighty-seven members shall be elected by the representative 
districts as now provided by law, three members by the Mountain 
Province, and one member by each of the other eight existing special 
provinces. 

For the purpose of enabling all voters to exercise the ri^ht of 
suffrage, Tuesday, the seventeenth day of September, nineteen hun- 
dred and thirty-five, is hereby declared a public holiday in the 
Philippine Islands. 

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the 
seal of the Government of the Philippine Islands to be affixed. 

Done at the City of Manila, this fourteenth day of June, in the 
year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-five. 

[seal] Frank Murphy 

Governor - General 


32 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


Tenth Philippine Legislature 1 
Second Session 


S. No. 137 


[No. 4203] 


An Act to Regulate the Holding of the First Election for 
President and Vice-President of the Philippines and Members 
of the National Assembly, to Appropriate Funds Therefor, and 
for Other Purposes. 

t 

Whereas, in accordance with section four of Act Numbered One 
hundred twenty-seven of the Seventy-third Congress of the United 
States, commonly known as Tydin^s-McDuffie Law, the Governor- 
General has issued a proclamation to the People of the Philippine 
Islands calling an election to be held on Tuesday, September seven- 
teen, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, for the purpose of electing the 
President and Vice-President, of the Philippines and the Members 
tion 6 ^ a ^ lcma Assembl y> provided for in the Philippine Constitu- 

. Whereas the existing Election Law does not contain any provi- 
sions for the election of said officers- 

\Y hereas the national political parties which contended during the 
last geneial election and which subsequently consolidated into two 
p:u ties, to wit, the 'Naqjfonalista Democratico Parti / and the Nacion- 
altsta Democrata I ro-Indepcndencia Party , agreed on June sixteen, 
nineteen uundied and thirty-fi V e, to present joint candidates for the 
offices of President and Vice-President of the Philippines, with only 
one pi at f oi m, and although said parties continue as separate and 
independent organizations, it is the sense of the Philippine Legisla- 
ture that the holding of a free and orderly election will be best 
guaranteed and public confidence in the result thereof will be more 
firm y grounded, if any party or parties that may during the coming 
election contend against said coalition is given an opportunity tS 
examine everything in connection with the holding of said election, 
therefore ^ etnment to the Principle of party government; Now, 

Be pLiZ a J ed - y T the - ?T te and ? ouse °f Representatives of the 
Philippines m Legislature assembled and by the authority of the 

general provisions 

Section L Effective date and application of this Act. — This Act 
shall take eltect on its appioval and shall irovern onlv with reference 
to the first election for President and Vice-President of the Philip- 
pines and Members of the INational Assembly. 

Sec. 2. Date of elect? on and legal 'provisions applicable to same . — - 
The first election for President and Vice-President of the Philippines 
and Members of the National Assembly shall be held on September 
seventeenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, in accordance with the 
pi o visions of the Philippine Constitution, of this Act, and of the 
existing Election Law relative to the holding of general elections, 
in so far as they may be applicable and not in conflict with the pro- 
visions hereof. All acts and omissions penalized by the Election 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 33 


Law which shall be committed during the holding of this election or 
in connection therewith, shall be punished by the penalties prescribed 
b} r said Law. 

CANDIDACIES 

Sec. 3. Candidacies of public officers or candidacies for more than 
one office. — Any person holding a public office or employment in the 
executive or judicial branch, shall automatically cease in his office at 
the time of filing his certificate of candidacy. No person shall pre- 
sent himself as a candidate for or be eligible to more than one office 
at the election provided for in this Act, and any person filing certifi- 
cates of candidacy for two or more different offices shall not be 
understood to be a candidate for any of such offices. 

Sec. 4. Certificates of candidacy. — Certificates of candidacy shall 
be signed and sworn to by the candidates themselves and shall be 
filed with the Department of the Interior at least forty days before 
the election. Said certificates shall not contain any nicknames or 
aliases of the candidates. 

SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR CERTAIN LOCALITIES 

Sec. 5. Electoral organization in the special provinces. — On 
August first, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, the provincial boards 
of the special provinces, under the supervision of the Secretary of 
the Interior, shall, whenever necessary, perform the duties of the 
municipal councils as regards the formation of election precincts, 
designation of polling places and appointments of election inspectors 
and poll clerks and substitutes therefor in their respective municipal 
districts, giving in the latter case due consideration to the recom- 
mendations of the accredited representatives of the national political 
parties. 

In the municipalities of said provinces, action on such matters shall 
be taken by the municipal councils concerned, the same as in the case 
of regular municipalities. 

Sec. 6 . Municipal districts of certain provinces. — The voters of 
Allacapan and Langganan, in the Province of Cagayan, shall vote 
in the second legislative district of said province; those of Alilem, 
Angaki, Cervantes, Concepcion, San Emilio, Sigay, Sugpon, Suyo 
and Tagudin, in the Province of Ilocos Sur, shall vote in the second 
legislative district of said province; the voters of Sudipen, Santol 
and San Gabriel, in the Province of La Union, shall vote in the first 
legislative district of said province, and the voters of Bagulin, 
Burgos and Pugo, also in the Province of La Union, shall vote in 
the second legislative district thereof. 

Sec. 7. Legislative districts of the Mountain Province. — For the 
purposes of the election of Members of the National Assembly, the 
Mountain Province shall be divided into three districts, as follows: 
hirst District , composed of the municipal districts of Bayag, Con- 
ner, Kabugao, Luna, Namaltugan and Tauit, Subprovince of 
Apayao, of the municipal districts of Balbalan, Lubuagan, Pinuk- 
puk, Tabuk and Tanudan, Subprovince of Kalinga, and of the mu- 
nicipal districts of Bontoc (the capital of the province), Barilig, 
Sabangan, Sadangan, Sagada, Natunin and Tinglayan, Sub- 
province of Bontoc ; Second District , composed of the City of Baguio 


34 DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 

and the municipal districts of Ampasung'an, Atok, Bokod, Bakun, 
Buguias, Itogon, Kabayan, Kapangan, Kibungan, La Trinidad, 
Mankayan, Sablan, Tuba and Tublay, Subprovince of Benguet; 

7 liird District , composed of the municipal districts of Banaue, 
Burney, Hungduan, Kiangan, and Mayoyao, Subprovince of Ifugao, 
and of the municipal districts of Banaao, Bauco, Besao and Kayan, 
Subprovince of Lepanto. 

Sec. 8. Election of Members of the National Assembly for 
Cotabato , Lanao and Sulu . — The Members of the National Assembly 
for the Provinces of Cotabato, Lanao and Sulu shall in each case 
be elected by the presidents, vice-presidents and present municipal 
councilors of the municipalities and districts making up the province, 
bv the persons who occupied similar positions in said municipalities 
and municipal districts in the past, and by the present senators, 
representatives, delegates to the Constitutional Convention, pro- 
vincial governors and members of provincial boards, and by any 
persons who occupied any of said offices in the past and reside in ^he 
province concerned. For said purpose, a board of election inspec- 
tors of each of the municipalities and municipal districts of said 
provinces, and in case there is more than one board of election 
inspectors in any municipality or municipal district, the one desig- 
nated by the provincial board concerned, shall make a special list 
of said officers and ex-officers, including in said list those of them 
who may apply therefor on the days set aside by this Act for the 
registration of voters. On the day of the election, the officers and 
ex-officers registered as above mentioned shall be entitled to vote 
filling out the proper official ballot and depositing the same in a* 
separate ballot box furnished to the board of inspectors by the 
provincial board, and upon the termination of the balloting the 
board of election inspectors shall count the votes so deposited’ and 
shall prepare a separate return of the result, in accordance with 
section four hundred and sixty-five of the Election Law. 

ELECTION REGULATIONS OF GENERAL APPLICATION 

Sec. 9. Election 'precincts and polling places . — The election pre- 
cincts shall remain the same as now established and the pollino- places 
shall be the same, unless the municipal council or board concerned 
shall, for good reason, designate a different place on or before August 
first, nineteen hundred and thirty-five. 

Sec. 10. Appointment of election inspectors and poll clerks On 

August first, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, the municipal council 
shall appoint three election inspectors and one poll clerk* with their 
respective substitutes, for such election precinct. 

Two of said election inspectors and the poll clerk, and their re- 
spective substitutes, shall belong to the political party, branch or 
fraction thereof, or political group, which polled the largest number 
of votes in said’ municipality at the general election of nineteen hun- 
dred and thirty-four, and the other inspector and his substitute shall 
belong to the political party, branch or fraction thereof, or political 
group, which polled the next largest number of votes at said election. 

No inspector or representation of any kind on the board of inspec- 
tors shall be granted to any branch, fraction or political group which 
has since the general election of nineteen hundred and thirty-four 


DOCUMENTS 'RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 35 

separated, or which may hereafter separate, from said parties, 
branches, fractions or political groups, or from the party created by 
their consolidation. 

The election inspectors and poll clerks and their respective substi- 
tutes shall be persons nominated by the accredited representatives 
of said parties, branches, fractions or political groups. 

If any party or political group presenting candidates for President 
and Vice-President of the Philippines shall be formed before August 
first, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, such party or group shall, 
upon nomination by the same, be given representation at each of the 
polling places of the municipalities or places where such party or 
group has an accredited representative, by means of the appoint- 
ment on said date of a fourth inspector, with his substitute, having 
the qualifications required by section four hundred and nineteen of 
the Election Law, and if, besides, other parties or political groups 
are formed which present candidates for said offices and which have 
accredited representatives in the locality, the Supreme Court shall, at 
the request of aniinterested party, grant such additional inspector to 
the party or political group showing that it has the most extensive 
organization in said locality. This paragraph shall not be construed 
to mean that the new party or political group or the candidates 
thereof may have more than one inspector on the board. 

In case a fourth inspector is appointed as provided in the next 
preceding paragraph, the poll clerk shall be entitled to vote on the 
board of inspectors in case of a tie. 

An election inspector or poll clerk may be replaced at any time at 
the request of the party or group on whose nomination he was ap- 
pointed, and in case there shall be no time for holding a meeting of 
the municipal council for said purpose, or if the latter shall fail to 
act or to come to an agreement, the duties of inspector or poll clerk, 
as the case may be, shall be performed by the substitute or by the 
person nominated by the part } 7 or group concerned. 

A 113 ' protest made by an ins] 3 ector against any act of the board of 
inspectors or of any member thereof, shall be made to appear over 
his signature in the return, and no protest not so made and appear- 
ing shall be entertained or considered as made. 

Sfcc". 11- Revision of list of voters and registration of new voters . — 
The boards of election inspectors shall meet on August ninth and 
tenth, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, to revise the list of voters 
and register new voters therein. On said days, said boards of inspec- 
tors shall strike from the present lists of voters the names of per- 
sons not having the qualifications prescribed by Title Five of the 
Constitution, of those disqualified from voting under the provisions 
of section four hundred and thirty ^two of the Election Law, and of 
those serving sentences of imprisonment. This section ghall, how- 
ever, not to^ be construed as barring the re-registration of voters 
rejected as illiterates if they can show, on one of the days set aside 
by law for the registration of voters, that they can write and read 
and. are not otherwise incapacitated by law. 

Sec. 12. Voters who may register and vote by wail— Voters con- 
fined at a leper station or colony and not otherwise incapacitated 
may register and vote by mail, sending their respective applications 
or ballots by registered mail to the board of inspectors of the pre- 
cinct in which they resided prior to their confinement, and it shall 


36 DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


be the duty of the board of inspectors of said precinct to register 
them and consider their ballots, provided the applicants have the 
qualifications required of voters and the application or ballot reaches 
said board of inspectors in time. The Secretary of the Interior shall 
make such additional regulations as may be necessarj' to facilitate 
the registration of said electors and to insure a secret, free and 
honest ballot. 

Sec. 13. Proceedings for inclusion and exclusion of voters and cor- 
rection of list of voters. — All judicial proceedings for inclusion in or 
exclusion from the list of voters shall be free of charge and shall be 
filed at the latest on August twenty-fourth, nineteen hundred and 
thirty-five, and a final decision thereon shall be rendered on or before 
September sixth, nineteen hundred and thirty-five. The boards of 
election inspectors shall hold their last meeting on September sev- 
enth, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, for the purposes specified in 
section four hundred and thirty-nine of the Election Law. 

Sec. 14. Compensation of election inspectors and poll clerks . — 
Election inspectors and poll clerks shall receive compensation at the 
rate of four pesos for each day of service rendered. 

Sec. 15. Ballots. — The ballots shall be uniform throughout the 
Philippine Islands, except in the Provinces of Cotabato, Lanao and 
Sulu. No ballot shall have any printing on the back and the stubs 
thereof shall be numbered consecutively in each municipality or mu- 
nicipal district. 

Sec. 16. Preparation of ballot and spoiled ballots. — Every voter 
shall prepare his ballot himself and no one shall be permitted to 
assist him therein, any provision of existing law to the contrarv 
notwithstanding, except as far as the election of Members of the 
National Assembly in the Provinces of Cotabato, Lanao and Sulu is 
concerned. Ballots prepared in violation of this provision shall be 
void and shall not be counted. Nor shall any vote be counted on 
which the candidate is designated by his nickname or alias , although 
mention thereof is made on his certificate of candidacy. 

Sec. 17. Counting of votes and canvass of returns.— The result of 
the balloting for Members of the National Assembly shall be deter- 
mined by the board of canvassers of the province concerned as now 
provided by law for elective members of the House of Represent-! 
tives. Said board shall forthwith certify the result of the election 
for Members of the National Assembly in its province to the Gov- 
ernor-General. 

The election returns of the President and Vice-President dul 
certified and sealed bv the board of canvassers of each province 
including special provinces and the City of Manila, shall be prepare 1 
in triplicate and shall forthwith be sent, one copy to the Secretarv 
of the Senate, one to the Secretary of the House of Representative^ 
and one to the Secretary of the Interior. 

Thirty days after the election has been held, or on a date to he 
designated by the Governor-General, the Legislature shall meet in 
joint session and shall publicly count the votes cast at the election of 
President and Vice-President the Philippines, determine the result 
thereof, and certify the same to the Governor-General. 

Sec. 18. Transmission of documents relating to election. — The Bu- 
reau of Posts shall receive and transmit without delay and free of 
charge all election returns and other official documents, reports, tele- 
grams or radiograms relating to the election in this Act provided for. 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 37 
FINAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 19. Assumption of office by officers elect . — The President and 
Vice-President of the Philippines and Members of the National As- 
sembly elected in accordance with this Act shall assume office and 
the National Assembly shall hold its first session immediately after 
said officers shall have been proclaimed as elected by the President 
of the United States. 

Sec. 20. Appropriation. — The sum of eight hundred thousand 
pesos, or so much thereof as may be necessary, is hereby appropri- 
ated, out of any funds in the Insular Treasury not otherwise appro- 
priated, for the expenses of the election ordered in this Act. 

Sec. 21. Repealing clause . — All Acts or parts of Acts inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act are hereby repealed. 

Approved, July 23, 1935. 


Summary 


Sec. 1. 
Sec. 2. 


Sec. 3. 
Sec. 4. 


Sec. 5. 
Sec. G. 
Sec. 7. 
Sec. S. 


S dc. 9. 
Sec. 10. 
Sec. II. 
Sec. 12. 
Sec. 13. 

Sec. 14. 
Sec. 15. 
Sec. 10. 
Sec. 17. 
Sec. IS. 


GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Effective date and application of this Act. 

Date of election and legal provisions applicable to same. 

candidacies 

Candidacies of public officers or candidacies for more than one office. 
Certificates of candidacy. 

special provisions for certain localities 

Electoral organization in the special provinces. 

Municipal districts of certain provinces. 

Legislative districts of the Mountain Province. 

Election of Members of the National Assembly for Cotabato, Lana o 
and Sulu. 

election regulations of general application 

Election precincts and polling places. 

Appointment of election inspectors and poll clerks. 

Revision of list of voters and registration of new voters. 

Voters who may register and vote by mail. 

Proceedings for inclusion and exclusion of voters and correction of list 
of voters. 

Compensation of election inspectors and poll clerks. 

Ballots. 

Preparation of ballot and spoiled ballots. 

Counting of votes and canvass of returns. 

Transmission of documents relating to election. 

FINAL PROVISIONS 


Sec. 19. Assumption of office by officers elect. 
Sec. 20. Appropriation. 

Sec. 21. Repealing clause. 


38 


DOCUMENTS DELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


Tenth Philippine Legislature, Second Session, Begun and Held 
at the City of Manila on Monday, the Twenty-fourth Day 
of June, Nineteen Hundred and Tiiirty-five 

[Resolution of both Houses in joint session] 


RESOLUTION OF THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTxVHVES OF THE 
PHILIPPINES, IN JOINT SESSION ASSEMBLED, CERTIFYING TO THE GOV- 
ERNOR-GENERAL THE RESULT OF THE ELECTION FOR PRESIDENT AND 
VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES. 


Whereas, in pursuance of section four of Public Act Numbered 
One hundred twenty-seven of the Seventy-third Congress of the 
United States, commonly known as the Tydings-McDuffie Act, and 
section seventeen of Act Numbered Forty-two hundred and three of 
the Philippine Legislature entitled “An Act to regulate the holding 
of the first election for President and Vice-President of the Philip- 
pines and Members of the National Assembly, to appropriate funds 
therefor, and for other purposes,” the Philippine Legislature met in 
joint session, publicly counted the votes cast at the election held on 
September seventeen, nineteen hundred and thirty-five, for the office 
of President and Vice-President of the Philippines, determined the 
result thereof, and has found that for the office of President, Hon. 
Manuel L. Quezon received six hundred ninety-five thousand, two 
hundred ninety-seven (G95, 297) votes; Gen. Emilio Aguinaldo re- 
°\ ie ^ un dred seventy-nine thousand, four hundred one 
(1< 9,401) votes; Mons. Gregorio Aglipay received one hundred 
forty-eight thousand, six (148,000) votes and Mr. Pascual Racuyal 
received one hundred fifty-eight (158) votes; and for the Office of 
Vice-1 resident Hon. Sergio Osmena received eight hundred ten 
thousand, six hundred sixty-six (810,066) votes; Hon. Raymundo 
/in receive d seventy thousand, eight hundred ninety-one 
(<0.89 ) votes; and Mr. Norberto Nabong received fifty-one thou- 
sand, four hundred forty-four (51,444) votes; and 

VVhereas, the number of votes received for the Office of President 
by Hon. Manuel L.^Quezon and for the Office of Vice-President by 
Hon. Sergio Osmena constitutes not only a plurality, but a ma- 

pT 1 -/ 7 t ? ie 7°7 tes A ega i ly cast for the said offices: Now, therefore, 
pi ,J] eso ? ve d by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 

RcpS Session smiled in the Hall of the House of 


. /hey hereby certify, to the Governor-General of 

^he Philippine Islands that Honorable Manuel L. Quezon and Hon- 
orable oeigio Osmena have been elected President and Vice-Presi- 
dent of the I hilippines, respectively, by a majority of all the votes 
cast at the election held on September seventeenth, nineteen hundred 
and thirty-five; and 

r J hat the statement of the votes cast in said election by provinces 
duly certified by the presiding officers and hereto attached be, and 
the same hereby is, certified to the Governor-General of the Philip- 
pines as a part of this resolution; and 

That the certificates of canvass made by the provincial boards 
of canvassers of returns of votes for President and Vice-President 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 39 


of the Philippines, duly certified by the Provincial Board of Can- 
vassers of the respective provinces and hereto attached be, and the 
same hereb}^ is, certified to the Governor-General of the Philippines 
as a part of this resolution. 

Adopted, October 12, 1935. 

Jose Avelino 

President Pro Tempore of the Senate 
Quintin Paredes 

Speaker of the House of Representatives 

We hereby certify that the foregoing Resolution was adopted by 
both Houses of the Philippine Legislature in joint session held on 
October 12, 1935. 

Fermin S. Torralba 
Secretary of the Senate 
Euxogio Benitez 

Seo'etary of the House of Representatives 
(Official Seal: Philippine Senate and House of Representatives.) 


Certification of Election of Officers of tiie Commonwealth of 
the Philippine Islands by the Governor-General 

To the Honorable, The President of the United States, Greetings: 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 4 of Public Act numbered 
127 of the Congress of the United States, appeared on the twenty 
fourth day of March, 1934, I, Frank Murphy, Governor General oi 
the Philippine Islands, hereby certify that the election of the officers 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands provided for m its 
Constitution was duly held throughout the Phillippine Islands on the 
seventeenth day of September, 1935, and that according to the results 
of said election as determined in accordance with the laws thereto! 
made and provided, the following were elected : 

President: Manuel L. Quezon of Baler, Tayabas. 

Vice President : Sergio Osmena of Cebu, Cebu. 

Members of the National Assembly : 

Abra, Quintin Paredes. 

Agusan, Apolonio D. Curato. 

Albay, 1st District, Jose Bonto. 

2nd District, Justino Nuyda. 

3rd District, Pedro Sabido. 

4th District, Pedro Vera. 

Antique, Calixto O. Zaldivar. 

Bataan, Teodoro Camacho. 

Batanes, Vicente Agan. 

Batangas, 1st District, Natalio Lopez. 

2nd District, Eusebio Orense. 

3rd District, Maximo Ivalaw. 

Boiiol, 1st District, Juan Torralba. 

2nd District, Olegario B. Clarin. 

3rd District, Margarito E. Revilles. 

Bukidnon, Manuel Forticli. 


40 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


Bulacan, 1st District, Nicolas Buendia. 

2nd District, Antonio Villarama. 

Cagayan, 1st District, Marcelo Adduru. 

2nd District, Regino Veridiano. 

Camarines Norte, Cayetano Lukban. 

Camarines Sur, 1st District, Francisco Celebrado. 

2nd District, Luis N. de Leon. 

Catiz, 1st District, Manuel Roxas. 

2nd District, Jose A. Dorado. 

3rd District, Rafael Tumbokon. 

Cavite, Justiniano S. Montano. 

Cebu, 1st District, Celestino Rodriguez. 

2nd District, Hilario Abellana. 

3rd District, Agustin Y. Kintanar. 

4th District, Vicente Rama. 

5th District, Miguel Cuenco. 

6th District, Nicolas Rafols. 

<th District, Buenaventura Rodriguez. 

Cotabato, Datu Smsuat. 

Davao, Romualdo Quimpo 

Ilocos Norte, 1st district, Vicente T. Lazo. 

Tinm - q™ i Fy Julio Nalundasan (Deceased). 

Ilocos Sur, 1st district, Benito Soliven 

Tt - . v 2 ^ district, Sixto Brillantes. 

Iloilo, 1st district, Jose C. Zulueta 

2nd district, Ruperto Montinola. 

3rd district, Tomas Confesor. 

4th district, Tomas Buenaflor. 

5th district, Victorino Salcedo. 

Isabela, Mauro Versosa. 

Laguna, 1st district, Tomas Dizon. 

T 2nd district, Arsenio Bonifacio. 

Lanao, Tomas Cabili. 

La Union, 1st district, Camilo Osias. 

2nd district. Agaton R Yanrmn 
Lette, 1st district, Jose Ma. Veloso 

2nd district, Dominador M. Tan. 

3rd district, Tomas Oppus. 

tt Francisco Enage. 

5th district, Ruperto Kapunan. 

Manila, 1st district Gregorio Perfecto. 

2nd district, Pedro Gil 
Marindtjque, Cccilio A. Mane-in’ 

Masbate, Pio V. Corpus. 3 
Mindoro, Juan L. Luna. 

Misamis Occidental. Jose Ozamis 

Misamis Oriental. Leon Borromeo 

Mountain Province, 1st district, Saturnine Moldero. 

^ncl district. Felipe Jose. 

3rd district, George K. Tait. 

Negros Occidental, 1st district, Enrique Magalona. 

2nd district, Pedro C. Hernaez. 

3rd district, Gil M. Montilla. 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 41 

Negros Oriental, 1st district, Guillermo Z. Villanueva. 

2nd district, Jose E. Romero. 

Nueva Ecija, 1st district, Manuel Alzate. 

2nd district. Felipe Buencamino, Jr. 

Nueva Vizcaya, Bernardo Buenafe. 

Palawan, Claudio Sandoval. 

Pampanga, 1st district, Eligio G. Lagman. 

2nd district, Jose P. Fausto. 

Pangasinan, 1st district, Anacleto B. Ramos. 

2nd district, Eugenio Perez. 

3rd district, Daniel Mara mb a. 

4th district, N. T. Rupisan. 

5th district, Narciso Ramos. 

Rizal, 1st district, Pedro Magsalin. 

2nd district, Emilio de la Paz. 

Romblon, Gabriel F. Fabella. 

Samar, 1st district, Antolin D. Tan. 

2nd district, Serafin Marabut. 

3rd district, Juan Bocar. 

Sorsogon, 1st district, Norberto A. Roque. 

2nd district, Tomas S. Clemente. 

Sulu, Datu Ombra Amilbangsa. 

Surigao, Ricardo Navarro 1.. 

Clementino V. DiezJ 
Tarlac, 1st district, Jose G. Cojuangco. 

2nd district, Benigno Aquino. 

Tayabas, 1st district, Jose A. Angara. 

2nd district, Francisco Lavides. 

Zambales, Potenciano Lesaca. 

Zamboanga, Juan S. Alano. 

Done at the City of Manila, Philippine Islands, this fourteenth 
day of October, in the Year of Our Lord, one thousand nine hundred 
and thirty-five. Frank Murphy, 

Governor General of the Philippine Islands. 

By the Governor General of the Philippine Islands — A 

Proclamation 

No. S60. — Calling a special session of the Philippine Legislature on 
November 12, 1935 , for the purpose of holding a joint session on 
that day in honor of th-e Vice-President of the United States, the 
Speaker of the House of Representatives, and other distinguished 
members of the United States Congress; and for other purposes. 

Whereas the Vice-President of the United States, the Speaker of 
the House of Representatives, and other distinguished members of 
the United States Congress have accepted an invitation, tendered on 
behalf of the Philippine Legislature, to be present at the inaugura- 
tion of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, and I have been re- 
quested by several members of the Legislature to call a special session 
in honor of these distinguished visitors and for other purposes ; 

H. Doc. 400. 74-2 4 


42 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


Now, therefore, I, Frank Murphy, Governor-General of the Philip- 
pine Islands, by virtue of the authority vested in me by section eight- 
een of the Act of Congress of August twenty-ninth, nineteen hundred 
and sixteen, do hereby call a special session of the Philippine Legis- 
lature to be convened in the City of Manila, Philippine Islands, on 
Tuesday, November twelfth, nineteen hundred and thirty-five,' at 
ten o’clock in the forenoon, for the purpose of holding a joint ses- 
sion on that day in honor of the Vice-President of the United States, 
the Speaker of the House of Kepresentatives, and other distinguished 
members of the United States Congress; for reconsideration of 
Senate bill Numbered One hundred eighty-six, entitled “An Act to 
amend section six of the Act entitled An Act to raise revenue for the 
Philippine Islands, and for other purposes’, approved by the Con- 
gress of the United States on August fifth, nineteen hundred and 
n i! ne ^v me - nde T ^ Numbered Four thousand and thirty-four of 
the Philippine Legislature” ; and to receive a message from the Gov- 
ernor-General of the Philippine Islands on November fourteenth. 

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the 
seal of the Government of the Philippine Islands to be affixed. 

Done at the City of Manila, this seventh day of November, in the 
year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-five. 

rsEAL ] Frank Murphy, 

Govei'nor- General. 


Vice President Garner’s Speech at the Joint Session of the 
1 hilippine Legislature, November 12, 1935 

no-n I ™ Pl k S1(le ?* ^rojugh the accident of war some thirty-five years 
Stated beautlful Islands came under the sovereignty of the United 

nf Th A 1 2/ cjf rS f ° f w 1S acqu i si £ ion m y P eo P le made me a Member 

of the United States House of Representatives. During mv first 

term m that body was formed the impression that our American 
Y as 1 ° f , 1 a temporary character. The discussions in those 
rri , °t whether they should be retained permanently or ulti- 

t-i'n e § 1V ei ? their independence caused keen interest in the ex- 
of °P lm °n of our greater statesmen, and at a very early 

P ~Thk a i lhe . P romisa of ultimate independence. 

, h p S followed by expressions of opinion of our great men in 

be e granted! n ln our Con S ress that independence should 

Today it is a pleasure to be with you because of your great hap- 
piness on this historic occasion, although, perhaps, the early years 
may prove a period of trial and tribulation, such as we had in our 
country. 

The thought foremost in my mind is that Americans have fulfilled 
their promise— the word of the American Nation is good, no matter 
how great the sacrifice to make it good. It is a sacrifice to part 
with a wonderful country such as yours, populated by a kindly, 
industrious, and intelligent people. J 

I have a feeling of pride that for the first time in the world’s 
nistory, at a great loss to itself, the American Nation has redeemed 
its promise. 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


43 


In compan} 7 with our distinguished Speaker Byrns, of the House 
of Representatives, one of the great coordinate branches of our Gov- 
ernment, with 27 Congressman and 17 United States Senators, and 
our wives, we have traveled approximately 10,000 miles and must 
travel 10,000 miles in return to celebrate two things. 

Putting them in the order in which my mind dwells upon them, 
there is the redemption of a national promise that all right-thinking 
Americans will approve and that all self-governing nations of the 
earth will applaud. 

As years went on in my congressional career fate finally placed 
me as Speaker of the great House of Representatives, and it was 
during my term of office that the first bill containing an offer of 
independence was passed. . , 

And then, strange as events will sometimes order, as Vice President 
of the United States the pleasure came to me of witnessing for the 
second time as a Presiding Officer the final accepted offer of inde- 
pendence. . - . 

On both occasions the offer of independence was accompanied by 
conditions and obligations which should first be accepted by your 
people. 

Amongst these was the perpetual preservation of human and prop- 
erty rights, which rights it had taken our ancestry many hundreds 
of years to secure. These rights were fought for upon battlefields 
and in debates and finally found themselves in written form in our 
American Constitution in what lawyers and even our school boys 
today know as our Bill of Rights. 

Your new constitution was presented to President Roosevelt, ex- 
amined by himself and his advisers, and we find that it contains 
these essentials of self-government: -if 

1. No person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property without 
due process of law. 

2. Security against unreasonable search and seizure. 

3. Religious liberty and its free exercise. 

4. Freedom of speech, of the press, and the right of assembly anc 


* 5. No involuntary servitude of any kind. 

6. The privilege of the use of the writ of habeas corpus. 

7. Due process of law in criminal offenses, the accused to be con- 
fronted with witnesses, and many other safeguards and protections 
for liberty, property, and orderly government. 

It has been generally agreed by thinking men the world over that 
if liberty is to be preserved and the rights of property respected, 
these provisions are essential. , 

For some thirty-four years our public administrators in the Islands, 
our soldiers who were here when the war was over, and our school 
touchers who came later and for long over a decade taught the bless- 
ings to be secured by liberty, education, and religious freedom, are 
ncrw all covered in your Constitution. 

Mv friend former Senator Hawes, a student of your country who 
has devoted years of his life toward promoting your aspirations for 
self-government, informs me that your people have paid all of its 
bills for education, bills for sanitation, the bills for public health, the 
bilfc for roads, and even the salaries of American administrators 
and their advisers, and that you enter upon your great experiment 


44 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


of freedom with probably the smallest per capita national debt of 
any nation. 

He advises me that in the thirty-five years of American sovereignty 
with the exception of $3,000,000 provided for recuperation after the 
war, the entire cost of all civil administration has been provided by 
the revenues secured from the taxation of your own people J 

Few nations have a record similar to this. The most of the world 
is not happy — it is in a state of much confusion and distress 

It speaks well for the character of your people and the temporary 
sovereignty of my people that an unequaled record of financial 
stability like this should exist. 

Our trade relations have grown to such proportions that you have 
until recently ranked as our eighth best customer, and, through the 
laws passed by our Congress, we have not only been your best cus 
tomer, but practically your sole customer " CUS 

Trade reiations of a beneficial character rest exclusively upon two 
things : the ability to sell, giving the ability to buy ^ 1 

Our great President, Franklin D. Roosevelt, iii sending the last 
independence bill to Congress, accompanied it with a recSmmenda- 
tion that where there were inequalities in our trade relations 

SSff'.SyM b 4ult. C bTeTSoVS n ;Su both peop !f -S 

gernis to O'l'r 120.00°, TO° people and to your 14,000 00<f peopl^™' 1 *' 

And this I hope after thoughtful consideration and investigation 
will be worked out to the mutual advantage of both nations ’ 

May the new nation preserve the world’s fine ons \. ... 

and equality, a nation of Christian neonle w |,„ u ^! 0ns ^berty 
thoughtful consideration of all its people ivill 3,V lts c . are ^. ul an< l 
to the nations of the earth. Prosperi?? will L? Ve *'1 inSpirah ? n 
out some trial and some sacrifice. Much will depend*^ +h y< ? U W1 p h ‘ 
of the men who administer your affairs. ^ d on ^ character 

You have sent to our country brilliant and 0 ui„ 
sioners to our House of Representatives You hiw aS 9 ommis - 
missions of studious, patriotic men wliose elonuenr. nt ? p , ecial oom- 
impressed the American Congress el °quence and logic have 



it is a pleasure for me to know that In g vmiv S ’ a * wa T s , patriotic, and 

m,Tor"t£‘ I,e ^ PreSident °' y ° Ur W ComS^thby dSfaS” 

JSSiiSS? . high character «, 

succeed himself. mited to Slx y ears - He ca ™°t 

It would seem to me therefore to be tho nort „-e j 

patriotic ttourtt ^Klipm«to ttrow asid<j p P artiso * and ' perxSd 
feeling and all unite m a coordinated support during these first 
trying years Let all thoughtful men and women put aside ideas 
of change and surround him with loyal support from every quarter 

adviser^ m 16 adllunlstratl0n of hls office he may pick the ablest 

M_\ thought goes back to the years in my country when Washing- 
ton was its leader. At the birth of our Nation when there were not 




DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 45 


two parties all factions supported the one party and the one ad- 
ministration, our first Washington administration. 

Why cannot this happen under my friend, your President-elect, 
Manuel Quezon? 

There should be no quarrelling and discord or lack of harmony. 
You have in your Constitution set a limitation upon his term, and 
during that time, in the fateful years of your first President, it 
seems to me that he should be given united support. 

After this first, administration there may be divisions. There is 
always honest disagreement in a republic such as you are forming, 
but let the first administration be united. 

Our Presidents have sent to you as Governors General men of 
ability, of sympathetic interest in promoting your welfare. The 
last of these is among the best. Governor Frank Murphy, who has 
won your confidence and esteem, has cooperated with your great 
leaders, Quezon and Osmena, and received the applause of your 
people. 

A consistent continued American policy* of preparation and con- 
trol, followed by what to me is of great historic significance, a 
redeemed national promise, with the well wishes of the nations of the 
earth, I came to this unusual historical spectacle with confidence in 
your future. 

I shall watch your destiny with optimism and friendly interest. 

You have the very best wishes of the people of the United States, 
and I am sure that prosperity will come, and with prosperity, hap- 
piness and national progress. 

I thank } T ou in behalf of each member of the Congressional dele- 
gation for the invitation which brought us here and brought with us 
our wives, and I assure you that we are carrying back kindly feel- 
ings of confidence and interest. 

Few people have had the privilege of witnessing the peaceful 
birth of a new nation that comes quietly into the world’s sisterhood 
of states, with an orderly written government, witli a well chosen 
leader, with all promise for happiness. 

We are impressed ; we return home inspired, with another great 
forward step in world progress. 

Speaker Byrns’ Speech at the Joint Session of tiie Philippine 
Legislature, November 12 , 1935 . 

Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, and members of the Philippine As- 
sembly, it is indeed a high honor to appear before you on this occa- 
sion in anticipation of the historic processes soon to be inaugurated 
as a preliminary to the birth of a new and independent nation. As a 
member of the party of United States Senators and Congressmen, 
who, with their wives and important members of the United States 
press, have come on your generous invitation from our homeland to 
extend our congratulations and cordial good will on this memorable 
occasion, I wish to join in the felicitations and good wishes so elo- 
quently expressed by our able, distinguished, and much-beloved Vice 
President, the second ranking officer of our Government, and who 
speaks as the leader of our delegation. I join in his expression of 
pride that this historic event has been made possible by the generous 
action of our great Republic in voluntarily surrendering its right of 


46 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


sovereignty and the interests which go with it in order that the 
people of the Philippine Islands may enjoy that sense of national 
freedom and independence which we have enjoyed for nearly 150 
years. So far as I know, it is the first time that a great people have 
achieved independence without the necessity of securing it at the 
point of the sword; and may I say, Mr. President, and to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that while my country has surrendered its sovereignity it 
never has and never will surrender its friendship and sympathetic 
interest in the Filipino people. No real republican form of govern- 
ment has ever existed as such for any great length of time which did 
not recognize the principles of democracy and the common good of 
the people as a whole. It is the practice of those fundamental ideals 
which has made our own country great and powerful and its people 
happy and contented during the past years. 

May I say that it is for you gentlemen and other leaders in your 
nation to preserve and make lasting these principles so well ex- 
pressed in the highly progressive Constitution which you have ap- 
proved. We feel certain that this will be done by the incoming ad- 
ministration, headed as it will be by your very able and devoted leader 
and President, Hon. Manuel Quezon. We look with confidence 
therefore, to your development and “strike hands with you across 
the sea” in best wishes for your future endeavors along these lines 
In the Plouse of Representatives we find that the following Q ' 
gressmen and Senators in our party served in the same period th l 
your President, Manuel Quezon, represented your country as f] 
Philippine Commissioner in the House of Representatives: John v 
Garner, Joseph T. Robinson, Matthew M. Neely, James F. R Vl 
Robert L. Doughton, Bertrand H. Snell, and Alien T. Treadway 
of whom have risen to places of influence and distinction in f] 
Congress. . the 

We found him to be a very able man, resourceful, considerate 
dependable. His contacts with these Members of Congress, a js 
of whom I have mentioned, I know have given him not only' a ew 
retical but a very practical knowledge of the workings of the Ani 
can system of government. ~ 1 eri " 

4 We have all come in contact with the many able Commissioi 
vou have sent to Washington during past years and whose na ^ 1S 
i shall not have time to mention, and also with the able men ^ s 
have come to Washington from time to time as members of var’ ° 
hio-h commissions. All of this has served to increase our confiri 10US 
] n your future, for all were able and faithful representatives of ^ UCe 
interests. Undoubtedly honest differences of political opinion will 
arise, but these will be solved, I am sure, in a spirit of amity ™nd 
O' ood will-. . . 

° in considering your new Constitution I find first and forem t- 
those declarations in the bill of rights to which the Vice President 

has referred. 

Through his pleasant contact with the Congress, your new tv . 
dent-elect has acquired a practical viewpoint of other administration 
details for the interpretation in a fair and equitable way of the 
provisions of your constitution. 

1 I bespeak for him your united support, and that you will give him 
generously of your advice and assistance that the way *may be 
smoothed for the attainment of the high ideals he possesses. J 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 47 


He lias had associated with him for the last few years as Gov- 
ernor General of the Philippine Islands, Gov. Frank Murphy, 
an able and conscientious executive whose experiences as mayor of 
one of our great cities, Detroit, has familiarized him with finance 
and orderly government. In his official contacts here we are pleased 
but not surprised to know that he has displayed tact and good 
judgment. 

For the next ten years, at least, the American flag will fly over 
your Commonwealth, and you will have with j 7 ou an official represent- 
ing the United States, who will have the title of High Commissioner. 
This official. I am happy to believe, will be your present able Gov- 
ernor-General and he will be representative of the President of the 
United States when it is necessary for him to act. 

His sympathetic cooperation during our continued sovereignty, 
subject to changes by Congress, will be the expression of the Ameri- 


can people. 0 . n 

For ten years, unless there is a change, the Stars and Stripes, lor 
which I know you have the greatest respect, will fly over the Com- 
monwealth. The Philippine flag, red, white, and blue, with its 
three stars and its blazing sun typifying the tropics, will be carried 
on all standards. These sister flags will do much as they have m 
tlie past to strengthen the fine type of friendship which exists today. 

When the time comes for the Republic to replace the Common- 
wealth, we believe that the conduct of its affairs during this period 
will so impress the nations of the world that t^e new Republic will 
begin its career with not only the old friendship of my country, but 
that all the enlightened nations of the earth will unite in its pro- 
tection and in the preservation of its sovereignty. 

The great American Nation will watch your development with 
keen interest and, wherever we may, will extend a helping hand. 

You raise products which are not raised in the United States. 
We sell you manufactured articles which are not made m your 
country. We believe that the President’s Commission will work out 
an equitable plan beneficial to both our nations, and that the result 
of its recommendations will strengthen the ties that will become 

stronger with the years. . , . 

The administration of President Quezon and Vice President 
Osmena is entitled to unified support. Your example of unity, pa- 
triotism, and self-sacrifice will have a most beneficial and heartening 
effect on the people of my country, and make it more simple and 
easy to reconcile any inequalities that now exist or may occur. 

A strong government administering your affairs under your^pro- 
p-ressive Constitution, which has been approved by our great Presi- 
dent, Franklin D. Roosevelt, will make for harmony, unity, and 

C °It^vas kind of the. Philippine people to include in their invitation 
to Senators and Congressmen an invitation for their wives. I hey 
have enjoyed the visit. You have aroused their sympathy and 
interest as you have our own. 

I have learned that the Filipino women are leaders in the matter 
of education. They are the household bankers. They have fol- 
lowed the teachings of our school teachers and our economists. They 
have many of the favorite American dishes in their kitchens. So, 
on behalf of the ladies of the Senate and of the House of Representa- 


48 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


tives, I thank you for the courtesy of the invitation, but I have the 
suspicion that back of it was the thought that our wives and daugh- 
ters who have come with us will in the future help to tighten the 
bonds of friendship and good will between our nations. 

I cannot close these remarks without referring briefly to my 
friend and your friend, Hon. Harry B. Hawes. As United States 
Senator, and since then, he has been an earnest, devoted, and able 
friend of the Philippine people. He merits your friendship and 
gratitude for his faithful and unselfish work in your behalf 

Let me again thank you for the high privilege that has been 
extended to us and to our wives to visit you and study first hand 
your conditions and your aspirations. Let me assure you that we 

instructive vSiT Wlth US ^ kmdliest thoughts of a pleasant and 

JSdS7 n e 5S' establishment of an independent 
"'if u Orient, to know that the fine traditions of 

IhTlriS Americans ’ ‘ S Satisfacti °" all right- 


r L Jf NC ' T ’ Oovernor-General Fuanic Morpht 
M,Z^T “ lTS Stum, Nov^aaa 

Gentlemen of the Legislature- 

reS. "S issuance by A-enoan-Filipin. 

tion announcing the results of the recent national 1 * P 1 oclai )™- 

ance with section 4 of the Tydings-Minuffie A,t ' 

Governor General of the Philiimfnp Tcl V A $ the olIlce of tbe 

This legislative body likewise w lFpa SS iitS hisTo^v C °Th t<> i 
our authority known as the Jones Act u rhe.chai-ter of 

Congress in 191 ( 5 , under whose liberaDind h C « y - ^ Jm *'. ed States 

Philippine people have governed and wi benehciei i t Provisions the 
decades— this great charter of lih2r-i gOVerned f ° r , nearly two 
In its place a new charter of Lveranienf 0 ?^ 1116 ^ I terminate, 
the representatives of the PhilSpS«SA£ 0Mtl ^ Utl0 ? framed by 
of authority granted by the Un ted IS n themselves , m pursuance 
of government constituted thereunder Si° gK ^ and a for A ln 
such a time it seems fitting for Ss to ° ° perat /°u e At 

final adjournment, to consider the situ- % feW moments befor ® 
review briefly the significant events and f oven ! nient 1 and 

course until the present hour. * ^ b<d lave shaped our 

Under the auspices of the Spanish ifnmi» t ^ t *1 
tury, the foremost nation of Europe rich .'1° slxteont h c f n 1 ‘ 

western civilization was brought to' the ’pi •y Ure - d ’ and Powerful, 
1564. During three centuries and a hStSf 68 Th ye f 
of these Islands received the impress of « ™ t q ] f pe ° pl ? 

^,r tilutions 

toTssum A ^ eri . Ca ^ T 1 ! ? dn ] li r Strat0rs came to the islands in 1900 
to assume the task that had been commenced by the Army forces, 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 49 

they ‘found not only the beginnings of an American school system, 
with soldiers in the role of teachers. They found a people that was 
prepared to benefit by the privileges and advantages that were to 
be offered to them under the American system of government. They 
found a quality akin to their own. For here was a people that 
already had revolted against oppressive rule and attempted to set 
up an independent republic. The events that preceded the truce of 
Biac-na-bato help to explain the remarkable early success of the 
American experiment with democracy in these islands beyond the. 
distant seas. 

While to many persons the odds seemed to be heavily against 
success of the venture, it was almost inevitable that a people nurtured 
as the American people were in the political philosophy that had 
produced the Declaration of Independence, with its emphasis on 
freedom and equality, and had evolved the American Constitution 
based on the presumed right and capacity of the common people to 
govern themselves — it was inevitable that such a people should seek 
to implant these doctrines and principles of government in the new 
territory that had been committed to their control. For democracy 
as conceived and expressed in these great documents, and as the 
American people had received it from their fathers, was something 
more than a method of government. It was a passionate political 
faith. It was a faith in the natural capacities and inherent 
possibilities of the common man, in his essential worth and dignity. 
In the scheme of democracy, as in the code of Christianity, all 
men were on a common level of dignity and importance. In this 
sense as stated by a great political philosopher of my own state, 
Christianity and democracy were twin-born. They provide for the 
common men, without distinction of race or clime, a way of salva- 
tion from forces of oppression and greed and selfishness. 

Having found democracy good for herself. America believed it 
was good for the people of the Philippines. With a faith and pas- 
sion like that which enabled their Spanish predecessors to establish 
throughout the land the practice of the Christian religion, the 
early American administrators and their devoted coworkers in the 
fiekl of education undertook to educate and train the people of 
these islands in the principles and technique of self-government, 
taking for their keynote and guide the memorable instructions issued 
by President McKinley in April, 1900. 

EDUCATION 

If with their simple and sincere faith in the principles by which 
they had won their own independence and founded their govern- 
ments, the American people failed to realize fully the nature and 
difficulty of the mission they were undertaking,’ they understood 
clearly * that for its successful practice and permanent enjoy- 
ment ^ democratic government required an educated and informed 
citizenry This understanding and conviction were as strong as 
they had been one hundred years earlier, when the framers of the 
great Ordinance of 1787 enacted for the government of the so-called 
northwest territory, stated that “religion, morality, and knowledge 
being essential to good government and the happiness of mankind, 
schools and the means of education shall forever be encouraged.” 


50 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


In similar vein, President McKinley directed that the Commis- 
sion “should regard as of first importance the extension of a system 
of primary education which shall be free to all, and which shall 
tend to fit the people for the duties of citizenship and for the ordi- 
nary avocations of a civilized community.” In its first proclamation 
to the people of the Philippines in 1899 the First Philippine Com- 
mission declared the establishment of elementary schools and appro- 
priate facilities for higher education to be of cardinal importance in 
the American program for the islands. 

Ko people ever accepted the blessings of education with more 
enthusiasm than the Filipinos. Like the Americans, they saw that 
the road to self-government lies through the schoolhouse. The 
United States Army began the establishment of modern schools in 
1898, and within a year more than 4,500 primary pupils were enrolled 
in Manila alone. The foundations for the permanent educational 
system of the country were laid by the Philippine Commission in 
January, 1J01. One of its first acts provided for the appointment 
of more than 1,000 American teachers. Some of the members of 
this original group of educational pioneers are still in the Philip- 
pines. The splendid and devoted work of these and thousands of 
others who followed them has been a credit to their country and 
of immeasurable value to the Filipino people. 

-^though a system of primary public schools v r as provided for bv 
royal Spanish decree in 1SG3, few Filipino children were being edu- 
cated at public expense at the end of the Spanish regime. Todav 
about two-thirds of all Filipino children of primary school age (7 
Tnfn? ) a H- enr ,° 1Ie , d m the fiv9t four grades of the public schools. 
tlI, a/ f C SC T- en ™ llmen t in March, 1935, was 1,204,485 pupils. 

Jdndnfcf-v. 5 aUght V 11 I£ S ° schools ’ staffed by 27,120 teachers and 
c stiators. In 1934 total expenditure for public education 

™5 ( , to 5* *23,000,000.* This included more than 20 per- 

ie total expenditures of the central government for all 

I) LI I pOcGS. 

t , he t l urclen °f popular education in the Philippines, 
enrolled l!' 6 ’ • S been borne mainly by the state, 97,500 pupils are 
innine r' r .,.p rivate educational institutions recognized by the Phil- 
T'Goftfi that rnm ®i fln .d operated under Government supervision, 
inte and pLT u c , er } a } n definite standards are accredited by the 
these are the ol Wlt b the public educational system. Among 

the 'Philippines* ^ an< ^ SOme the best institutions of learning in 

« e hoo 1 s ^i n K t h e ^ e i e 6 1 ’ S ^ a ^ G ] ias ^ een more effective than the public 
natfnnafitl n l ^ * Stl> ™g COUScioUSUeSS of Philippine 

rp‘ | , ,L . development of a sense of civic responsibility. 

I he En^., i. g uage is now spoken in every barrio in the Archi- 
pelago by people of all ranks of life. The schools have been an 
important factor and effective instrument in the improvement of the 
health of the peop.e. The offices of the Government and of private 
usmess have been a most completely staffed with competent Fili- 
pinos trained in the public schools. The standards of efficiency in 

*?]u lltUre ’ com . merce a ? c | ln( iustfy have been raised and the wealth 
ie country increased by the efforts of vocationally trained citi- 

e s * Pro fessional and technical education has been placed upon a 

* The Philippine peso (P) equals 50 cents, U. S. currency. 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


51 


high plane and our own institutions of higher learning are now 
supplying the country with specially trained men capable of meet- 
ing its technical and scientific needs. The Bureau of Science, the 
University of the Philippines and some of the older private insti- 
tutions, besides providing opportunities for general and specialized 
high education, are making distinguished contributions to the com- 
mon fund of human knowledge. Through the National Research 
Council, founded and supported as an agency of the state, the direct 
aid of the Government has been placed behind scientific research. 

Further expansion of the school facilities of the Philippines is 
primarily a financial problem. Insular appropriations for school 
purposes probably cannot be greatly increased during the next few 
years, and in the present financial condition of the provinces and 
municipalities no large increase in their school expenditures may 
be expected. Further substantial progress toward the goal of uni- 
versal. free primary education apparently must depend upon and 
follow an increase in the taxable wealth of the country. 

Within the limited financial resources of the country, however, 
the educational system that has been developed in the Philippines 
is successfully serving the fundamental needs of the Nation. The 
schools, colleges and universities of the country have, become effec- 
tive means for the intellectual development and self-expression of 
the people — in the extension of general culture, and in civic, voca- 
tional and professional education. The people of this country 
know that an educated citizenry is indispensable to the existence of 
a free, democratic, progressive state. I am confident that they will 
continue to press forward to the educational goals that were set a 
generation ago, and will not fail to support their schools to the limit 
of their resources, as an indispensable instrument in their national 
development. This determination has been written into the Consti- 
tution they have adopted as the supreme law of the future Philippine 
nation. . ' 

PUBLIC WORKS ^ 


Important as education is, however, in building the structure of 
strong national life, other elements were needed. Roads and trans- 
portation facilities and public works were required to develop trade 
and commerce, and to promote understanding and cooperation be- 
tween communities and groups. The revenues of the state have been 
liberally and profitably employed in this direction, bringing to 
isolated communities the advantages of easy communication and 
the conveniences of modern civilization. 

When the Americans came, nothing remained of the old Spanish 
road system but 990 miles of right-of-way, impassable in the rainy 
season, and available for travel in the dry season only to a very 


limited extent. , , 

Today the Philippines has 9,057.G kilometers of first-class roads, 
4 831.1 kilometers of second class, 2,009.4 kilometers of trails, or a 
total of 20 82 G kilometers (12,912.12 miles) of roads and trails repre- 
senting an investment of 1*210,000.000. . 

There were 2,G00 bridges and culverts in existence ^ when civil 
o-overnment under American sovereignty was started; 5,500 others 
have been adaed at an expenditure of 1*25,000,000, including such 
notable bridges as the Gilbert Bridge at Laoag, the Quirmo Bridge 


52 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


and the 


spanning the Abra, the Plaridel Bridge in P. lri 
General Luna Bridge at Cabanatuan. ‘ n S asinan ? 

With the advent of the American regime, them • ,,i<nirated 
the construction of schools, hospitals, municim i u S • nfnS and 
provinmai capitols. In Manila we have the Loti i f ul 1 Buildim/ 
Post Office, Executive Building, Philippine GeneS? w' tlV .°? I "an 
of Science College of Medfcine, Insular PsvVh ^T 1 W 
Philippine Normal School and dormitory, P a J& >atl £ C LTrch Li 
brary, Ice Plant, and University of the Philippines 1 ?" o f nrovincjJ 

Batnnfns Ca T lt0 f Uk r ngS ° f IloCOS Sur ’ Docos Nof-te * Paiwasinam 
^edaF meihi^ aba Frmf the '^^iMiii^o^ the' 6 ^^ ^ ? 

bSfdi ^ 8 : 891 ’ 285 ha ™ "» ** fi T&H 

tem wiftho CnSS^e™ 0 

a££S 

Water System of Manila them hntfi Excludl , n S the Metropolitan 
31, 1934, 288 municipal ‘and JrovWinl f mpleted up to December 
tensions and 10 improvements furnishing notnK 1 ? 15 ^ s y stems ’ 19 ex ' 
lation of 1,008,918, at a cost of Sflfil b i e water to a popu- 

systems constructed are : ,181,106.50. T] le mos t important 

pla 1 nt M " r ° POlitan Wato Sy* 1 ™ 1 Manila, induding filtration 

| MMSr&ffiSE fe* S “' 

t ?= g V S ivaSSf ta " W “~- 

7 S' M e V'° POl , kan Waterworks. 

E ™ lc> Metropolitan Waterworks 
8. Lrtcena-Paebdnn Wot 1 ''oiks. 

Prior to 1898 and vmto thl^f m Ta y abas - 
had been constructed in thp pfr ly P art °£ 1904, no artesian wells 
the Bureau of Public Works it “ippines. The first was drilled by 
From then until September 30 iqr'T/no 8 and in December, 1904. 
have been drilled in towns harrif 3 °’ i 2 ’^ 90 succ essful artesian wells 
at a total cost of P=5,6ll 31 * 44. ° S ’ and sdios throughout the Islands, 
people with pure water. ’ ’ su PPly in g approximately 3,000,000 

Irrigation was known in the pun- • 
evidenced by the wonderful r j PP uippines even prior to 1521 as 
the initiative of Spanish °! rthe ™ L . uzon ‘ Under 

placed under irrigation at an ccHmnt i hectares of rice land were 
the American regime has added in i/r p COst ^6, 000.000. To this 

at a cost of P18.647,000. To »^ ste “? f or 83,200 hectares 

built during the past 25 years irrff f a £ ded P rlvate systems 
and bringing the grand total of irrnft § 604,000 additional hectares, 
a great advance over the Spanish rt-dme U1K " P to <15 ’ 000 hectares, 

ver^W^rtT/tte^orth , t0 V only' the old river walls and a 
y snort pait of the noith breakwater at Manila were built prior 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


53 


to 1898. During the past 35 years 1*75,000,000 have been devoted to 
construction and improvement at nearly 100 ports throughout the 
Islands, ranging from the breakwater, sheltered harbor, and modern 
piers at Manila to simple landings for small coasters at isolated 
towns. 

There is reflected in all this an earnestness of purpose in the Amer- 
ican stewardship, and a capacity on the part of the Filipino people 
to build and enjoy better things. The Filipino people can continue 
to have them only if the tax burden is levied equitably, paid cheer- 
fully, and spent wisely for the good of the people as a whole. 


INTERISLAND SHIPPING 


Before American occupation there was very little interisland ship- 
pin<»\ Seven days after the fall of Manila the Manila Customhouse 
^established. It was apparent that there should be a larger num- 
ber of ships in the coastwise service, to strengthen the newly estab- 
lished civil government and better conditions for farmers in all 
sections of the Islands. In March, 1902, 196 ports were opened to 
interisland traffic. There being no Government funds available for 
subsidies, and few capitalists and merchants willing to invest in 
shipping, Act 520 was passed in November, 1902, throwing open coast- 
wise trade to foreign vessels without restriction until July, 1901. A 
growing tendency toward nationalization of the coastwise shipping 
industry culminated in Act 3081 passed in March, 1923, which pro- 
vides that only vessels of domestic ownership may engage in the 
coastwise trade. Foreign firms which had engaged in the trade 
before 1904 were allowed to continue, but were prohibited from 
adding any new ships. 

prior to December, 1927, interisland service was mediocre, r ixea 
schedules were not maintained and the service was uncertain and 
unsatisfactory. With the passage of Act No. 3418 the jurisdiction 
of the Public Utility Commission over routes was withdrawn. T his 
i free competition, acceleration of service, and the entry of new 

y l)S into the field. The commerce of the Islands has steadily 
s . ^ c reased from about 5*68,000,000 in 1899 to over 1*350,000,000 in 
1934. Goods amounting to such a sum must be moved expeditiously. 

1 \vn important factor in the development of this commerce has 
been the steady improvement of ports. Beginning with the con- 
t ruction of sea walls and small wooden docks in Manila, Iloilo, and 
r> bu a program of port works has received generous support from 
S' 6 (government. The result has been that all the important sea 
ts from Aparri to Sulu have been improved, with Manila the out- 
P° din°* example of what can be done in this line. 

^Between 1916 and 1926 there were many losses due to shipwrecks, 
An annual inspection by the Bureau of Customs was instituted, 
"oroving the seaworthiness of the ships. The development of the 
"terisland shipping to its present level of efficiency is a notable 
H ^d vital achievement for a people largely dependent upon the sea 
for their channels of trade. 

The most populous sections of the Philippines, Central Luzon and 
Cebu have been given the advantage of efficient railroad facilities 
for a’ number of years, and commercial automobile traffic has closely 
followed the improvement in highways. 


54 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


AVIATION MAKES AUSPICIOUS START 

Very recently the first chapters of Philippine aviation history 
have been written. Private enterprise has pioneered and has demon- 
strated the practicability of air communication. A country of more 
than 7,000 islands offers a great field for this most modern develop- 
ment in transportation, and the past several years have shown re- 
sults which hold great promise for the future. 

Thousands of miles have been flown commercially, on regular 
schedules, north to Baguio, and south to Iloilo and Cebu. and only 
the other day regular service was extended to Davao in Mindanao 
At present there are some 40 landing fields throughout the islands, 
20 of which have been constructed by the Philippine government. 
Hus work is progressing as rapidly as possible so that Within a year 
oi eiy towm of the Philippines will be within a day’s trip from 
Manila. Great credit is due to the Air Corps of the United States 

* 1 ° tj f U en 1 thusiastlc interest and support of 
? I j '/i r m k P i arke / f . or th . e rec ent acquisition and construe- 
lion of landing fields at stategic points. In addition, the Air Corps 
has made exhaustive surveys and has drawn up plans for a system of 
an; routes covering the entire Archipelago. J 

TV ithm a few days we shall hail the first trans-Pacific flight bv the 
Pan-American Airways, which will mark the beginnin” of anew 

rLTof°thf world." 1 communication between the Philippines and the 
PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY 

CmistSSrbiniilT/ haVG been inaugurated in the Philippine 

With the cooperation^ of th^Shtm^ ° f effici f nc W- 

necessarv fiinrld tha i 4-^gisiature, which appropriated the 

5 047 men to its mesenttt^ ^increased from 400 officers and 
men Two si<W SlwlJ °, f 549 officers and 8 > 512 enlisted 
one howitzer company have beraVman^J W ^' fai ; e companies, and 
and several Thompson submachine f , ^ we ve machine guns 
same time it lias been put n on f.AlT been / cquired ;. A t the 
rewards on merit only. The FpA;, 1 ba , S1S ° f , P 10 paoti°ris and 
sponsors have every reason to -feel nrfilo pe ? ple A u , ld th ? u ‘ A n ™ r fji an 
pine Constabulary as it exists toclaf T t is nm" enC<i f the ^ hlhp ' 
agency of law and order and our <mal diirimftl!! ^ ? f WUI ’’ but 
a half has been to make it a unit’ >•, \ n f tb i pa&t two y ears aI1( l 
of peace in the Islands. This V n « ab T adequate A t, he needs 
achieved and my only injunction in tu iml T convinced, has been 
be kept clearly and Steadfastly in mind coimectlon 1S that this goal 

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 

" ithOTt ' ja ™ iiei *” w 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


55 


The early American Government found the Philippines with a 
meager and inadequate economy, the total of foreign trade was 
less 'than 1*100.000,000 a year. Imports exceeded exports and the 
balance of trade both visible and invisible, was seriously against 
the Islands. Internal trade was seriously restricted and Philippine 
economy was essentially that of the village. The country vvas annost 
wholly agricultural, industrial development and improvement were 
negligible Even in the field of agriculture, the necessity of import- 
ing a° considerable fraction of the principal item of diet, consisting 
of rice attested the inadequacy of the national economy. It is 
estimated that probably less than 5 percent of the land area was 
liTirlpi* nnT, form of cultivation. 

Bv successive steps the Government proceeded to build a larger 
. qnc ] obtain a wider distribution of the growing 

wealth 10 In 1002 a discount of 25 percent from the regular United 

States tariff rates was granted. In 1909 free trade was set up with 
orates tann icilco ^ 01 q ^ 

mild restrictions. In 1JJ - d 


unlimited free trade was established. 


T» >he vears that followed, American import duties on foreign goods 
competing with Philippine goods were successively raised 

mA-ioV; flf the end of thirty-five years of economic growth, the for- 
• I °^ a ^, a f f i. p Philippines is running approximately 1*400,000,000 
eign trade of n ^ e ,^ u f ^ rfold as com pa?ed with trade in 1901. Even 
annually .. G f trade have turned in favor of the islands. Trade 
t *fi m America has acquired so favorable a position that it has offset 
with ars w ^j a a favorable balance the negative balances with 

t U r Oriental and most European countries with which the Philippines 

tr * population has more than doubled. Land under cultivation 
i ^v^rpnepd nearly threefold. The rice problem has been solved, 
iaS l during the past few years the Islands have been all but self- 
efficient in cereal requirements. Should necessity arise, the cattles 
s . • q. industry has made it possible to supply all of our meat. The 
ralS | u ^^i on 0 f abaca and tobacco has more than doubled. Corn has 
P r ° sec [ fourfold, rice fivefold, lumber and forest products sixfold, 
m ?r r sixfold. Copra production has increased ninefold, and min- 
SU ^f production has risen from a negligible position to one that is 
commanding the respect of the world. 

Formerly all our products lett our shores m raw state, or as nearly 
so as conditions of transport allowed. Today nearly half our copra 
• con verted into oil ; practically all our sugar is carried to 96 degrees 
more; our tobacco goes forth as cigars; and a respectable fraction 
°f our abaca leaves as rope. The sound first steps of industrial de- 
° lopment have been taken in the form of maximum elaboration of 
mir agricultural products. 

This economic advance has not been made on the basis of exploita- 
. ^ share of the profit has been passed all the way down the 

w’ resuiting in the highest labor wage in the Orient. Philippine 
"hor has been preserved, guided and trained to a degree of compe- 
tence of which we are proud. The public domain has not been ex- 
ploited. Large estate grants— a sore spot m other days— have not 
Pen tolerated The natural inheritance of the Filipino as the owner, 
of his fatheriand has not. been violated. The Filipino has been 
encouraged to enter the professions. No door has been closed, no 
reasonable want has been denied him. 


56 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 




But what does it signify, this gaining of a better economy, if the 
chief aim of government is the well-being of the people generally? 
Is it merely crass materialism, or has it improved and enriched the 
life and spirit of the generality of men and women ? The public 
benefits that have accrued from the wealth created during the last 
thirty-five years are too numerous to catalog fully. A few may be 
sketched : 

1. Higher standards of diet, clothing, and housing have lifted the 
Filipino laborer far above the level on which he formerly lived. 

2. State funds have been provided out of which railroads, high- 
wa 3 7S ? bridges, and ports have been brought into useful being. 

3. State pay rolls make possible the highest average salary for 
Government employees and the largest number per capita to be found 
in the Orient or Tropics. 

•n* available for investment in sugar mills, oil 

mills, store and ofiices, land and houses; capital that has been used 
h) jnodemize the old industries and create new ones. 

5. Less tangible but equally important, are the acquirement of bet- 
ter health, wider education, and higher scientific and artistic cul- 
uie, and all the chain of advancing social standards, which come 
witli an expanding and diffused economy. 

GO\ ERNMENT- CONTROLLED COMPANIES GAIN 

All government-owned companies showed decided gains during the 
P a f l!ZTi th ^ exception of the Manila Railroad Co., which 
SnnfWn A p SS l due i t0 °P tl . onaI currency clauses in its 4-percent 

an 1 d the reduction of freight volume The 
it H t F showed a net profit of 4*122.65-2.89 for the vear 

ieS Tlfp a fvL a p°T a l P n° fit of onl y P500 - 19 for the preceding 
er-itinn wiHi o t Portland Cement Co. continued its profitable op- 
fo^the year 193? P1 ° fit ° f P432 ’ 510 - 68 as compared with 4*268,483.73 

W ?r0 f * ° f -Wl, 266.90 as 

»rSch sS,°wT? r ofii 

RenS and h te hPPn f 6 P1 '°, fits delude recoveries of charged-off 

rX%n^l h ", e si ee o n f pape" Pl,Shed d<5!pite U “ 

measurif of^its °Srvir^ ^41 pp ^ ne National Bank are not the true 
measuic ot its seivice to the people of these Islands It m-ovides 
service m many ways. As a iesc islands, ic piouaes 

ae pository of the Government it serves 
. i 1 t L rpm J° f- . 1 i e facilities of the Bank have been ex- 
J -lftLi tG i dlst F, lcts and at all of these places it provides 
S if £fbnf diiri lt01T n 0r funds > f or exchanging checks for 
SmeS Md merehSS? and loans to small 


PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE 

The Philippines has led during the American occupation all other 
oriental countries in progress made in health and welfare. Epi- 
emics are controlled; pandemics are definitely of the past; com- 
merce is no longer impeded by quarantine and other restrictions 


DOCUMENTS DELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


57 


necessary to prevent the spread of disease; new measures have been 
inaugurated by the Government to improve the living conditions of 
the poor and to protect those economically distressed from the 
ravages of disease. 

As a typical example, I refer particularly to the construction 
during the past two j r ears of a modern water-nitration plant for the 
City of Manila. It is significant of the progress which had been 
made that Manila, a tropical city, is thus provided with a water 
supply which is not excelled in purity by that of any other city in 
the world. The prevalence of water-borne diseases in the City of 
Manila has already been reduced and there is no doubt that the 
pure water now available for the inhabitants of Manila will be an 
important factor in the continued improvement in the public health 

of the city. , . , , . . nn 

Today the Insular Government operates 80 hospitals having 4,402 
beds, and more than 1,000 dispensaries. During the past two years 
special attention has been devoted to the care of the insane and the 
mentally defective. Government facilities for the institutional treat- 
ment of insane patients have been doubled and many of the un- 
fortunates who formerly wandered at large or were confined in jails 
now receive proper care. During the past year we have revised the 
standard of care of the insane and perfected our administrative 
methods to conform to the best practices in this field. Also, during 
the past year we have set up a school for mentally defective children 
at Welfareville where they can be trained, guided, and given the 
opportunity to become useful citizens. 

Within the last two years we have developed a new approach to 
health and social work in the Philippines. The modern conception 
of government supervision of all matters relating to the welfare of 
the public has been put into actual practice, and the Philippine 
Government has assumed full and complete responsibility for the 
relief of public distress due to any cause, whether it be social 
maladjustment, economic conditions, disaster or sickness. 

The problem of providing medical care for the people, of the 
barrios and the congested districts of the cities and towns is being 
met by a public health nursing service which is being extended to 
the more remote communities. Only within the last year we have 
placed 250 additional nurses in this work. Traveling clinics, which 
are in fact mobile hospitals, are now being employed to reach the 
Isolated villages of the Mountain Province. 

In the overcrowded areas and slum districts of Manila and the 
larger towns we have established social services for the poor, the 
distressed, and the underprivileged. Greatly increased protection 
for the health and the welfare of children and the mothers of the 
slums has been thus provided. Methods of improving the housing 
of the poor have been adopted on a basis which will permit of con- 
tinued progress. 

Since 1933 the best the western world has to offer in public wel- 
fare service has been inaugurated here and been eagerly adopted by 
the Filipino people. A well grounded, long-time program of health 
and social services has been established. If persistently developed 
over a period of years it will be an important factor in the success 
of the Commonwealth Government. A widespread social con- 

H. Doc. 400. 74-2 5 


58 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


sciousness has been aroused among the officials and the people of 
the towns and barrios. I cannot overemphasize the importance of 
sustaining this social consciousness through the years to come. I 
trust that all of us who have been responsible will make continued 
efforts along these lines and will consider ourselves to be trustees 
charged with preserving these services and making them more and 
more progressive and with seeing that there is no stagnation and 
above all no backward movement. 

The present government of the Philippine Islands may take just 
pride in its adoption of the humanitarian principles of government 
responsibility to ameliorate distress among our helpless people due 
to any cause, whether it be social maladjustment, economic condi- 
tions, disaster or sickness. 


bureau of science 

The Bureau of Science, organized in 1901 as the Bureau of Gov- 
ernment Laboratories, and taking its present name in 1905. has 
been of inestimable assistance m the progress achieved here. At 
first concerned almost wholly in protection against disease, it did 
magnificent work, and for many years there has been no possibility 
of such major disasters as the outbreak of cholera that occurred in 
1902, continuing forty o years and taking the lives of nearly 100.000 
people. In fact it can be said that cholera, bubonic plague, dysen- 

The Bureau is tireless in its efforts to occiot ; • ,, 

general health of the people, in its researches to de^^rVmturU 
resources, and m its cooperation with and helpfulness toward hidus- 

‘Thanks to the Bureau, copra production has become r i m ,Ki, r Tam- 
able through elimination of wasteful methods and simllnr 
ance to the sugar industry has produced additional millions The 
Bureau has assisted factories making paints virnhtn. „ S ' ^ j 
other industrial products from local raw materials • it hn« 
experiments in the field. of ceramics; aided materially in ^ U ° 
tion of fish and game; in development of the mineral roae sei ' a ' 
the Islands; in improvement of crops ° f 

and in general has made a place for* itself in hL 1 plants, 

marrow of the economic life of the people 6 m tllG VGry lleart aur * 

The Bureau is a research institute of ‘extreme value. Its inter 
national reputation is deserved and it is one of the m reatest Wa 
cies that the new Philippine Commonwealth will inherit from the 
American regime. lu wie 


ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 


In the administration of justice, there are outstanding milestone 
erected by the joint efforts of Americans and Filipinos, that reflec 
the genius of American institutions and the capacity of the Filipin 
people to absorb and apply democratic principles of government. 

Before the galleons of i lagellan touched these shores, the nativ 
laws were mostly based on usages and ancestral customs. The pen 
alties for violations of penal laws were severe and cruel. 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 59 


Spain did much to modernize the administration of justice in the 
Islands. The Spanish Penal Code was implanted here. A Supreme 
Court, courts of first instance in the provinces, and justice-of-the- 
peace courts in the municipalities were established. Individual 
liberty, however, was hemmed in by a multitude of restrictions which 
resulted in many injustices, especially to the common people. 

One of the first acts of American rule was the organization of a 
judicial system, and in the Philippine Bill of 1902, Congress im- 
planted in these Islands the same guaranties of constitutional and 
individual liberty that are found in the United States Constitution 
with the exception of the right to keep and bear arms and the system 
of trial by jury. A reorganization of the courts was effected and 
orderly procedure was provided for the trial of cases. In all crim- 
inal prosecutions, a speedy and public trial was guaranteed to the 
accused; his right to bail, to compulsory process of obtaining wit- 
nesses in his favor, to be assisted by counsel, and not to be compelled 
to be a witness against himself, were expressly recognized. 

Today, we have a modern system of courts and judicial procedure. 
Conscientious efforts have been exerted during the last thirty-five 
years to guarantee to the people of these Islands a fair and impartial 
Administration of justice. In line with this policy, there has been 
introduced recently a far-reaching innovation in the selection of 
judges. I refer to the organization of the Judicial Council, which 
has been functioning satisfactorily. Properly guided and directed, 
this Judicial Council should insure to the people of these Islands the 
appointment of competent judges selected primarily on merit. 

In the field of penology, there have been introduced changes in- 
tended to aid the accused and to ameliorate the condition or those 
c0 nyicted by the courts of justice. I refer to the law providing for 
public defenders, the Indeterminate Sentence Law and the law creat- 
ing the probation office which is now being organized. 

Since the Indeterminate Sentence Law went into effect in January, 
1934, there has been marked improvement in the behavior and morale 
of prisoners. During the twenty-two months of its effectiveness, 645 
prisoners have been given parole. Of these only three have violated 
tfici 1 * P ar °i e - Fhe probation system, which will soon be in operation, 
will complement the Indeterminate Sentence Law. We have every 
reason to expect that these two institutions will be found eminently 
suited to the social conditions of these Islands, because the spiritual 
side ^ le Filipino character is especially receptive to the benign 
idea of reform. 

CULTURAL DESTINIES 

The cultural prospects of the Filipino people are full of promise. 
The racial and cultural differences of the Philippine population have 
been unduly exaggerated. Evidence is strong that there is building 
up in these Islands a true general Philippine culture around which 
future development will revolve. A blending of diverse elements 
in the population has been going on continuously for 2,000 years, 
and has been especially rapid during the Spanish and American 
periods due to the greater peace and order and freer communication. 
* The increasing homogeneity in the population is not a mere altru- 
istic hope. There is strong scientific basis for holding that seem- 


60 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


ingly discordant and nonfusable elements not only can be but are 
being fused. From the time of Dr. Jose Rizal down to the present 
the opinion has been held by man}' American and Filipino author- 
ities that among the non-Christian population are elements that con- 
stitute a strong: asset for the future Philippines. 

The pagan, Moro, and other non-Christian peoples possess essen- 
tially the same racial traits and innate psychology as the majority 
of the inhabitants of the Christian provinces. Investigations of 
Professor Beyer and others show that the Filipino-blend type is de- 
veloping steadily in all parts of the Islands — regardless of linguistic, 
religious, and cultural differences. Such studies forecast the steady 
growth of an harmonious and blended Filipino race that will one 
day be characteristic throughout the Islands. 

On the cultural side, there will be need for much patient and 
tolerant consideration in dealing with the pagan and non-Christian 
® r ° ^ P°l lc y of gradual education and improvement of economic 

conditions however, will eventually bring about cultural amalgama- 
tion and develop a strong and unified Philippine population. 


governmental finance 

• r ^j s gratifying and remarkable expansion in the natural economy 
is reflected also in the parallel story of governmental finances. Let 
us look at a few figures. Excluding bond issues, the total revenues 
°* <ae centra l government in 1901 amounted to 1*21 - 
532,490 They rose to a high peak of 1*92,783,173.70 in the boom 
year of 19^9. In the last fiscal year (1934) they totaled 1*78,674 751.33. 

4 io during the same period from 1*2,- 

410,437.16 to 1*24,385,978.07 m 1934 reaching an nll-timA 
1*30,889,071.38 in 1930. ’ 16 Cm g an a11 tlme hl S h of 

ion<* governments, revenues increased from 
”S’of AsSl'K. W > 509 ’ W « 8 “ o >>%!■ figure 

tli t ^ e tw ° chartered cities included, total public revenues in 
S 1934 dS gr6W fr0m P48 > 772 ) 1 93-21 in 1910 to 1*119,792,900.38 

men^nrp the public and their industries have in large 

returned to them or preserved in the form of increas- 

ernrnent TliI 1CeS . and va , u . a ^ e fixed properties owned by the gov- 
alone in real ^™ anen j investments of the central government 

value of jg? forms ’ ”■ 

impound 

rent financial condition of the government. In all funds of the 
central government on December 31, 1934, there was a surplus of 
more than seventy-five million pesos (1*75,179,189.42), as compared 
with less than nine and one-half million pesos (1*9,331,582.85) on 
June 30, 1901. In the general fund alone there was a current surplus 
o± approximately thirty-seven million pesos (^36,900,492.19) on 
December 31, 1934. Of this amount a substantial portion was cash 
in the governmental depositories. The excess of cash over recorded 
oo! 1 fni 1 ? 11 ? an< ^ liabilities was almost seventeen million pesos (1*16,- 
881,49 l 41) as of December 31, 1934. In addition to this approxi- 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 61 


mately 3*30,000,000 awaits clearance in Washington and will soon 
be paid into the Philippine treasury from excise taxes levied and 
collected on coconut oil under a recent Act of Congress, which will 
leave our general fund in the strongest position of our history. 

The bonded debt of the central government and its subdivisions 
is not excessive. At the end of 1934 it stood at slightly more than 
one hundred and sixty million pesos (1*160,364,700), but with sinking 
funds totaling more than sixty millions (1*60,895.286.55), the 
net bonded indebtedness is slightly less than one hundred million 
pesos (1 99,469,413.45). The Manila Railroad Co., whose stock is 
wholly owned by the government, also has a net bonded debt after 
sinking fund oi f 48,856,424.14. Interest on bonds of the Philippine 
JJail^uy Co., amounting to Pd.7,098,000, is guaranteed by the central 
government until July, 1937. 

Philippine public finances are sound. In some respects they might 
well excite the envy of many of the large nations of the world today. 
In the central government for the past two and three-quarter years, 
expenditures from all funds have been considerably less than the cur- 
x'ent revenues accruing to those funds. Our budget is balanced in 
fact as well as m form. 

The surplus of the ( central government should be jealously 
guarded. It may be difficult to borrow externally at advantageous 
rates of interest. ^ Pack oi large local capital accumulations limits 
the possibilities ox internal loans. While the governmental bonded 
debt is not excessive and is being properly serviced, major financial 
problems exist in the bonded indebtedness of our railroads, and in 
the pension funds of the government wherein liabilities are steadily 
accruing without adequate provision to meet them. These pension 
funds at present are not actuarily sound and a government policy 
for their rehabilitation should be instituted without delay. Several 
px’ovinces are financially weak. Ordinary and recurring normal ex- 
penditures for the national defense wall tax government resources 
Severely- demands may be expected for concessions to 

deli n( l uen ^i 7 i s, f an . c * ^ be prospects of increasing revenues are 
«* a that “8“ «■«•« >»■*•«» 


It woul l ’ t0 ltce P the surplus intact 

the propei reserve for a government of the position and size of 
Sue Philippine Government. Extraordinary and nonreemrin- -il 

Jetion 6 S^LrtuTloo^well^ tr f eat ? d , . as windfalls that will not 
he repeater- Let us look well to cut within our financial cloth. In 

‘pre^nt economy and environment, the safe course for this Gov- 
,vrnn icnt ' s ° + G \|v, ' balance and its current expenditures 

ffithi» cU1 T ent 'i l ; ? ltllout fl a sound financial position and a 
ram of sound public finance, the most essential and fundamental 
Sanctions of government are handicapped and may he completely 
^.Slvzed. No governmental activity comes ahead of an orderly 

£ aI cial program. J 

^fn closing this subject I should like to repeat the exhortation 
out ained in my first address to the Philippine people : 

miif> first duty of such a government ( this Government), in order of statement 
f , of importance, is to conduct its own business on a sound and orderly 
i£ 1 efficiently and economically, giving a peso in actual service for every 
baS S ’of income. It must carefully budget its expenditures so that they will 

pGSu u 


62 DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


not exceed its revenue or dissipate the public resources in unnecessary services 
or activities. For the time being we must have recourse to uncompromising 
economy in spending. The public debt also must be kept within proper and 
conservative limits. This result will be assured by the preparation of a care- 
ful program and strict and rigid adherence to it by all the departments of 
the Government. A budget is valuable only if, and when, expenditures are 
kept within it. Together we will make a stubborn stand against the unwhole- 
some practice of allowing deficits to creep into our balance sheets. 

The present sound and satisfactory state of governmental finances, 
with budgets balanced and substantial reserves at hand, is clear indi- 
cation that an honest effort has been made to practice what we have 
preached. 

POLITICAL PROGRESS 


With the development we have been tracing in the fields of eco- 
nomics and finance, communication and education, science and hv- 
giene, political development has kept pace. The Philippine public 
gradually attained an understanding of the theory and processes 
of populai government, and acquired experience in its practice. 
This was according to the plans conceived and formulated by the 
rst mencan administrators. Small beginnings had been made 
in Spanish times, with a limited right of suffrage and the privilege 
of electing municipal and barrio officials. Municipalities became 

1901 ‘ n ^ rov i nci ^ b °ards came under popular control 
in 190o. Two years later the first national legislative assemblv was 

:,r?, ££££-" teki ”s ^ *■«*» 

The next step wu.s the »Xones Act in 101 n ,] n „ 1 • -i , 

erated until today. Within the short space of sfxtZnyeaTs the^Fili' 
pmo people had qualified themselves tn thJ V7. 

American Congres? for exdnsivTSrol’o Wancb 
of their government- In large measure they had justified the reat 
American faith m the inherent capacifv of people to ^vern them 
selves given equal advantages of education Ld trainin- The a d' 
ministration of justice also was frmrlnniKr rvi™ 1 • i? XIAe * 
Filipinos. Although the exlcutfvl hSW m ^ h ? nds ° f fcbe 
American direction and control aetml i m i | IK ’ U ba . s been under 
years has been largely in Philinnino 1 n ] lulIS P' a f 1011 during recent 
of equal suffrage to women was a notahL nC * S ’+ f \ e - re( ^ nt ex tension 
pine Legislature to democratic contrlblltlon b ? the Philip- 

In this steady advance in the nW a,. , 

tional government toward the ultimate giTof complete^de' 

h of a th r C tei ; ms of the Tydings-Mc&iffie 
mirable doUunent, with it S S i f°^- ent ' This ad- 

and freedom for the indhg n 

, tb « soundness of our political faith 
adoption of this “tion: the 

fun/ai^tan; a product of SJ MKcfS 

American people. It was the generous act of a generous 
people. If some adjustments should appear desirable to alleviate 
unnecessary hardships, we may be confident that the American Com 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


63 


gress will not refuse to consider them. With full warning, however, 
and understanding of the inconvenience and risk and hardship 
that may be entailed by their separation from the United States, 
the Filipmo people have definitely and gladly assumed the condi- 
tions and responsibilities and have adhered to the course that leads 
ultimately to full sovereignty and independence. 

America has kept faith with her political principles and has been 
true to her origins. Putting aside considerations of empire and 
self-interest, with deep understanding of the strong yearning of a 
peopl e f°i' po itical freedom, acknowledging the right of a people to 
self-determination when supported by demonstrated understanding 
of constitutional self-government and evidence of capacity to sus- 
tain it, the United States has accepted the decision that has been 
made here, and is prepared to surrender its trusteeship. In good 
time this will be done. 

Material progress is dearly bought and of little worth when ob- 
tained at the price of exploitation and suppression of a people’s 
patrimony and liberty and their individual initiative. The record 
of America cannot be told merely in terms of public revenues and 
economic production. Things more precious in the life of a people 
are the preservation of racial integrity and culture, the enlargement 
of human liberty, the cultivation of a spirit of adventure and initia- 
tive. these priceless qualities, so essential in the building of a 
nation, have been permitted to grow and flourish by the liberal and 
farseeing policies that have guided the administration of Philip- 
pine affairs by American authorities. With these elements of char- 
acter and mutual toleration of differences in religious faith, aided 
by a favorable geographical grouping and freedom from deep racial 
conflicts, the Philippines, under wise and patient and just leadership, 
may become a strong and united nation. 

So we have come to this present hour Through the idealistic poli- 
cies of her statesmen, McKinley, Root and Taft, and Wilson and 
Roosevelt, supplemented bv the conscientious and devoted service 
of her representatives in these' Islands, and the strong friendship and 
sympathy of Franklin D. Roosevelt, the political faith of America 
bas flowered and is nearing fruition. Free education, constitu- 
tional principles, freedom of conscience and opinion, material prog- 
ress, economic development, stable finances, responsible government— 
these essentials of a sound and enduring democracy have been estab- 
lished in the land. 

A splendid chapter in Philippine history, in which this body under 
able leaders has played a distinguished part, is now coming to a 
close. With a large and growing population, expanding industry 
and agriculture, easy communication and increasing wealth, a gov- 
ernment financially stable and sound, an enlightened press, and an 
informed and patriotic citizenry, the sinews of statehood and the 
elements of a strong national life have been provided. We place m 
the hands of our successors a rich estate, a high trust, and a glorious 
privilege to preserve and administer this Government that we have 
built together upon the faith and confidence of the American people. 

Another chapter remains to be written before the record is com- 
plete, and the mission accomplished. To assure its * urther 

period of adjustment has been provided, under the protection and 
guidance of United States authority. Retaining full rights of sov- 


64 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


ereignty, with appropriate functions and authority ted i n ttie 
President and other agencies for the protection of vL l^/finiate in- 
terests under the Independence Act, the United States Government 
is now entrusting direct management of domestic affaire m the newly 
elected representatives of the Philippine pedple_ t h„ T»™eident and 
members of the National Assembly. Jrieb 

Their success and the success of the Commonwealth will rest not 
upon the fine hopes and enthusiasm of this moment Tt'will require 
deep and abiding loyalty to the principles of sound ^^11(1 social 
justice, freedom from measures that are selfish and ce a 1 <=tead- 
fast devotion to the ideals and principles of demS c T » 
sonal aspect of government must be minimized. Ijl Xials should 

t!rysrs,r^s' 

This great and happy venture of the American nnd Filipino 
people is not yet ended. With an altprod -p,.„ lcan and 
autonomy, the Philippine Government o- 0 es nn me ^ 0r ' c an( i broader 
flag, with the full confidence and support of tlle America 

ment of the United States. As in a l^oocf hnnl PG W and PT™ 
and romance; we close this chapter anticipating hlgh adve « m, t 
that the Divine Author will SS2? E& »ext confident 

cordance with the faith and. high^pur pose of its b^nnhm.^ ^ 

Frank Murphy, 

The Philippine Legislature, Governor-General. 

Manila , P. /. 

Tire Commonwealth of the Philippines 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

A PROCLAMATION* 

WHEREAS pursuant to the Drovioinnc ^ 
entitled “An Act to provide foVtliP pS J • he , ^ of Congress 
Philippine Islands, to provide for tlv> lnde P endence ,°* f lic 

and a form of government for the PlYnm • ° P t°i U a constitution 
purposes”, approved March 24. 1934 f4Jp4?ndmfi\ ds ’ and for other 
ance with the Constitution of the cLnmnw! ni° 6 l’ and in . accord - 
heretofore adopted and ratified by the numi 1 °J tl , ie Philippines 
Islands, an election was held in the Phil; ml; P t G i° , tPe Philippine 
17, 1935, for the purpose of electing ° n Se P te '! lper 

Commonwealth of the Philippines- and * th ff vernment of the 

WHEREAS the Governor General of the Phii;,., - T , 11 

certified to me as President of the United Stated P^e lslands has 
result of the said election : nUecl htates ot America the 

NOW, THEREFORE, I, FRANKLIN D pqnwvirTT 
President of the United States of America, u£ ami ^ Situe of 
the authority vested m me by the aforesaid i .r 

With section 4 thereof, do announce and Si! Z! 5 twSSX 
so held in the Philippine Islands on September 17, 1935, officers of 

•Read by Governor General Murphy at the Inaugural ceremonies on Nov. 15 . 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


^vrprnJnent of the Commonwealth of the Philippines were 

SSJS " foUowS! 

■PRESIDENT : Manuel L. Quezon of Baler. Tavabas 
?ICE PRESIDENT: Sergio Osmena of Cebu, Cebu 

Ambers of the national assembly?’ 

Abra, Qumtan Paredes. 

Agusan, Apolonio D. Curato. 

Abbay, 1st District, Jose Bonto. 

2nd District, Justino Nuyda. 

3rd District, Pedro Sabido. 

4th District, Pedro Vera. 

ANTIQUE) Calixto O. Zaldivar. 

Bataan, Teodoro Camacho. 

Batanes, Vicente Agan. 

Batangas, 1st District, Natalio Lopez 
2nd District, Eusebio Orense 
3rd District, Maximo Kalaw. 

Bohol, 1st District, Juan Torralba 

2nd District Olegario B. Clarin. 

3rd District, Margarito E. Revilles 
Bukidnon, Manuel Forticli. 

Bulacan, 1st District, Nicolas Buendia 

2nd District Antonio Villarama. 

Cagayan, 1st District, Marcelo Adduru 

2nd District, Regino Veridimio. 

Camarines Norte, Cayetano Lukban. 

CaMAKines Sur, lst Distnct Francisco Celebrado. 

2nd District, Luis N dp T 
Oapiz, 1 st District, Manuel Roxas. 

2nd District, Jose A. Dorado. 

3rd District, Rafael Tumbokon. 

Cavite, Justiniano S. Montano. 

Cebu, 1st District, Celestino Rodriguez. 

' 2nd District, Hilario Abellana. 

3rd District, Agustin Y. Kintanar. 

4th District, Vicente Rama. 

5th District, Miguel Cuenco. 

6th District, Nicolas Rafols. 

7th District, Buenaventura Rodriguez. 


Cotabato, Datu Sinsuat. 
Davao, Romualdo Qumipo. 


Soros’ N ome,” 1st District, Vicente T. Lazo. 

2nd District, Julio Nalundasan. 
Tr nros Sur, 1st District, Benito Soliven. 

1 2nd District, Sixto Brillantes. 

Ttoilo, 1st District, Jose C. Zulueta. 

2nd District, Ruperto Montinola. 

3rd District, Tomas Confesor. 

4th District, Tomas Buenaflor. 

5th District, Victorino Salcedo. 
Isabela, Mauro Versosa. 

Laguna, 1st District, Tomas Dizon. 

2nd District, Arsenio Bonifacio. 


66 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


This 

Manila, 


Lanao, Tomas Cabili. 

La Union, 1st District, Camilo Osias. 

2nd District, Agaton R. Yaranon. 

Leyte, 1st District, Jose Ma. Veloso. 

2nd District, Dominador M. Tan. 

3rd District, Tomas Oppus. 

4th District, Francisco Enage. 

5th District, Ruperto Kapunan. 

Manila, 1st District, Gregorio Perfecto. 

2nd District, Pedi’o Gil. 

Marinduque, Cecilio A. Maneja. 

Masbate, Pio V. Corpus. 

Mindoro, J uan L. Luna. 

Misamis Occidental, Jose Ozamis. 

Misamis Oriental, Leon Borromeo. 

Mountain Province, 1st District, Saturnino Moldero. 

2nd District, Felipe Jose. 

w ~ „ 3rd District, George K. Tait. 

Negros Occidental, 1st District, Enrique Magalona. 

2iu[ District, Pedro C. Hernaez. 
at ^ „ 3rd District, Gil M. Montilla. 

Negros Oriental, 1st District, Guillermo Z. Villanueva. 
xt T-t District, J osc E. Romero 

Nueva Ecija, 1st District, Manuel Alzate. 

v „ 2n £ District, Felipe Buencamino, Jr. 

Nueva Vizcaya, Bernardo Buenafe. 

Palawan, Claudio Sandoval 
Pampanga, 1st District, Eligio G. Lagman. 

2nd District, Jose P. Fausto. 

Pangasinan, 1st District. Anacleto B. Ramos 
2nd District, Eugenio Perez. 

25 £. ls J r . lct , Uaniel Maramba. 
fj . 1 District, N. T. Ru pisan. 

-p i f n-ci : ■ 4 . D ^ t ? ct > Nai 'ciso Ramos. 

Rizal, 1st District, Pedro Magsalin. 

2nd District Emilio de la Paz. 

Komblon, Gabriel F. Fabella 
Samar, 1st District, Antofin D Tan 

2nd District, Serafin Marabut. 

3rd District, Juan Bocar 
Sorsogon, 1st District, Norberto A. Rocme 

o n i 2n n I ? lstn . ct ’ Tomas S. Clemente. 

Sulu, Datu Ombra Amilban»sa 

Tarlac, 1st District, Jose G. Coiuaimco 
2nd District, Benigno Aquino 
Tayabas, 1st District, Jose A. Amrara ' 

2nd District, Francisco Lavides. 

Zambales. Potenciano Lesaca. 

Zamboanga, Juan S. Alano. 

In Surigao the election resulted in a tie between Ricardo 
Navarro and Clementino V. Diez. 

proclamation shall be effective upon its promulgation at 
Philippine Islands, on November 15, 1935, by the Secretary 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


67 


of War of the United States of America, who is hereby designated 
os mv representative for that purpose. 

And I do further announce and proclaim that, in accordance with 
e provisions of the aforesaid Act, upon such promulgation of this 
•ordamation the existing Philippine Government shall terminate 


the p 
proc 


provisions w ^ upon sucn promulgation of this 

„clamation the existing Philippine Government shall terminate 
and the government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines shall 
a _ its rights, privileges, nnwm nn/i 5‘ Ym, 


and the govenmif*^ - •*“? vAimmonweaitn ot the Philippines shall 
enter upon its rights, privileges, powers, and duties as provided 

under th«^iss n TOERE 0 OF h, a T C 1 ommo 1 nweal< } 1 of the Philippines. 

IN WITNESb x have hereunto set my hand and 

caused the seal of the Pm ted States of America to be affixed. 

DONE at the City of Washington this 14 th day of November in 
the yeai of oui Lord nineteen hundred and thirty-five 
T seal] and of the Independence of the United States of Imerica 
L SE J tlie one hundred and sixtieth. “lerica 

FRANKLIN D ROOSEVELT 

By SSSt- 

C °* Secretary of State. 

[No. 214S] 


a tioN py His Grace, the Most Reverend Gabriel 
J iTV 70CAl1 D. D-? Archbishop of Cebu. 


-CVEYESj 


the destinies ^ Fili pino people, dawning with bright hopes 
longed of our cherished and legitimate aspirations, 

the fulfidu^' q Lord, a glance on the history of our nation ™ 
Casting ’ aiding hands; Thou didst entrust us to the noble 
r ecogni» e S/spain, who brought us the good tidings of the eospel 
ond Cathoho l r the ways of Christian civilization; Thou didst assist 
and led us a A fcs toward the attainment of our emancipation, by 

« in our us under the beneficent protection of America, for the 

^v-nolv P laCin ^ r i helpf ul development of o*r means and resources 

Ation beseeches Thy blessin R on her for 

c T-tence this n (l rj> hey labor in vain who build the house, unless 
we all R with them.” . 

God budds t0 bless America and Spam, and deign to complete 

Thv^ork ^Vhee O G' ;<1 oi Wisdom and Justice, from whom all 
We proy 1 ‘ „ ’ to assist with Thy light and power the authorities 
authority 9° „ ’j eC ted by the will of their brethren. Confirm their 
who have bee they may always enjoy a willing and loyal obedi- 
authority, s° % Thy holy spirit of counsel the President and the 
ence. Assist t QU j. new Government, that their administration 
Vice President equity, eminently useful and constructive to the 

may be con due ^ over. 

nation they PW^ w i s dom enlighten the deliberations of our Na- 
• Le ^ T hy blv so that all may tend to the promotion of national 
tional Assei ^ ire them to labor for the spiritual and moral better- 
ment' of our people, for “of all the dispositions and habits which 


68 DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


lead to political prosperity, religion and morality are indispensable.” 
Bless our industries and commerce. Preserve union and peace, 
liberty and equality amongst Thy beloved people. 

We pray likewise for His Excellency, the High Commissioner of 
the United States, for all the magistrates, judges, and ouvemors, 
and all other officers who are entrusted to safeguard our political 
welfare. To all of them, grant, O merciful God, strength and 
vigor, that they may be enabled to discharge with wisdom and 
honesty their respective duties. 

Be mindful, O Lord, of Thy servants, our patriots, who have 
fought for our liberty and have gone before us with the si<ni of 
faith and rest in the sleep of peace. To them, O Lord, and to all 
our countrymen who sleep in Christ, we beseech Thee, to orant of 
Thy goodness a state of comfort, light, and peace. Through the 
same Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Introduction of the Secretary of War of the United States By 
Hon. Frank Murphy, Governor General of the Philippine 
Islands. 

Friends : 

For this great and inspiring occasion, we make grateful acknowl- 
edgment to the steadfast faith of the American people and the 
Congress of the United States and to the encouragement and assist- 
ance of that great friend of the Philippine people the President of 
the United States, Franklin Delano Roosevelt ’ Sldent ° 

As further evidence of his deep interest and friendship, President 
Roosevelt has requested and designated another true friend of Philip- 
pine liberty to represent him on this occasion-a former Governor 
of one of the sovereign American States and a distinguished ad- 
ministrator of one of the great departments of the American Gov- 
ernment, that Department which under his guidance has specially 
guarded and protected the interests of the Philippine Government 
and has supervised the administration of its affairs The Phil opine 
people and all who share official responsibility for their welfare 
and Government rejoice _m the presence here today of Hon QeSge 

5'yST’ SeCretary ° f whom 1 have the 7 honor to present 

Address of the Honorable George H. Dern, Secretary of War at 
the Inauguration of the Government of the Common wealth 
the Philippines, at Manila, P. I November 15 1935 


OF 


Citizens of the Philippines : 

I have th& distinguished honor to come to you as the representative 
of the President of the United States to participate in the ceremonies 
of this momentous occasion We are about to establish and put into 
operation the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philinrhnes 
as ordained by the Congress of the United States. This event is 
another landmark in your steady progress toward the fulfillment of 
your aspirations to be a completely independent sovereign nation— ul- 
timately to be realized through the practical, cooperative efforts of two 
peoples imbued with the same ideals of liberty and self-government. 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 69 

President Roosevelt asked me to say that his heart is with you 
on this historic day. A radiogram just received from him asks me 
to give the following message to the Filipino people : 

Please convey to President Quezon and the Filipino people on the occasion 
of the birth of the Commonwealth of the Philippines my sincere congratulations 
on this great forward step in the establishment of popular self-government, 
and express to them my confidence in their ability to carry out successfully the 
final steps in the accomplishment of their complete independence. 

Franklin D. Roosevelt. 

Thirty-seven years ago, through the fortunes of war, the Philip- 
pine Islands came under the flag of the United States'. It was no 
premeditated aggression, and there was no thought of territorial 
aggrandizement. 

Even before American occupation the Filipino £>eople had started 
their struggle for freedom, with which Americans instinctively sym- 
pathized. What, then, was to be the attitude of the United States 
toward a dependency which it had so accidentally acquired? A pol- 
icy of colonial expansion and exploitation was a departure from our 
national ideals, and therefore did not commend itself to the Ameri- 
can people. 

Our decision was soon made. Less than two years after American 
occupation, President McKinley’s letter of instructions to the first 
Philippine Commission laid down these basic principles : 

In all the forms of government and administrative provisions which they are 
authorized to prescribe, the Commission should bear in mind that the govern- 
ment which they are establishing is designed not for our satisfaction, or for 
the expression of our theoretical views, but for the happiness, peace, and pros- 
perity of the people of the Philippine Islands. * * *. 

Later he declared : 

It is our purpose to establish in the Philippines a government suitable to the 
wants and conditions of the inhabitants and to prepare them for self-govern- 
ment and to give them self-government when they are ready for it and as 
rapidly as they are ready for it. 

That promise was made in good faith. In order that it might be 
creditably carried out it implied a period of training and prepara- 
tion. Greedy exploitation was repugnant to our minds. We de- 
clared that the good of the dependency — not our own good — must be 
the first consideration — a new idea, perhaps, in colonial administra- 
tion. We harked back to the spirit of 1776, and we conceded that 
the Filipinos had the same rights as we claimed when we were 
colonists of Great Britain. The question is sometimes asked : “Why 
does the United States give up so valuable a territorial possession 
as the Philippine Islands?” The answer is that the value of the 
Islands to the United States does not enter into the calculation. We 
have proceeded in accordance with the American conception of the 
fundamental right of peoples to govern themselves. 

Having declared this unprecedented colonial policy, there arose 
the practical question of how and when it should be carried out. 
Through no fault of their own the people of the Philippines had 
not been trained in the difficult art of self-government, and had never 
been given an opportunity to demonstrate their capacity to rule 
themselves. We had no means of knowing whether they had been 
disciplined, as Anglo-Saxons had been disciplined for centuries, 
to abide by the expressed will of the majority, however obnoxiou 3 


70 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


that will might be to the minority. Stable popular government is 
impossible without majority rule. Moreover, it was difficult for us 
to comprehend how popular government could be successful without 
popular education, which we Americans regard as the keystone of 
the arch of democracy. And so one of the first things we did was 
to send school teachers over here in large numbers, to establish a 
progressive educational system. And today universal education is 
the Philippine ideal as it is the American ideal. 

Popular government was begun promptly and developed steadily. 
The election of municipal and provincial officials was the first step, 
soon to be followed by an elective lower house of the Legislature, 
and somewhat later by a completely elective Legislature. And now 
we are taking the last step. 

I need not trace the history of independence legislation. The 
Tydings-McDuffie Act, passed in 1934, and accepted by the Philip- 
pine Legislature, is the result of an earnest effort on the part of the 
Congress to meet the aims and aspirations of the Filipino people, 
so far as was consistent with harmonizing the various interests 
affected thereby. Its enactment is an expression of confidence by 
the Congress of the United States in the capacity of the Filipino 
people to carry out successfully the next and final steps in the pro- 
gram for the establishment of an independent Filipino nation 1 

The prescribed transition period of ten years before complete in- 
dependence becomes an accomplished fact seemed advisable and 
prudent in order to launch the Philippine Republic under the most 
f avora b le auspices. It provides adequate safeguards for the interests 
of both the American and the Filipino people. The problems that 
must be worked out in this period are vital, and must be given the 
most careful and thorough consideration. 

President Koosevelt, in his message to the Congress on March 2 
1934, said : & ’ 

* * * May I emphasize that while we desire to grant complete indenend- 

ence at the earliest proper moment, to effect this result without allowing suffi- 
cient time for necessary political and economic adjustments would be a definite 
injustice to the people of the Philippine Islands themselves little short of a 
denial of independence itself. * * * 01 a 


11 1 ill Ul 

The Independence Act is a broad grant to the Filipino people of 
local government. The enlarged powers granted under this Act re- 
side essentially in the people, I he Commonwealth Government 

Arnfom7orl in nf'f'OlTlflnO.ft With tho m'Airi ^ 


side essentially in the people. The Commonwealth Government is 
being organized in accordance with the provisions of your own Con- 
stitution, which goes into eiiect today and which was formulated and 
drafted by delegates of your own selection. It is an enlightened 
democratic document, and does great credit to the Filipino people’ 
It contains a bill of rights expressing what the American people 
believe to be the basic principles of free government. Perhaps the 
greatest heritage that the United btates has bequeathed to you is the 
bill of rights included in both the first and second organic at 


Ulll UI IXguto . Uii'd.ilJLU UUIS Ol 

the Congress and earned over into your Constitution. 

You are about to witness the inauguration of the Chief Executive 
whom you have elected by popular vote ; and all the agencies of local 
government will soon be functioning under the provisions of your 
Constitution. Your President and Vice President, the members of 
your Supreme Court, and the other Island officials heretofore ap- 
pointed by the President of the United States, will take office under 


DOCUMENTS DELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 71 


the provisions of your own Constitution and the laws of your own 
National Assembly, thus your local affairs pass to your own con- 
trol, and you have the full responsibility of citizens of the Philip- 
pines. upon whose shoulders rests the mantle of government. 

I may be pardoned an expression of pride and pleasure in the 
privilege^ of witnessing an event resulting from the cooperative 
efforts oi two peoples situated on opposite sides of the globe, but 
laboring together to establish ultimately a new member of the family 
of independent nations. There is something unique and inspiring in 
the spectacle of two peoples voluntarily agreeing to dissolve °the 
bands which unite them, and to go their separate ways; and vet that 
is the event to which we now eagerly look forward as the final 
consummation of the program for Philippine independence. 

It- is a source of satisfaction to the American people to know that 
the fiscal affairs of your government are at this time, perhaps, at the 
best level m its history. Your finances are in excellent condition. 
Income for the past year exceeded expenditures. There is but a 
small public debt, lour governmental structure is supported by a 
prosperous and increasing commerce and by a thriving industry, 
backed by agricultural, mineral, and forest ‘resources adequate for 
the maintenance of a high standard of living for all the people. 

During my present visit I have been astonished bv the fertility of 
y° m so 3 * the diversity and abundance of your crops, the wealth of 
v 0111 mir ? es * vastness of your forests, the excellence of your har- 
jors. and. greater than all of these, the industry and virtue of your 
people. \\ i th such resources, and with good government, you should 


With the present change in your government, the office of Gover- 
noi General is abolished. This exalted office has been filled b} r a long 
line ot distinguished Americans, beginning with that illustrious 
statesman, TV llliam TI. Taft, and ending with the able, efficient, and 
warm-hearted man who has served you during the past two and one- 
half years, the Honorable Frank Murphy. In the discharge of his 
duties, Governor General Murphy lias made a record of which his 
fellow-citizens at home are justly proud, and I know that you people 
of the Philippines honor and love him. I have no doubt that it is a 
great satisfaction to you that he now becomes the first United States 
High Commissioner to the Philippines, and as such he will be the 
representative of American sovereignty and authority in your 

While the American record in the Philippines is not ended, it is 
drawing to a close. As Secretary Root on one occasion said : 


The country which exercises control 
in the public opinion of mankind. 


over a colony is always itself on trial 


We hope, of course, that the world will sav of us that our work 
here has been well done. But especially, w e hope that you, the 
people of these Islands, may continue to look with grateful apprecia- 
tl i > x, up ^r n ‘ h ® da - v that se n fc th,s beautiful land under the sovereignty 
of the United States, and to feel that our sojourn here has been a 
benediction to you And I hope, too, that the people of the United 
States may forever feel a just pride and satisfaction in the monument 
thus built m your hearts. We shall continue to be united by the 
bands of comradeship and mutual good will. 


__ rpn PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 
72 DOCUMENTS RELATING TO 

_ , , , . + hp United States will not forget to be 

I trust that the people ofthe un reflected crec ii t upon their 

grateful to the and women wh 1 and their ars 

native land by^vmgtheirta^en , far-away territory, 

to the service of their country ana you -i- • T ]■ i 

I should be most unfair, people of the Philippines if I did not 
point out that the main credit for the rapid evolution of youi pop- 
ular government is due to yourselves. 1 ou have been tried and not 
found wanting. You have had a passion for independence for many 
years, and with each new opportunity you have, m the most con- 
vincing manner, demonstrated your capacity to perform the varied 
and intricate tasks of government. In legislation you have shown 
vision,' wisdom, fairness, and restraint, with a statesmanlike grasp of 
your problems. In administration, the Governor General gives un- 
stinted praise to his Filipino associates for their ability and integ- 
rity. In drafting your Constitution you have shown a profound 
understanding of the fundamental principles of democracy, and you 
have produced a document remarkable for its impartial provisions 
in behalf of all the people. In the judiciary I wish to pay tribute to 
those distinguished Filipino jurists who, in cooperation with their 
American colleagues, have made your Supreme Court an everlast- 
ing credit to both the American and the Filipino people. 

As Americans, therefore, we do not boast of what we have done 
here. Father, we are gratified at having been given the rare privi- 
lege of cooperating with you in establishing a new democratic 
member of the family of nations in the western Pacific. 

Mr. President, as generally affecting the affairs of the Filipino 
people, I feel that you have an exceptional opportunity to carry out 
the next steps of this vital program. The responsibility for the 
happiness and well-being of this people is entrusted to the new Gov- 
ernment under your leadership. President Roosevelt has faith in 
your devotion to democratic principles and in your ability and that 
of your colleagues to carry the program through in a manner well 
calculated to serve the interests of your people. I most cordially 
wish you every success in the administration of your high office. 

And so, citizens of the Philippines, I congratulate "you with all 
my heart upon the consummation of your desires. May your self- 
rule always be characterized by that enlightened justice which alone 
S ar } ™ e y° u TT a great nation. And may you always have reason to 
teei that the United States is interested in your welfare and is vonr 
true friend. J 


Following the reading by Governor-General Murphy of the Presi- 
dents proclamation announcing the election of officer (for text, see 
p 65), oaths of office were administered by the chief justice of the 
Philippine Supreme Court to the president-elect, the vice-president- 
elect and the members-elect of the national assembly, who are listed 
in the proclamation. 


DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 


73 


THE COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

By the Secretary of War of the United States of America — 

a Proclamation 

By direction of the President of the United States of America, 
I, GEORGE H. DERN, Secretary of War of the United States of 
America, do hereby promulgate the proclamation of the President 
of the United States of America announcing the results of the elec- 
tion held in the Philippines on September 17, 1935, for the purpose 
of electing officers of the Government of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines; and I do hereby announce that the heretofore existing 
government of the Philippines is now terminated, and that the Gov- 
ernment of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, in entering upon 
its rights, privileges, powers, and duties as provided under the con- 
stitution of the Commonwealth of the Philippines and the laws of 
the United States of America, is the successor to the heretofore 
existing Philippine government and to all the rights and obligations 
thereof. 

r i cit 7 Manila at 8 : 58 o’clock a. m. on the fifteenth 

<- ay o November, m the year of our Lord one thousand nine hun- 
dred and thirty-five. 

(Sgd.) George H. Dern. 

Inaugural Address of His Excellency Manuel L. Quezon, 
President of the Philippines 

(Delivered Nov. 15, 1935, at the Legislative Building, Manila, P. I.) 
rELLOW-CoXTNTRYaiEN : 

me to y°ur constitutional prerogative you have elected 

ful f or tU? VeSldenc y of the Commonwealth. I am profoundly grate- 
I shall not S fail V ex P ress i° n °f your confidence, and God helping me 

i ml oh- n f , w b i ch is now taking place in our midst transcends in 

We riri, i , '. f ' - e me re induction into office of your Chief Executive. 
oxivermnom 0 ^ 1 * ^? * rdo being a new nation. We are inaugurating its 
fiber tv wl e a . re see mg the fruition of our age-old striving for 
noblest' umw'l - Wltnessin g the final stage in the fulfillment of the 
with a S nbfcl akln § ever attempted by any nation in its dealing 
is attested 3 f Ct P eo P le - And how well this task has been performed 
to Amerlen ? %- the blessings which from 14 million people go 
hope has boo^f Icn s °temn hour. President McKinley’s cherished 
day when do t ^ u d J ed — the Filipinos look back with gratitude to the 
the y peon o ?* aced their land under the beneficient guidance of 

Tt l the Unit ed States. 

should nH £« hat high dignitaries of the American Government 
n,-ol^ i ld these ceremonies. We are thankful to them for their 
KnkbVn % The Resident of the United States. His Excellency, 
x i amain ij. Roosevelt, ever solicitous of our freedom and welfare, 
nas sent to us as his personal representative, the Secretary of War, 
iTon. vjeor^e H. Dern, whose friendship for our people has proven 
most valuable in the past. Vice President Garner, Speaker Byrns, 

. H. Doc. 400, 74-2 6 


74 DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 

distinguished members of the Senate with their floor leaife 1 ? ® e ^f 
ator Robinson, and no less distinguished Members of the -HO * , . _ 
Representatives have traveled 10,000 miles to witness this 
toric event. I feel that by their presence the whole American i a , 
is here today to rejoice with us in the fulfillment of America s p ^ 
generously given that the Filipino people is to become free ana 1 . 
pendent. It is my hope that the ties of friendship and aite 
which bind the Philippines to America will remain unbroken c 
grow stronger after the severance of our political relations with • 

In behalf of the Filipino people, I express deep appreciation 
Hon. Frank Murphy, our last Governor-General, for his jus a 
efficient administration and for the valuable assistance he has i 
dered us in the difficult task of laying the constitutional founda ions 
of our new government. . , , . 

As we enter upon the threshold of independent nationhood, ie 
us pause for a moment to pay tribute to the memory of Rizal an 
Bonifacio, and all the heroes of our sacred cause, in deep acknowl- 
edgment of their patriotic devotion and supreme sacrifice. 

Fellow countrymen : The government which we are inaugurating 
today is only a means to an end. It is an instrumentality placed m 
our hands to prepare ourselves fully for the responsibilities of com- 
plete independence. It is essential that this last step be taken with 
full consciousness of its significance and the great opportunities that 
it affords to us. 

Under the Commonwealth, our life may not be one of ease and 
comfort, but rather of hardship and sacrifice. We shall face the 
problems which lie in our path, sparing neither time nor effort in 
solving them. We shall build a government that will be just, 
honest, efficient, and strong, so that the foundations of the coming 
Republic may be firm and enduring — a government, indeed, that 
must satisfy not onlv the passing needs of the hour but also the 
exacting demands ox the future. We do not have to tear down 
the existing institutions in order to give way to a statelier structure. 
There will be no violent changes from the established order of 
things, except such as may be absolutely necessary to carry into 
effect the innovation contemplated by the Constitution. A new 
edifice shall arise, not out of the ashes of the past, but out of the 
standing materials of the living present. 

Reverence for law as the expression of the popular will is the 
starting point in a democracy. The maintenance of peace and 
public order is the joint obligation of the government and the citi- 
zen. I have an abiding faith m the good sense of the people and 
in their respect for law and the constituted authority. Widespread 
public disorder and lawlessness may cause the downfall of constitu- 
tional government and lead to American intervention. Even after 
independence, if we should prove ourselves incapable of protecting 
life liberty, and property of nationals and foreigners, we shall be 
exposed to the danger of intervention by foreign powers. No one 
need have any misgivings as to the attitude of the Government 
toward lawless individuals or subversive movements. They shall 
be dealt with firmly. Sufficient armed forces will be maintained at 
all times to quell and suppress any rebellion against the authority 
of this Government or the sovereignty of the United States. 




DOCUMENTS relating to PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT 75 

There can be no progress except under the auspices of peace. 
Without P? ace an d public order it will be impossible to promote 
education, improve the condition of the masses, protect the poor and 
ignorant against expioit a ti on _ and otherwise insure the enjoyment 
of life, liberty, and property. ' I appeal therefore, to every Filipino 
to give the Government his loyaTsupport so that tranquility may 
reign supreme in our beloved land 

Our Constitution establishes an independent judiciary by provid- 
ing for security 0 - * tenure and compensation of our judges. But in- 
dependence is 1 not .the only objective of a good judiciary Equally, 
if not more important is lts inte it which will depend upon the 
judicious selection ot its members. The administration of justice 
cannot be ^ lise higher than the moral and intellectual 

standards of the men who dispense it To bulwark the fortification 
of an orclerlyana just government, it shall be my task to appoint 
to the bench o } men of proven honesty, character learning, and 
ability, ^°l h nt fc he 3 ? K 6 ma ^ feel when lie appears before the courts 
of justice thi at ne w 11 be protected in his rights, and that no man in 
this country 11 om the Chief Executive to the last citizen is above the 

We are ^ay amidst the storm and stress of one of the most 

tragic epochs ol history. Acute unemployment and economic dis- 
tress theater it] be stability 0 f governments the world over. The very 
foundations ox civilized society are shaken. The common man alone 
can save humanity tiom disaster. It is our duty to prove to him that 
under a ^publican system of government he can have every oppor- 
tunity to attain his happiness and that of his family. Protection to 
labor, especially to working women and minors, just regulation of 
the relations between labor and capital in industry and agriculture, 
solicitous regard on the part of the o-overnment for the well-being 
of the masses, are the means to briim about the needed economic and 
social equilibrium between the component elements of society. 

A wvemment draws the breath of life from its finances, and it 

must balan F e ejects To 6 and .expenditures as any other going business 
concern if it expects to survive. It is my duty, then, to see that the 

Government of the Commonwealth ^ w ithin its means and that it 

stand four-square on a well-balanced budget. 

The lar^r Wgjures which the grave responsibilities ahead of 
us will en c j g national defense, must be borne by taxation. 

So long as < ? ^o nieet those responsibilities from our present 

income we sna impose new taxes. But we are among the least 

taxed people in ie world and, therefore, when necessity arises, we 
should be willing o accept the burden of increased taxation. Liberty 
and independence can be possessed only by those who are ready to 
pay the price m life or fortune. 

To enable us mme adequately to meet the new responsibilities of 
the Commonwealth and to raise the living conditions of our people, 
we must increase the wealth of the nation by giving greater impetus 
to economic development, improving our methods of agriculture, di- 
versifying our crops, creating new industries, and fostering our do- 
mestic and foreign commerce. I trust that the forthcoming trade 
conference between representatives of the United States and the 
Philippines will result m a more just and beneficial commercial rela- 
tion between the two countries. 


76 DOCUMENTS RELATING TO PHimFET NE GOVERNMENT 

The establishment of an economical, simple and efficient govern- 
ment; the maintenance of an independent civil service; the implanta- 
tion of an adequate system of public instruction to develop moral 
character, personal discipline, civic conscience, and vocational effi- 
ciency; the safeguarding of the health and vigor of the race* the 
conservation and development of our natural resources — these* and 
other matters of equal import are touched upon at length in ‘the 
platform of the Coalition and in my speech of acceptance of my 
nomination, and it is unnecessary for me to reiterate my vi ews re- 
garding them. Having been elected on the virtuality of that plat- 
form and the policies enunciated by me in the course of the presi- 
dential campaign, I renew my pledge faithfully to carry them into 
execution. 

Good will toward all nations shall be the golden rule of my ad- 
ministration. The peoples of the earth are interdependent and their 
prosperity and happiness are inseparably linked with each other. 
Internation brotherhood and cooperation are therefore necessary." 
Amity and friendship, fairness and square deal in our relations with 
other nations and their citizens or subjects, protection in their legiti- 
mate investments and pursuits, in return for their temporary alle- 
giance to our institutions and laws, are the assurances I make on be- 
half of the new Government to Americans and foreigners who may 
desire to live, trade, and otherwise associate with us in the Philip- 
pines. * 

In the enormous task of fully preparing ourselves for indent ri nr,™ 
we shall be beset with serious difficulties, but we will rSK 
march forward. I appeal to your patriotism and summon vour 
nobility of heart so that we may, united in the common endunvnr 
once more dedicate ourselves to the realization of our national' Z’ 
tiny. I face the future with hope and fortitude, certain th ‘it Pnrl 
never abandons a people who ever follow His unerring and 
hand. May He give me light, strength, and courage evermmv* 

I may not falter In the hour of service to my people ! m ° re thafc 

Manuel L. Quezon 

,, .. President of the Philippine s 

Manila, November 15 , 1935 . 9 Vines. 


United States High Commissioner 

Section 7 (4) of the Philippine Independence Act provides for- rl,r 
appointment of a United States High Commissioner to theGn™™ 
ment of the Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands who “sl° nT 
the representative of the President of the United States in the Phil 
ippine Islands.” ue 1 m1 ' 

The President appointed Hon. Frank Murphy, then G™„ 
General, as the first United States High Commissioner TT. ernor 
pointment was signed by the President on July 12, 1935 t' s , a (J' 
his oath of office in Manila on November 14 and entered im! AT 
duties of his office immediately upon the completion of the in a ,, 1 

ceremonies on November 15, 1935. 6 mau g ura] 


O 


