
THE CENTRAL BANK MONEY MUSEUM QUARTERLY 
VOL. V NO. 3 JULY 1978 




: "' : *J.?ARY COPY 




Manila. Listed with the U.S. Library of Congress under Ref. No. 0-51-486. Annual 
Subscription: P28; Foreign: $6. Individual Copies: P7; Foreign $1.50. 



VOL. V JULY 1978 NO. 3 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EDITORIAL 102 

PHILIPPINE NUMISMATICS 

Quezon: The Fight for Independence 

- M.N.Querol 103 

Anecdotes About Quezon 

- Carlos Quirino 114 

Some Quotations from Quezon's Speeches 117 

Manuel L. Quezon and Philippine Numismatics 

- Angelita G. Legarda 118 

Tokens of the Revolution? 

- Angelita G. Legarda . . 124 

Philippine Numismatists: Felipe Liao 

- Doris G.Nuyda 128 

PAPER AND BANKNOTE SECTION 

Errors on Quezon Banknotes 131 

Japanese Invasion Money 

- Guy Davis 137 

ANCIENT COIN SECTION 

The Romance and Beauty of Ancient Gold 

- Herbert Ledyard 150 

The Emperor of the Thundering Legion 

- Herbert Ledyard 152 

WORLD COIN SECTION 

Swaziland Coins 

- Tarquin Olivier 154 

MUSEUM NEWS AND NOTES 156 



Editorial Consultant: Rodolfo V. Romero 

Editor: Dr. Benito J. Legarda 

Executive Editor: Dr. Angelita G. Legarda 

Editorial Advisers: Manuel P. Manahan, Antonio V. Bantug, Guy Davis 



Cover of this issue devoted to Manuel L. Quezon, this year being the centenary of his birth, 
features his portrait as painted in oil by Miranda and belonging to the Central Bank Corporate 
Art Collection. 



Editorial 



T t is a measure of the stature of the man that three articles in this 
issue on Manuel L. Quezon only begin to reveal a small part of 
what he signified to his country and his people. 

M. N. Querol traces his political career from the Revolution to 
the Commonwealth. Carlos Quirino gives sidelights on Quezon the 
man, with emphasis on his lack of vindictiveness toward political 
rivals and his effort to bring the government closer to the people. 

There is of course more. Social Justice as a political goal owes 
much to his espousal while President of the Commonwealth, when 
together with Osmeha he oversaw the country's transition to final 
independence. The forces he set in motion then have developed 
and gathered strength down to our time, and will continue to do 
so for the foreseeable future. The road had often been rough, but 
it has been well marked by milestones in social legislation. 

Despite his imperious and autocratic reputation, he was para- 
doxically a man of intellectual humility, in the sense that he recog- 
nized his own limitations. It is said that he once convened his cabi- 
net to discuss a certain subject and told them to talk freely and 
fully, as he knew nothing about it and wanted to learn from their 
discussion. 

It was a personal tragedy that he was forced by events to 
spend the last years of his life in exile, and that the ardent nationalist 
should in the end die on foreign soil without seeing the attainment 
of his life-long goal of complete independence. But even in that dark 
period of the country's history, he was a symbol of resistance to 
foreign tyranny, and by his participation as head of state in Allied 
war councils discharged the role of an independent statesman in 
advance of formal independence. 

Barrilla joins the rest of the Filipino people in observing the 
centenary of the birth of Manuel Luis Quezon, statesman and 
nationalist. 



102 



BARRILLA 



Philippine Numismatics 



QUEZON: 
THE FIGHT FOR INDEPENDENCE 

by M. N. Querol 



rtl he Philippine Assembly met at the 
Manila Grand Opera House on a 
sunless day, October 14, 1907. Though 
inexperienced, it went straight to the first 
order of business, electing Sergio Osme- 
na speaker and Manuel L. Quezon 
majority floor leader. Both were 29 years 
old. 

The Philippines had come a long way 
since June 12, 1898, when it declared 
itself independent. In battle after battle 
Emilio Aguinaldo's troops had retreated 
before better-equipped American forces, 
each time after hitting back savagely and 
exacting a high price in American blood. 
This had convinced the Americans that 
the Filipinos would give up only if given a 
measure of what they were fighting for. 
The result was that the U.S. Congress 
passed the Philippine Bill of 1902. 

The Philippine Bill put the executive 
power in the hands of an American 
governor-general, but it also placed the 
Filipino people under the protection of a 
Bill of Rights, vested the judicial power in 
the courts, and established an elective, 
Filipino-dominated Philippine Assembly 




as the lower house of a two-chamber 
legislature which had an appointive 
Philippine Commission (composed of 
Americans and Filipinos) as the upper 
body. 

Armed resistance to American rule 
tapered off. In this new setting, the 
Aguinaldo age ended and the Quezon age 
began. Aguinaldo and his key associates 



JULY 1978 



103 




Pres. Quezon with Gen. 
Emilio Aguinaldo. 



faded. Leadership fell into the hands of 
young men who had played subordinate 
roles in the fight against the Americans. 
But the central objective remained the 
same: independence. 

Osmena had Chinese blood. Though a 
lawyer, his first love was journalism. He 
proved his courage in 1899 by making a 
dangerous voyage from his native Cebu to 
Luzon, breaking through the American 
lines in order to meet with Aguinaldo in 
Tarlac and get instructions for the Cebu 
Revolutionary Junta. After trying to keep 
resistance alive through a newspaper 
called El Nuevo Dia, he plunged into 
politics, becoming governor of Cebu. He 
was cool and deliberate under fire. 

Quezon was a Spanish meztizo from 
Baler, a small town on the northern 



Tayabas coast. About five-foot-six and 
slight of build, he was practicing law 
when the Americans landed. He fought in 
Aguinaldo's army as a captain in Bataan. 
After Aguinaldo's capture, he was elected 
governor of Tayabas. An impulsive man, 
he cut a dramatic figure, volatile and 
unpredictable. 

As speaker of the Assembly, Osmena 
was the No. 1 Filipino leader. Quezon 
was No. 2. In a few short years, 
impulsiveness was to outmaneuver delibe- 
ration and the positions would be 
reversed. Osmena's leadership would then 
blur into the Quezon age. 

But a few key figures of the Aguinaldo 
age remained. One was Benito Legarda. 
Another was Pablo Ocampo. They were 
appointed as the first Filipino resident 



104 



BARRILLA 



The First Phil 
commissioners to Washington — spokes- 
men for the Philippines and members of 
the U.S. Congress in every sense except 
the right to vote. 

For Legarda, who had been the vice 
president of the Malolos Congress, this 
was a new political career. Convinced the 
future lay in collaboration with the 




Sergio Osmefta. 



line Commission. 

Americans, he had joined the Partido 
Federal and got appointed a member of 
the American-dominated nine-man Philip- 
pine Commission. He moved to the 
Partido Nacionalista, led by Osmena and 
Quezon, once he realized he was not 
articulating the popular will. 

Stocky and quick-witted, Ocampo had 
served as a secretary to the Malolos 
Congress. During most of the fighting 
against the Americans, he was an 
Aguinaldo secret agent in Manila. 

The fight for independence thus 
moved into the second round. With 
Osmena in Manila calling the shots, 
reinforced by the volatile Quezon, Legar- 
da and Ocampo sailed to Washington to 
argue the Philippine case. Round No. 1 
had been lost in the battlefield. In Round 
No. 2, the U.S. Congress was the place to 
win it. 

Economic legislation passed by the 
U.S. Congress had been as basic as the 
political framework it set up for the 



JULY 1978 



Philippines. Tariffs on Philippine exports 
to the U.S. were cut by 25 percent. This 
gave the major Philippine export indus- 
tries - hemp, sugar and tobacco - a 
competitive edge in the U.S. market. 

The tariff reduction was needed. As a 
result of the war, farms on most of Luzon 
had deteriorated. Work animals had all 
but disappeared. Except for subsistence 
farming in small plots, agricultural pro- 
duction had come to a dead stop. A 
bureau of agriculture had to be organized 
to speed up rehabilitation. Model farms 
and experiment stations were put up to 
demonstrate scientific methods of cultiva- 
tion. 

The country's potential were indicated 
in the census of 1903. Population was 7.6 
million, most of it Christian. More than 
half of the population - 55.8 percent - 
was illiterate, spread in rural districts of 
an archipelago with a total land area of 
roughly 30 million hectares. Somewhat 
less than half of the total land area was 
covered by commercial forest, the rest by 
mountain and farmland. Outside of beer, 
sugar and tobacco, there was little 
industrialization. There were considerable 
reserves of gold, iron ore, manganese and 



copper. Surrounded by water, the coun- 
try ought to have a large teeming fishing 
industry. 

Nonetheless, though still licking its 
wounds, the country was moving for- 
ward. Three things happened in 1903. 
For one thing, Manila saw its first 
automobile. The American-owned Meral- 
co acquired the horse-drawn Manila 
tramway, pushing Manila into the electric 
age. And the Philippines got a new 
currency based on gold. 

A young businessman named Leopold 
Kahn introduced the automobile, an 
import from France. So brisk was the 
Manila market that Khan's import quick- 
ly ran into tight competition from 
American models. 

The unfolding electrical age would in 
two years change the horse-drawn Meral : 
co tramway into electrically-driven cars. 
The rest of the transport industry was 
active. The Manila-Dagupan Railway, 
seized by the Americans during the war' 
was back in commercial operation, with 
commerce flowing on its 195 kilometers 
of track. Motor vehicles were beginning 
to edge carromata and carabao cart off 
the country's 1,400 kilometers of road. 




The first Philippine Assembly. Quezon is shown inset. 



106 



BARRILLA 



Inter-island shipping was also pushing 
forward, with vessels calling on 196 
domestic ports. 

The new Philippine coin removed an 
anomaly. Up to 1903 the silver-based 
Mexican and Spanish-Philippine peso was 
the country's legal tender. This was 
confusing, for the Philippines politically 
had nothing more to do with Spain and 
Mexico. Furthermore, silver was fluctuat- 
ing in value from day to day, giving 
businessmen headaches and ulcers. The 
U.S. Congress removed the uncertainty, 
creating a Philippine peso based on gold, 
valued at half the American dollar. New 
Philippine coins - a silver peso, half-pesos 
and assorted pieces - were soon in 
mintage. 

These events created ripple effects. A 
steam-powered rice thresher was intro- 
duced in 1904, the first of many 
machines which were to make mechan- 
ized agriculture possible. The American- 
owned Philippine Railway supplemented 
the Manila- Dagupan Railway in 1906 
with long lines of track in Cebu and 
Panay. With the transport network 
expanding, fanners and processors now 
had more and bigger markets within 
reach, and goods could be distributed 
quickly at less cost. 

The preferential U.S. tariffs provided 
new momentum to economic develop- 
ment. To the list of Philippine exports 
was added two related items, copra and 
coconut oil, which were coming into 
prominence as basic ingredients in the 
manufacture of soap and margarine. The 
rising curve in the export market 
increased local purchasing power. By 
1907 the domestic market was making 



yearly gross sales of well over P400 
million. The retail trade, however, stayed 
under foreign control, mostly Chinese. 

The Payne- Aldrich Tariff Act of 1909 
swung the preferential market into partial 
free trade. The new law assigned quotas 
to all Philippine exports except rice. All 
shipments within quotas were to be 
admitted into the U.S. market duty-free; 
everything in excess had to pay the full 
tarrif. On the other hand, any amount of 
U.S. goods was to be admitted into 
Philippine ports duty-free. 

This was the economic backdrop 
against which Round No. 2 in the fight 
for independence was fought. 

Convinced that most of the American 
people knew little or nothing about the 
Philippines, Manuel Quezon took a crash 
course in English and got himself 
appointed resident commissioner to 
Washington, succeeding Pablo Ocampo. 
He sailed to San Francisco in 1909, a plan 
for an information campaign in his 
pocket. He wanted Congress to pass an 
independence bill. It would never do this, 
he was sure, unless it get a message to do 
so from American public opinion. It was 
hard to see the American people exerting 
this kind of pressure unless they knew the 
Filipinos better. 

In Benito Legarda, Quezon found an 
effective associate in Washington. Legarda 
kept the home fires burning while 
Quezon traveled to key points in the 
U.S., wangling invitations to speak before 
influential groups. His talks were varia- 
tions on the same theme. Independence, 
he said, had made America prosperous 
and great. It would do the same thing for 
the Filipino people. The American people 



JULY 1978 



107 




The Council of State in 1920. Senate Pres. Quezon is seated fourth from right beside Gov-Gen. 
Francis Burton Harrison. 



were therefore called upon to instruct 
their representatives in Congress to pass a 
Philippine independence bill. 

Quezon did not rely solely on the 
spoken word. He reinforced it with a 
press bureau which funnelled material 
about the Philippines to influential 
American newspapers. 

Events were shaping up pretty much 
the way Quezon hoped they would. In 
1912 the Democrats overthrew the 
Republicans, gaining the White House and 
sizable majorities in the House and the 
Senate. The Democrats traditionally took 
anti-imperialist positions. At Quezon's 
instigation, Rep. William Atkinson Jones, 
Democrat of Virginia, presented a bill 
granting the Philippines independence "as 
soon as a stable government can be 



established." The House passed the bill, 
211 to 59. An amendment to grant 
independence within four years of ap- 
proval deadlocked the vote in the Senate, 
41 for and 41 against, and the Vice 
President of the United States broke the 
tie with a vote for passage. In a 
conference of the two chambers, the 
amendment was voted out, and the bill 
was enacted as passed by the House. 
Signed by President Woodrow Wilson on 
August 29, 1916, the bill became the 
Jones Law. 

Though short of independence, it 
brought the Filipinos closer to their 
dream. The Bill of Rights had been lifted 
bodily out of the Philippine Bill of 1902 
and made part of the new organic act. 
The basic change lay in the legislative 



108 



BARR1LLA 




Quezon with his family - Dona Aurora, and children Zenaida, Maria Aurora, and Manuel, Jr. 




Quezon with Osmefia and Governor - General Frank Murphy at Malacanang. 



110 



BARRILLA 



power. The Commission was abolished to 
give way to a 24-seat, completely Filipino 
Senate. The Assembly was reconstituted 
into a 93-seat House of Representatives. 
In short, the legislative power was 
completely in Filipino hands. Even the 
executive power ceased to be completely 
American; the governor-general was to be 
assisted by a preponderantly Filipino 
Cabinet. 

Quezon put the Jones Law in his 
pocket and sailed home to a hero's 
welcome. Thousands crowded the pier in 
Manila to catch a glimpse of him as he 
stepped ashore. His name became a 
byword. 

He ran for the Senate and became its 
president. From the time he got seated at 
the rostrum, he attracted power like 
filings to a magnet. Though Osmena got 
elected with little opposition to the 
speakership of the House, his fortunes 



were on the wane. Quezon was on the 
way to becoming No. 1 . 

The Big Depression, which rose out of 
nowhere in 1928, proved to be an 
effective if unwelcome ally. By 1931 
business had become so slack in the U.S. 
that thousands got thrown out of work. 
The crunch was so hard that U.S. 
producers in competition with Philippine 
exports put the squeeze on Congress to 
pass an independence bill. Once indepen- 
dent, the Philippines would have to pay 
the full tariff and lose its competitive 
advantage in the U.S. market. The result 
was the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Indepen- 
dence Act, passed by a Democratic 
Congress. 

President Herbert Hoover vetoed the 
bill, saying it was unfair to cut the 
Philippines adrift without the protection 
of the U.S. market, but Congress 
overrode the veto. 




President Franklin Delano Roosevelt signing the Philippine Constitution, 23 March 1935, wit- 
nessed by American and Filipino officials headed by Quezon (Seated right) . 



JULY 1978 



111 



The bill split the Nacionalista leader- 
ship wide open. Osmena and Manuel 
Roxas, a new star in the Philippine 
political sky, thought it was the best that 
could be got out of Congress and urged 
that it be accepted. Quezon disagreed. 
The bill, he said, would put the 
Philippines in the short end of its trade 
with the U.S. In addition, Philippine 
dignity was offended by provisions 
allowing the U.S. to keep military anJ 
naval bases in the country. Finally, the 
powers of the American high commission- 
er, who was to be the symbol of the 
American presence during the 10-year 
transition to independence, were so 
indefinite he could do almost anything. 

But the Philippine legislature had to 
accept or reject the bill. That was the 
point. If Quezon was to prevail, he would 
have the majority in both chambers. The 
result was the division of the country into 
antis and pros - for and against the bill - 
and the bitterest political infighting that 



the nation had so far seen. The anti- 
victory was overwhelming. Even before 
the vote was taken, the pro side had 
become a political wasteland. Osme- 
na was deposed as Senate president 
protem. So was Roxas as speaker of the 
House. 

In 1933 Quezon went to the U.S. to 
try and get a better bill. The new 
President of the U.S., Franklin Delano 
Roosevelt, told him frankly what to 
expect. Congress, Roosevelt told him, 
could be persuaded to do two things. 
First, scrap the notion of allowing the 
U.S. to retain military and naval bases in 
the Philippines. Second, agree to correct 
whatever "imperfections and inequali- 
ties" there might be in Philippine- 
American trade. Outside of these two 
stipulations, the rest of a new indepen- 
dence bill would have to be pure 
Hare-Hawes-Cutting. 

Quezon was satisfied. He thought the 
two provisions made all the difference. 




Inauguration of the Commonwealth before the Legislative Building, November 15, 1935. 



112 



BARRILLA 




Quezon taking the oath of office as first President of the Commonwealth. 



Containing Roosevelt's two stipula- 
tions, the Tydings-McDuffie bill quickly 
passed the legislative wringer and became 
law in March 1934. On May 1 - the 36th 
anniversary of Dewey's victory in Manila 
bay - the Philippine legislature accepted 
it. A Constitution was drafted for a 
Commonwealth of the Philippines. The 
Commonwealth was inaugurated on 
November 15, 1935. 

Faced with a difficult economic 
situation, the splintered Nacionalista 
Party had closed ranks. In nationwide 
balloting two months previously, Quezon 
had been elected President and Osmena 
Vice President. Now, at inaugural ceremo- 
nies at the Capitol near the Luneta, 
Quezon faced a dazzling audience. Presi- 
dent Roosevelt was represented by his 
secretary of war, George H. Dern. The 
Vice President of the United States, John 



Nance Garner, was present. So was the 
speaker of the House of Representatives, 
Joseph W. Byrns. In an honored place was 
Francis Burton Harrison, who in his day 
as governor-general had gone out of his 
way to give the Filipinos every chance at 
self-government. Frank Murphy was 
doing his duty as governor-general for the 
last time. 

It was a sunny day. Quezon was in top 
hat and spats, his left chest studded with 
medallions. As he delivered his inaugural 
address, his voice was picked up by radio 
and broadcast to all the Filipino people. 
With God's grace, he said, he intended to 
do his work with courage. 

The transition to independence was to 
be 10 years. It would be a long journey. 
As he spoke, Quezon's rhetoric was down 
to earth. He was telling his people to -take 
the first step. EJ 



JULY 1978 



113 



ANECDOTES ABOUT QUEZON 



by Carlos Quirino 



robably more stories are told about 
President Manuel L. Quezon than 
any other public official of this country. 
If he had good facets in his character, he 
also had many faults - which made him a 
very human person, just like you and me. 
He was quick to anger, and just as quick 
to 'subside - he possessed a mercurial 
temperament that angered many people, 
and also endeared him to others. I shall 
relate some of the many anecdotes about 
this great Filipino that will give an inkling 
of his character. 

For one tiling, he never held a grudge 
against the persons who had called him 
names, or criticized him severely, special- 
ly those made during a political struggle 
- and there were many during his 
lifetime. One of these incidents referred 
to my relative Elpidio Quirino, who had 
opposed him in the selection of a Speaker 
for the National Assembly. Quezon 
wanted Jose Yulo for the job, but Don 
Elpidio felt that he was popular enough 
with the to-be-elected Assemblymen 
that he could win the Speakership. With 
the help of wealthy Negros backers who 
wanted Yulo to become the Speaker, 



Benito Soliven defeated Don Elpidio for 
the seat in the Assembly. 

When Don Elpidio's name was brought 
up for a position in the Commonwealth 
administration during a caucus of the 
party, many opposed his inclusion on the 
grounds that he had opposed Quezon's 
wishes. 

"Gentlemen," said Quezon, "Quirino 
went against Quezon the president of the 
Nacionalista party, but not against 
Quezon the President of the Philippines. 
He is a capable and an experienced public 
official. He will therefore be my next 
Secretary of the Interior." 

Again there was the case of Rafael 
Palma who had been one of Quezon's 
most vitriolic critics. It was Palma who 
had advocated that our leader should be 
"Filipinos de caray corazon" (Filipino of 
face and heart) obliquely hitting Quezon 
for his Spanish physiognomy. When 
Quezon rejected acceptance of the 
Hawes-Hare-Cutting law granting in- 
dependence to the islands after a 
transition period of ten years, Palma 
publicly branded Quezon "a renegade to 
the cause of Philippine independence." 



114 



BARRILLA 



These words hurt Quezon to the 
quick, and he vowed "never to see Palma 
again. " When Sergio Osmena recommend- 
ed to Quezon the appointment of Palma 
to the Supreme Court during the 
Commonwealth Government, Quezon ref- 
used to do so. 

But when Palma was on his last illness 
a few years later, with no money to pay 
for his hospitalization, Quezon im- 
mediately named him chairman of the 
National Council of Education so that 
Palma could secure his retirement pay 
and die with no financial worries. 

The late Manuel Zamora, protocol 
officer at Malacanan Palace, had many 
anecdotes about his President. These are 
some of them: 

One morning while walking in the 
Palace garden, Quezon noticed that an 
acacia tree near the gates fronting Aviles 
Street (now J. P. Laurel) had been cut 
down. 

"Who ordered that acacia cut down? " 
he thundered, as his eyebrows twitched — 
a sure sign of repressed anger. 

"Secretary Jorge Vargas, sir, yester- 
day," replied the gardener. 

"Tell him to come here at once." 

When the Executive Secretary came 
running from the Executive Office, he 
trembled a little, for it was obvious that 
el president e was very angry. 

After verifying that it was Vargas who 
had given the order, Quezon said, 
"Jorge, I want you to put back that tree 
in 24 hours - or else . . ." 

Vargas nodded dumbly, realizing that 
a large tree which had been sawn at the 
base could never be replanted. 

"Yes, Mr. President," said George, and 



for several days afterwards he did not 
show up at the Palace. But he need not 
have feared Ms irate boss, for in an hour 
Quezon had completely forgotten about 
the acacia tree. 

One day, while on his way to inspect 
the new buildings being constructed in 
what is now Quezon City, the President 
saw a group of humbly dressed people 
outside the Palace gates. When Quezon 
returned in his car two hours later, the 
group was still there, drenched by the 
rain that had fallen in the interim. 

Learning from Zamora that they were 
farmers from Cavite province who had a 
petition to bring before him, he exploded 
with the words: "Puneta (Spanish equi- 
valent of dammit), why didn't you tell 
me before I left the Palace? " 

The farmers had come at the behest of 
their provincial governor, Luis Ferrer, 
who had made the appointment not with 
Zamora but with Col. Manuel Nieto, the 
senior aide-de-camp. 

The President had the group brought 
in to the social hall next to the Pasig river 
and ordered that they be served with 
sandwiches and hot coffee. 

"You didn't have to come here to 
present your petition," he told them in 
Tagalog. "You are poor and in making 
this trip you must have spent your last 
centavos. Here in Malacanan, which is 
really your Palace, I have at least six cars 
which you can use to bring you back to 
your homes. 

"When the people, specially the 
common people are in need," he said, " it 
is the duty of this government to go to 
the people, and not wait for the 
people to come to it. As your President, I 



JULY 1978 



115 



want you to know that this is my 
policy." 

Added Zamora, "As far as I can 
remember, this was the first time that the 
policy of bringing the government closer 
to the people was enunciated." 

A serio-comic incident took place one 
day while Quezon was strolling in the 
Palace garden. He noticed somebody was 
staring at him from the second floor of 
the executive building. He called for that 
person, who turned out to be the chief of 
the records section of the law division, 
named Feliciano Tayag. 

"Why did you keep looking at me? " 
Quezon asked, and before Tayag could 
answer, said: "Who are you? " Again, 
before the flustered employee could 
answer, Quezon fired a third question: 
"Why are you wearing that luxurious 
mustache? " 

Now, Don Manuel had sported such a 
mustache during his salad days, when he 
was a member of the Philippine Assembly 
and while Resident Commissioner to the 
United States, but had shaved it off prior 
to his return to the Islands after the 
passage of the Jones Law. 

Poor Tayag was so scared that he 
could only hem and haw in reply. 

"Shave it off! " ordered the President, 
turning away. 

Tayag reportedly shaved it off that 
very day. Since that time he remained 
without hirsute adornment, and when he 
tried to revive it during the Japanese 



occupation, he observed: "My mustache 
got so scared of President Quezon that it 
had refused to grow since then." 

Quezon was careful not to show 
favoritism towards any of his relatives. 
Once he noted that a nephew of his wife, 
a member of the Presidential Guards, 
used to have his meals at their table after 
they were through eating. 

"Why is he eating here? " the Presi- 
dent asked his wife, Dna. Aurora. 

"The food given the guards are so poor 
that I've asked him to eat here," she 
replied. "Please let him stay." 

"Well, in that case I'll have to allow all 
the guards to eat at our table." 

His wife saw the point, and from that 
time on her relative ate in the mess hall 
with the other soldiers. 

Quezon was not above making fun of 
himself. Zamora relates that he once had 
a portrait of Don Manuel in his office, a 
painting done in the modernistic manner 
after Pablo Picasso. 

"Zamora," said the President as he saw 
the painting in the protocol office; "sino 
ba and luko-lukong iyan? (who's that 
crazy guy there? )". 

"Kayo ho," said Zamora, feeling 
terribly embarrassed. "Retrato ninyo ho 
iyan (You, sir, it's your picture). 

Quezon grinned. "Kungako ito, bakit 
mukhang luko-luko? " (If that's me why 
do I look like crazy). And then he walked 
away. Zamora's heirs now prize that 
portrait of el presidents □ 



116 



BARRILLA 



SOME QUOTATIONS FROM 
QUEZON'S SPEECHES 



My loyalty to my party ends where my 
loyalty to my country begins. 

Ask the bird, Sir, who is enclosed in a 
golden cage if he would prefer his cage 
and the care of his owner to the 
freedom of the skies and the allure of 
the forest. 

What a beautiful spectacle for the 
country to behold political fights 
limited to discussion of principles and 
eliminating personalities! 

The man has not yet been born who can 
make me forget what is due to 
myself, nor is there under the heavens 
any price however great that can make 
me even for a moment eschew the 
dictates of human dignity. 

Victory or defeat has to me the same 
value in the face of duty well done. 

A new edifice shall arise, not out of the 
ashes of the past, but out of the 
standing materials of the living pre- 
sent. 

I face the future with hope and fortitude, 
certain that God never abandons a 
people who ever follow His unerring 
and guiding Hand. 

The ultimate bulwark of liberty is the 
readiness of free citizens to sacrifice 
themselves in defense of that boon. 

We are living in an age in which civilized 
society can only endure if justice is 
equally accorded to the rich and poor. 
Those who have can hope to keep 




what they have if they share it with 
those working for them. 

Reverence for law as the expression of 
the popular will is the starting point in 
a democracy. 

The administration of justice can not be 
expected to rise higher than the moral 
and intellectual standards of the men 
who dispense it. 

Liberty and independence can be possess- 
ed only by those who are ready to pay 
the price in life or fortune. □ 



JULY 1978 



117 



MANUEL L. QUEZON 
AND PHILIPPINE NUMISMATICS 

by Angelita G. Legarda, M.D. 



jy^anuel Luis Quezon, statesman, 
leader, and first President of the 
Commonwealth, through his dedicated 
efforts to gain Philippine independence, 
left us a legacy in Philippine numismatics 
as well. 

Quezon, who was chairman of the 
committee on appropriations and floor 
leader in the first Philippine Assembly, 
had shown himself to be a man of 
brilliant mind, charming personality, and 
an admirable spirit of dedication to the 
public welfare. It was no wonder that he 
was thus chosen to be Resident Commis- 
sioner to the Congress of the United 
States. It was during his maiden speech 
on the floor of the U.S. Congress that, 
among other things, he said: 

"Ask the bird, Sir, who is 
enclosed in a golden cage if 
he would prefer his cage and 
the care of his owner to the 
freedom of the skies and 
allure of the forest! " 

Many years intervened, many pro- 
blems and difficulties faced and resolved, 
and many efforts unceasingly exerted 
before the law which would lead to 
independence was accepted by the 



Philippine Legislature on May 1, 1934. 

The Commonwealth of the Philippines 
officially came into being with the 
induction into office -on November 15, 
1935, of Manuel Luis Quezon as Presi- 
dent and Sergio Osmena as Vice- 
President. The inauguration was attended 
by high officials of the U.S. government. 
The Independence Act which had led to 
this provided for a United States High 
Commissioner to the government of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines, and 
Frank Murphy, who was governor-general 
at the time of the inauguration of the 
Commonwealth, was the first United 
States High Commissioner. 

The inauguration of the Common- 
wealth was commemorated by a set of 
three silver coins which have become key 
coins in the cabinets of collectors of 
Philippine coins. The coins were minted 
at the Manila Mint, and designed by Am- 
brosio Morales. 

The inauguration of the Common- 
wealth also produced a change in the 
design of the circulating coinage in that 
the seal of the Commonwealth replaced 
the American eagle and shield on the 
reverse of existing denominations, i.e. one 



118 



BARRILLA 



Commonwealth Inauguration Commemorative coins. Clockwise from top: Quezon-Murphy, 
IP; Quezon-Roosevelt, IP; common reverse; and Quezon-Murphy, 50<f. 




Medal issued to commemorate the inau, 

centavo, five centavos, ten centavos, and 
twenty centavos. 

Another commemorative item for the 
inauguration of the Commonwealth was a 
medal, issued in silver and in bronze, 
designed by Daniel Zamora, of the firm 
Zamora Hermanos. Mintage of the medals 
was 5000. The obverse shows the profile 
of President Quezon, with a view of the 
Legislative Building in Manila beneath the 
bust, and "MANUEL LUIS QUEZON" 
above. The reverse depicted the newly 
adopted coat-of-arms of the Philippine 
Commonwealth, which was similar to the 
old seal, except for the Philippine flag 
with the three stars on the yellow field, 
with red and blue on the lower part of 
the seal, and also mounted by the castle 
and dolphin of the old coat-of-arms of 
the city of Manila. The legend of the 
reverse reads: "COMMONWEALTH OF 
THE PHILIPPINES" in large letters and 
"UNITED STATES OF AMERICA" in 
smaller letters below it in the upper 
portion, and the date "NOV. 15, 1935" 
below. The issue price for these medals 
was $2 each. At the time it was stated 
that the dies were to be defaced and 



ration of the Manila- Legaspi railroad line. 

placed in the National Museum. 

It is a sad trick of fate that Quezon did 
not live to see his country achieve the 
independence he strove for. However, 
events and accomplishments during his 
administration were often commemo- 
rated by medals to enrich the collector's 
cabinet. 

President Quezon's birthday on 
August 19, 1936, which was celebrated as 
a campaign against tuberculosis was 
commemorated by a unifaced bronze 
medal manufactured by Zamora, featur- 
ing the President's bust profile, facing 
left, within a circle in the center; above, 
in two lines: "August 19, 1936 - 
MANUEL L. Quezon"; and below, 
"FIFTY-EIGHTH BIRTHDAY". 




BARRILLA 



In May, 1938 Pres. Quezon officially 
inaugurated the opening of the Manila- 
Legaspi railroad line, an event commemo- 
rated by a bronze medal 44 mm. in size. 
The obverse depicts a running train with 
Mayon volcano in the background, all 
within a circle, and around the circle the 
legend "MANILA RAILROAD 
COMPANY OF THE PHILIPPINE IS- 
LANDS" with a star beneath. The reverse 
bears the description in several lines: 
"MANILA-LEGASPI LINE/ OFFI- 
CIALLY INAUGURATED/ BY/ PRESI- 
DENT/ MANUEL L. QUEZON/ OF THE 
PHILIPPINES,/ MAY/ 1938." 

Quezon died on August 1, 1944, just a 
few days before the invasion of the 
Philippines by the liberating American 
armed forces. 

His home province, Tayabas, was re- 
named after him and was thence- 
forth called Quezon province. An oval- 
shaped medal bearing the bust of Quezon 
facing right was issued to commemorate 
the Quezon Provincial Carnival and 
Exposition in 1947. The medal was issued 
in silver, by Zamora, and was unifaced. 




Oval-shaped medal issued by the Quezon 
Provincial Carnival and Exposition in 1947. 




The tragic death by assassination of 
Mrs. Quezon was recalled in a medal 
issued in her memory in 1949. (above) 




Bataan Commemorative Medal, 1947. 

In later years, a series of three medals 
commemorating the 25th anniversary of 
Bataan and Corregidor were issued, struck 
by J. Tupaz. The obverse bore the jugate 
busts of President Quezon and General 
Douglas MacArthur facing left. 
(B-9 18-21) 

This year the country is celebrating 
the birth centennial of Manuel Luis 
Quezon. A set of two commemorative 
coins are planned to be issued for the 
occasion, a 50-peso coin and a 25-peso 
coin, both in silver. Designed by the CB's 
numismatic consultant, the 50-peso coin 
bears the bust profile of MLQ facing right 
occupying the center and left half of the 



JULY 1978 



121 



Approved designs of the forthcoming Quezon centennial coins. At left is the 50-Piso coin 
featuring his bust while the 25-Pat right has the Quezon Memorial monument. 



obverse, with the seal of the com- 
monwealth in the right upper quadrant 
and the dates 1878-1978 in the right 
lower quadrant. The legend below reads: 
"MANUEL L. QUEZON." The 25-peso 
coin depicts the Quezon monument on the 
obverse "1878" to the left of the 
monument, "1978" to the right, and 
"MANUEL L. QUEZON" below. The 
reverses of both bear the coat-of-arms of 
the Republic, "REPUBLIKA NG PILIPI- 



NAS" above, and the value below. The 
coins will be made available singly or as a 
set, and will be included as part of the 
1978-proof set of Coinage of the 
Republic. 

Although numismatics traditionally 
includes coins and medals only, it is 
worthy to note that Quezon's portrait 
appears on two banknotes, the F200, 
which has been demonetized and the 
P20-note still circulating. 




CENTRAL BANK OF THE PHILIPPINES 

THIS NOTE IS A LIABILITY Of THE CENTRAL BANK AND FULLY GUARANTEED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 



rut m ■ »•' •' I 




*AB 000 000,. .... ^jZJZZiE &amm M 000000 fULUUfJ 



Proposed design for the T200 bill of the CB English banknotes. Not adopted. 



BARRILLA 





G PILIPIIMASGM789898 



mnsLNA rro ay i&anq ©AYxauj *o. 

BANCXO SENT! 

IAOWTAN HO PAMAHAtX 



I?' 

til I ' 



GM78 



DAIAWAMPUNG 





JULY 1978 



123 



TOKENS OF THE REVOLUTION? 



by Angelita G. Legarda, M.D. 



wo more unidentified and un- 
documented pieces have surfaced 
from the Laguna region in recent times. 
The pieces are crudely struck, round, of 
base metal alloy, both dated 1899. 

Unlike the previous finds (see Barrilla, 
January 1978) which are dated in the 
first half of the 18th century, these 
pieces, purportedly of much later vintage, 
bear a date which is historically signifi- 
cant in that the year 1899 is encompassed 
by the period of the Revolution. 

The design of the pieces lends support 
to the possibility that they may have 
been associated with the revolution, since 
the triangle with three stars, one at each 
point within the triangle, is a well-known 
revolutionary symbol. This basic design is 
in fact found on one type of the 
2-centavo coins struck in Malolos by the 
revolutionary government. The latter, 
however, were well engraved and machine 
struck whereas the newly discovered 
specimens have a much cruder appearance. 
Another difference is that instead of the 
sun in the center of the triangle, the 
pieces described here bear the letter "L." 
One can guess if one wishes that "L" may 



have stood for "Laguna." The reverses, 
though badly corroded can be seen to 
bear the letters "RF", in one case 
punched twice. Here again, these could be 
interpreted as meaning "Republika 
Filipinas". The two pieces described here 
bear the values "2c." and "4c", 
respectively. (Fig. Nos. 3 & 4) 

Are these pieces indeed tokens of the 
revolution? In this article we would like 
to explore that possibility although 
obviously any conclusions arrived at 
would necessarily be no more than 
educated guesses. 

It is a fact that the Malolos Congress 
of November 26, 1898 authorized the 
minting of coinage. The new Philippine 
Republic issued two varieties of copper 
coins, each worth two centavos, which 
were struck at the army arsenal in 
Malolos. The first variety had the sun and 
three stars in the upper center, above an 




124 



BARRILLA 




island, and the date 1899 below. The 
legend above read "Republica Filipina." 
On the reverse, the numeral "2" 
surrounded by olive and laurel branches 
in the center, the word, "LIBERTAD" 
above, and "CENTIMOS DE PESO" 
below. The second variety, slightly larger 
in size than the above, had a triangle with 
sun and three stars in the center of the 
obverse, the legend "REPUBLICA 
FILIPINA" above and the date " 1899" 
below between two tiny circles. The 
reverse bore a large "2" in the center 
surrounded by a wreath of laurel 
branches. Mintage of these coins was 
unknown, but was probably very limited 
because the fledgling Republic was a 
short-lived one. 

The outbreak of the war with the 
United States took place on February 4, 
1899. The Filipino army was organized 
on a regional basis, each province 
organizing its brigades and regiments 
under the command of generals and 
chiefs who were native sons of the 
province. One of the generals of the 
southern Tagalog provinces was Gen. 
Paciano Rizal, brother of Jose P. Rizal, 
already a national hero. 

Descriptions of some of the campaigns 
in the southern Tagalog area are given 
here as taken from Prof. Gregorio F. 
Zaide's "The Philippine Revolution": 



LAWTON'S CAMPAIGN IN 
LAGUNA DE BAY. After the 
capture of Malolos, General 
Otis surprisingly stopped 
MacArthur's campaign. He 
recalled General Lawton . . . 
and sent him on a minor 
campaign in Laguna de Bay. 
On April 8, 1899, Lawton 
left San Pedro, Makati, with 
an American expedition of 
1500 troops ... He sailed up 
the Pasig river, crossed 
Laguna de Bay, and landed 
near Santa Cruz (capital of 
Laguna province) in the 
afternoon of April 9th. The 
following morning, the 10th 
of April, 1899, he captured 
Santa Cruz. 

From Santa Cruz, Lawton 
marched inland, overcoming 
the Filipino resistance and 
captured Pagsanjan (April 
11th) and the lakeshore 
towns of Lumbang, Longos 
and Paete on April 12th. 
While his tired troops were 
bivouacked at Paete, he 
received orders from Otis to 
return immediately to 
Manila. Accordingly, he 
postponed his plan to attack 
Calamba and brought back 




JULY 1978 



125 



his troops to Manila on April 
17. 

His splendid, lightning-like 
campaign proved to be a mere 
reconnaisance. His victories 
gave no permanent advantage 
to Uncle Sam. No sooner had 
he returned to Manila than 
General Cailles' forces 
reoccupied Santa Cruz, 
Pagsanjan, Lumbang, Longos, 
and Paete. 

(Lawton died on December 19,1899, 
in a battle near the Marikina river in San 
Mateo defended by Gen. Licerio Gero- 
nimo and his guerrillas. It was an ironic 
twist of fate that the general responsible 
for the capture of the notorious Apache 
Chief Geronimo should meet death at the 
hands of a Filipino general of the same 
name) 

The occupation of the Southern 
Tagalog provinces by the Americans is 
described by Zaide as follows: 

"After Lawton's death, 
Gen. Otis moved to crush the 
Filipino forces in the South- 
ern Tagalog provinces — Cavi- 
te, Batangas, Laguna, and 
Tayabas (Quezon). One brig- 
ade, General Wheaton in 
command, with two compa- 
nies of Macabebe scouts, and 
another one, under General 
Theodore Schwann, were 
readied for the offensive. The 
general plan was for Wheat- 
on's brigade to fight General 
Trias' men in Cavite until 
Schwann's brigade, marching 





Fig. 4 



along the west shore of 
Laguna de Bay, could es- 
tablish a line running from 
Binan to Naic, thus hemming 
in the Cavite patriots. 

On January 4, 1900, 
Schwann began his march 
from San Pedro, Makati. On 
the following day he captured 
Binan, after a brisk engage- 
ment with Gen. Paciano 
Rizal's troops. On the 7th of 
January, his brigade moved 
towards Silang, while Wheat- 
on's brigade, which was based 
at Imus, began the attack on 
Dasmarinas, Kawit, and San 
Francisco de Malabon. After 
a series of furious skirmishes, 
Trias' troops were dispersed, 
and Wheaton and Schwann 
became masters of Cavite 
province. The Binan-Naic line 
was established, and all towns 
along this sector were garri- 
soned by American soldiers. 

The next phase in the 
offensive was the conquest 



126 



BARRILLA 



of Batangas, Laguna and 
Tayabas. Meanwhile, Col. 
Robert L. Bullard, command- 
ing the American garrison at 
Calamba, was busy fighting 
General Rizal. After defeating 
Rizal's guerrillas at Los Banos, 
he marched to Santo Tomas, 
Batangas and captured this 
town. With artillery and in- 
fantry reinforcements from 
Wheaton's brigade, he moved 
towards Lipa, while 
Schwann's brigade was clos- 
ing in from Cavite. On Jan- 
uary 15, Lipa was taken and 
looted by the American sold- 
iers. The next day, Schwann 
reached Batangas soil and 
systematically occupied town 
after town, despite General 
Malvar's resistance. 

From his headquarters at 
Lipa, Schwann directed the 
campaign in Laguna and Ta- 
yabas. His infantry elements 
captured Alaminos, San 
Pablo, and Nagcarlan with 
little opposition; but, at 
Mahayhay, the Filipino 
guerrillas resisted stoutly. On 
January 23rd, Sta Cruz, 
capital of Laguna, was cap- 
tured. Meanwhile, Schwann's 
cavalry under Col. EJvl. 



Hayes captured Sariaya, 
Tayabas, Lucena, Tiaong, and 
San Pablo. From San Pablo it 
proceeded to Santa Cruz and 
rejoined the infantry. 

Organized resistance in the 
Southern Tagalog provinces 
collapsed. The principal 
towns were garrisoned by 
American forces. But in the 
hills, Generals Malvar, Cailles 
and Trias organized their 
guerrilla brigades *nd carried 
on the war." 

It is possible that the generals of the 
revolution in the southern Tagalog 
provinces found it necessary to manufac- 
ture tokens for their needs, resorting to 
cruder methods of production due to lack 
of adequate machinery. If so, the 
mintage, again, could not have been very 
large since the troops were too occupied 
with fighting and were constantly on the 
move. 

If the above is conceded, then the 
interpretation of the letter "L" as 
indicating "Laguna" would be as good as 
any other for the time being until further 
documentation can be found. 

If this theory is accepted, or substan- 
tiated in the future, we can add the two 
specimens described and illustrated here 
to the short list of rare and elusive 
coinage of the revolution. □ 



SAVE IN BANKS 



JULY 1978 



127 



Philippine Numismatists 



FELIPE LIAO 

by Doris G. Nuyda 



^^fter one gets to know Felipe Liao, 
one begins to wonder which of his 
many interests occupies him most — his 
business (he is president of his own 
electronic business system firm) or his 
collections. 

For on meeting him, one learns that, 
one, he is a numismatist, member of the 
PNAS board of directors, this year's (as 
well as last year's) chairman of the PNAS 
convention; two, he is a stamp collector; 
three, an art and antique collector; and 
four, a pottery collector. And as if these 
are not enough, he has also started to 
collect vintage cigarette wrappers (his 
oldest piece dates back to 1899), 
sweepstakes tickets, and old Spanish 
documents, some of which reveal what 
some of the country's luminaries one or 
two generations ago were up to. 

But then, business must be going great, 
especially with members of the family 
taking charge, so that Liao can enjoy his 
leisurely pursuits to the hilt. 

Collecting, he says, was in his blood 
since childhood. As a schoolboy in Cebu, 
where he was bom, he remembers 
spending hours after classes 'scavenging' 




office waste baskets for stamped envelops 
which he would exchange for brand new 
foreign stamps. A businessman of his 
acquaintance, obviously a stamp 
collector, was only too happy to trade. 
His interest in stamps was a decided 
advantage, the young Liao found out, 
when his grades in geography started to 
go up. 

Today, his hobbies may often take up 
a great slice of his time, but the fact that 
he is still more interested in acquiring 
rather than in selling indicates that it's all 



128 



BARRILLA 



Liao before his exhibit at the China i 

still a hobby and that is really as far as he 
wants to go. 

Despite his diversity, numismatics still 
remains his major hobby (though it must 
be mentioned that it shares equal rank 
with philately, his first love), and it is in 
the "errors and oddities in paper money" 
department that he feels he can hold his 
own. Liao has been a recipient twice of 
PNAS awards. 

Two particularly interesting pieces in 
his numismatics collection are two bills, a 
P50 and a PI 00 - with the signature of 
Central Bank Governor Licaros missing. 
Liao, on acquiring them, hastened to 
correct the error on his own, so he 
requested Governor Licaros to personally 
sign on the specific spot on the notes. 
With that fresh signature, the notes in his 
keeping are today pieces of very special, 
very legal tender. 



nkittg Corporation branch in Makati. 

Liao has an eagle eye when it comes to 
errors. Many of those in his collection 
were acquired through the usual business 
channels, and so he wonders how they 
passed the well-trained scrutiny of mint 
and bank inspectors. 

Besides its informative and educational 
value, a collection of errors can provide 
the beholder with some amusing 
moments, according to Liao. Imagine a 
paper note, he says, minus the face of 
Bonifacio, or with two faces of Bonifacio, 
or with crooked printing, or with two dif- 
ferent denominations printed on one single 
note (like, a note with 50 (pesos) marked 
on one comer and 20 on the other). But 
the greater number of errors are not as 
easily discernible - like the discrepancies 
in serial numbers which are always in 
fine print. 

Nothing shows off the frailty of the 



JULY 1978 



129 



human factor as clearly as these 
innocent-looking, even amusing, errors, 
he observes. What would happen, he asks, 
if any of them were allowed to circulate? 

Actually, Liao has an extensive 
collection of both coins and paper 
money, aside from the error notes. He 
even holds a minor exhibit of 
representative pieces at the ground floor 
of the China Banking Corporation branch 
in Salcedo street, Makati. This exhibit 
tells the history of the Philippines 
through money from the piloncito to the 
F 5,000 gold coin of 1977. 

A collector for more than 30 years, 



Liao reports that he has not been keeping 
a constant tempo: some years he is 
relaxed and easy, while other years, like 
the present, he goes about as in a fever. 
This fluctuation along with the 'surprise 
catches' that come his way every now and 
then, makes collecting the exciting and 
truly enjoyable hobby that it is for him. 

Incidentally, as we write this, we learn 
one more thing about our numismatist; 
that he is now deep in the study of beads, 
particularly those which were used as 
money in our prehistory. We look 
forward to whatever findings on the 
subject he comes up with. □ 



CANADIAN DONATES TO M.M. 




Mr. Joseph Rathgeb of Canada recently donated to the Money Museum 
one Canadian banknote commemorating the centenary of the federation. The 
donation was presented by Mr. Roy Watts (shown above with Barrilla editors 
Benito & Angelita Legarda), the donor's friend who was a recent Manila visitor. 

This is the second donation of Mr. Rathgeb to the MM, the first being a num- 
ber of Samar guerrilla currency which he kept as souvenir items while he was in 
that province during the early stage of the liberation of the Philippines as a pilot 
of the U.S. Air Force. His plane was shot down by the Japanese and he was res- 
cued by the Filipino guerillas who cared for him until the coming of MacArthur's 
forces. 



130 



BARRILLA 



Errors on Quezon Banknotes 



Ed's Note: The error banknotes featured here belong to the collection of 
Mr. Felipe Liao. 



MAM BO K* tSANG OAYAJn* *3 

ANGKO SENTRAL 

NO rM.HAMJO>>N NC RCPUBUKA HC PTJ*H*S 




G PI LI PIN AS *341628 

Ik 





A IMG PILIPIIMASCP186100 



mrtx HA TO AY ISA mo »aya*;n kg 

ANGKO SENTRAL 

HG PAMAMAIAAN NO MMJOUKA NO 



PAPtl NA (TO Kt 3AIAWHQ UWURA1 8A «U«*A3 AT MMBATKO tA LAMftf 




JULY 1978 



131 



— * 







G PIL1PINAS 



M MMA Ml * Ml I 



SALAPING BAPll HA (ID AY t&AMO BAYAIWOIB 

— i up %mnf n hp " 

a99^-.;v7^M 



DALAWAMPUNG 

AMQ tftKL HA nO AY SAXAMlK UMUftAl «A MUffMAf AT #*Mm*VAD SA LAMAT 




JULY 1978 



133 




A IMG P1LIPINAS AJ:'^9„ 

3 BAYAWM NO 



PAPAL HA ITD AY tSAMO BAYAWfl Nti 

ANGKO SENTRAL 

NO PAMAHALAAH JjpUl 1 1 lilt 




HAEHWAtTQAY 0A1 AW0 WIW^ WH UW M I WWIWWftW 




G PILIPINAS 

PAPCL HA TO AY ISANG BAYAJB* MO 

ANGKO SENTRAL 

MO MMAHALAAN figf^f^gtgWi POJPPIA* 



BAIAWAMPUNG 

AM MML MA ttO AT SALAPMO UMUKAl *A Mi MAO AT PRMWOM0 OA 





134 



BARRILLA 





A IMC PILIPINASDX956092 




JULY 1978 



135 




BARRILLA 



JAPANESE INVASION MONEY 



by Guy Davis 



Japanese Invasion Money, often 
referred to as JIM among paper 
money collectors, was carefully prepared 
and executed by the Japanese Govern- 
ment in their ambitious plans of conquest 
of East Asian nations with intent to make 
them semi-independent states within a 
Japanese sphere of influence (East Asia 
Co-Prosperity Sphere). 

Reflecting its national character of 
paying meticulous attention to detail, 
Japan sent with its conquering armies 
five complete paper money systems for 
use in each of the conquered nations 
and regions. 

Currency issued for the invaded areas 
are distinguished by their corresponding 
monetary units and the initial letters 
of these countries were used in the pre- 
fix of the Plate Letters as the following: 



P — Philippine (Pesos and centavos) 
S - Dutch East Indies for Sumatra, 
the most important island of the 
group (Gulden and cents) 
M — Malaya (Dollars and cents) 
B - Burma (Rupees and cents) 
0 - Oceania; British possessions in 
the South Pacific, Solomon and 
Gilbert Islands (Pounds and 
Shillings) 

As puppet governments were formed, 
second issues were printed to gain the 
confidence of the population. For the 
Philippines, serial nos. were used and the 
Rizal Monument for the vignette. For the 
Dutch East Indies, new designs were 
made with the Roepiah as the monetary 
unit, and retaining the Plate Letter "S" 
(Sumatra). 



PHILIPPINES (First Issue) 




JULY 1978 



137 




138 



BARRlLLA 



PHILIPPINES (Second Issue) 




140 



BARRILLA 



o\i-iii\imi:»i»i;sos 




DUTCH EAST INDIES 




BARRILLA 




JULY 1978 



143 




144 



BARRILLA 



MALAYA 




BURMA 




146 



BARRILLA 




JULY 1978 



147 




OCEANIA 



APANESE GOVERNMENT 

% mmm& ■ 




148 



BARRILLA 




JULY 1978 



149 



Ancient Coin Section 




The Romance and Beauty 
of Ancient Gold 

by Herbert Ledyard 



T~) oes your pulse beat faster when you 
*^ hold a gold coin in your hand? 
Don't fret, gold has captivated the human 
race from the earliest times to the present 
day. What, then, is your reaction when 
the coins are ancient gold? Here before 
you are golden pieces of micro-art with 
the power to carry you off to the times 
of Alexander III, the Great, Phoenician 
Carthage prior to the first Punic War, and 
Hadrian's Rome. 

Some authorities feel that Alexander's 
staters were not struck until his invasion 
of Asia, but the large gold deposits at the 
mines of Crenides suggest otherwise. 
Upon landing in Asia Alexander sacrificed 
to Athena as well as to Zeus and 
Hercules. Alexander's coins were 
measured from the Babylonian royal gold 
standard of 8.42 gm. Their normal weight 
is 8.6 gm. 

When the early settlers were digging 
the foundations of Carthage, Virgil states 
that they found the carving of a horse's 
head at the site. The stylistic reverse of 
the Carthaginian stater alludes to that 
event. Persephone on the obverse was 
intended to represent the Punic Goddess 




CENTURION COINS. AU - Stater, Alexander 
III, The Great, 336-323 B.C. Athena I Nike. 8.35 
gms. 

Tanit. There is a great deal of evidence to 
suggest that much of the Carthaginian 
gold was procured from West Africa. 
When the supply of gold became limited 
during the African campaign of the 
Syracusan Tyrant, Agathocles, the weight 
of the stater was reduced to that of the 
Shekel, 7.6 gm. As the war progressed the 
weight continued to decline as more and 
more silver was amalgamated with the 
gold. 

The Roman Emperor Trajan, shortly 
before his death, appointed Hadrian as his 
successor in A.D. 117. Besides being a 
capable engineer and builder, Hadrian 
could trace his family origins to the early 
days of the famous Scipios. He received 
the title of COS III (Consul for the Third 
Time) in A.D. 119. After Augustus 



150 



BARRILLA 




AU - Aureus, Hadrian, A.D. 11 7- 1 38. Bust 
right /Sol in quadriga. 7.20 gms. 

(Octavian), the weight of the aureaus was 
standardized at 7.8 gm. The actual 
weight, however, was usually lower, and 
scales were used in most transactions with 
gold. By the time of Caracalla (A.D. 198), 
the weight of the aureus had fallen to 
6.55 gm. 




AU/AR - Stater (Electrum), Carthage, 310-370 
B.C. Persephone I Horse. 7.22 gms. 



Have you noticed how Athena's hair 
hangs down in ringlets? Take note of 
Persephone's coiffure. The next time you 
see the Nike of Samothrace in the 
Louvre, remember her inspiration on 
ancient Greek gold. Particularly she may 
be found on the staters of Demetrius 
Poliorcetes, and commemorate his victory 
over Ptolemy during the naval battle off 
Salamis (B.C. 306). Hadrian's Sol in 
quadriga illustrates the influence of the 
cult of Sol in Syria. Both Marc Anthony 
and Trajan had been similarly affected 
during their Oriental campaigns. When 
you attempt to draw a quadriga within a 
circle of 20 mm. diameter, reflect upon 
the skill of the ancient die makers. 

We have traveled together an ancient 
trail, indeed. We have journeyed from 
Macedon and the mines at Crenides, to 
Carthage and the mines in West African, 
and at the end, all roads lead to Rome. Is 
it any wonder there's a condition known 
as ''gold fever"? D 



Tliere is, perhaps, nothing more likely to disturb the tranquil- 
lity of nations than their being bound to mutual contributions for any 
common object that does not yield an equal and coincident benefit. 
For it is an observation, as true as it is trite, that there is nothing 
men differ so readily about as the payment of money. 

The Numismatist, March, 1957 



JULY 1978 



151 



The Emperor of the 
"Thundering Legion' 

by Herbert Ledyard 



hat kind of man would develop 
from a boy who adopted the plain 
and coarse philosophers tunic at the age 
of eleven? RIC- 1311 depicts Marcus 
Aurelius at the age of 31/32. This is not 
graybeard with his nose stuck in a dusty 
tome. The proud head is bare and still 
youthful. He has curly hair and a short, 
light beard. On this coin he proudly 
claims PII FIL (ius), pious son ... in 
honor of Antonius Pius who had adopted 
him. 

Whether alone, or as co-regent with 
Verus, or with Commodus (Ids son), from 
A.D. 161 until his death on campaign in 
179, Marcus Aurelius inherited an empire 
that was constantly besieged and in 
jeopardy from ail quarters. One campaign 
followed another, e.g., against the 
Parthians led by Volagases III, the Slovaks 
under King Bolemir, then the 
Marcommani and the Quadi on the 
Rhine-Danube frontiers. In 175 one of his 
best commanders, Avidius Cassius, 
revolted in Asia. There was no time to sit 
home at Rome and read philosophy. 
Certainly one of the first "barracks" 
emperors. 



Despite the infamous infidelity of 
Faustina, Marcus pretended not to know. 
When Avidius Cassius was assassinated, 
Aurelius recommended mercy to the 
Senate for Cassius' family and for the 




AE - Sestertius, A.D. 152-153. Marcus 
Aurelius, bust draped, bare head right /Roma 
(Britannica) seated to the right. 



w 



152 



BARRILLA 



conspirators. Although the Christians 
were considered to be a danger to the 
established order, and the atrocities at 
Lyon are well documented, the facts 
concerning the severity of Marcus' orders 
to the Governor at Lyon are 
controversial. 

During the climax in the war with the 
Quadi in 174, the Roman army found 
themselves in desperate straits. Extreme 
thirst took its toll. Many of the soldiers 
were near exhaution. At the height of the 
battle, a sudden rainstorm discharged hail 
and lightning on the enemy while 
drenching the Romans. The great victory 
and miracle was attributed to a Christian 
legion in the army. This legion became 
famous for its valor and is remembered as 
the "Thundering Legion", for later they 
wore the device of a thunderbolt on their 
shields. The Antonine Column, erected in 
memoriam to Aurelius by Commodus, is 
on view in the Piazza Colonna at Rome. 



There you can still see the "Thundering 
Legion" ... yet joined in battle. 

There is a decipherable inscription (at 
Trencin on the Vah River in mod. 
Czechoslovakia) that commemorates a 
battle in 179. The translation reads: "850 
SOLDIERS DEDICATE THIS PLACE 
TO THE VICTORY OF THE EMPEROR 
OVER HIS ENEMIES. CAUSED TO BE 
INSCRIBED BY CONS, LEGATE OF 
THE SECOND LEGION, ENCAMPED IN 
LAUGARCIA."! 

Marcus believed and practiced: "A 
man's true greatness lies in the 
consciousness of an honest purpose in 
life, founded on a just estimate of himself 
and everything else." 2 Few would disagree 
that the boy became quite a man. What 
say you? □ 



The Slovaks, Their History and Traditions, 
Peter P. Yurchak, Orbana Press, 1947. 
2 

The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius, The 
Harvard Classics, 1937. 



Of all antiquities coins are the smallest, yet, as a class, the most 
authoritative in record, and the widest in range. No history is so un- 
broken as that which they tell; no geography so complete, no art so 
continuous in sequence, nor so broad in extent; no mythology so ample 
and so various. Unknown kings, and lost towns, forgotten divinities, 
and new schools of art, have here their authentic record. 

.... TJie Numismatist, June 1957 



JULY 1978 



153 



World Coin Section 



SWAZILAND COINS 

by Tarquin Olivier 

Mr. Olivier is regional manager for Asia of Tfiomas Dc La Rue, the bank- 
notes printer, who also represent the Royal Mint. His publications include "Tfie 
Eye of the Day" a book about people of Southeast Asia published in 1964 by 
Heinemann, London, and Morrow, New York. 



fTS he inception of a totally new 
national currency, where none 
before existed, allows the maximum 
possible freedom in chosing design, shape, 
size and colour. This removes the 
awkwardness which exists in established 
coinages, when inflation makes desirable 
the introduction of a new coin — one of a 
higher value through coining the lowest 
banknote, or reducing the intrinsic value 
in an existing denomination through use 
of cheaper metal. 

Easy differentiation from existing de- 
nominations is achieved by introducing a 
shaped coin, or the use of metal of a dif- 
ferent colour. This helps to avoid muddle 
between values, and the enormous metal 
cost tied up for years in issuing larger 
coins and yet larger again, to add to the 
combined tonnage already swinging 
around in handbags, pockets, and 
sporrans. 

But the avoidance of muddle by these 
means often causes the new coin to look 
as if it had been threateningly laid by a 
cuckoo into an established happy family 
of coins. People may worry about what it 



portends for their standards of value; will 
their medium of exchange ever be safe 
and sound again and free from Govern- 
ment interference? 

Their feelings can be surprisingly 
strong because they grow attached to 
their coinage, the first real inducement a 
child has to learn how to count. 

So for the first ever national coinage, 
covering all values, the emblems used 
should reflect a sense of identity. The 
head of a reigning monarch is a natural 
choice for the obverse, especially for 
Swaziland, whose King Sobhuza II is 
revered in the country's innermost life. 

Lucky is the coin sculpter to have such 
a head to model from, with such depth of 
line and vigour of expression. And with 
the wide spread of agricultural activity, 
from tropical sugarcane and pineapple, to 
temperate pinewood forests, the choice of 
design for the reverse is indeed wide, and 
in keeping with the desire to equate the 
medium of exchange with items of 
identified worth. 

The new coinage had to replace the 
cent denominations of the South African 



154 



BARRILLA 



Rand. These continue to circulate side by 
side with the national coinage; the Swazis 
had to consider ideas which were 
distinctive. 

This was a practical consideration in 
recommending to them the introduction 
of a totally unround coinage. It made 
economic sense for the one and five cent 
equivalent to be in bronze. The 
replacement of cupro nickel for the 
South African pure nickel higher values 
was also economic, though the colour 
remained identical in terms of being 
bright white metal. 

Differentiation through size alone 
would have lead to pitfalls, since if the 
ten cent were a minimum of three 
millimetres larger or smaller in diameter 



than the Rand equivalent, this would 
have solved one problem but led to 
another. The coin would have been 
recognisably different from its equivalent, 
but perforce, rather close to the size of 
another value over the border. This could 
on the one hand have made it popular for 
misuse in the parking meters of 
Johannesburg; on the other hand, if 
smaller, it could have appeared inferior to 
the coin it was replacing in terms of 
intrinsic value. 

The final reason was an emotional one; 
to use this uniqueness to celebrate the 
existence of a reigning African King, of 
ancient lineage, the supreme embodiment 
of the Swazi people's way of life. □ 



JULY 1978 





QUEZON CENTENNIAL COINS 





Approved designs for the 25-Piso (left) and 50-Piso (right) Quezon Centennial coins. 



Two crown-size silver coins will be 
issued by the Central Bank late this 
year to commemorate the centenary of 
the birth of Manuel L. Quezon, first 
President of the Commonwealth and a 
leading crusader of Philippine inde- 
pendence. Both coins were designed by 
Angelita G. Legarda, Barrilla Executive 
Editor and CB numismatic consultant. 

A 25-Piso coin will have on its obverse 
the Quezon Memorial Monument with 
the legend "1878" and "1978" flanking 
it and "MANUEL L. QUEZON" in- 
scribed below. The reverse will feature 
the seal of the Republic circumscribed 
by the legend "REPUBLIKA NG 
PILIPINAS" and "25-PISO". 



The 50-Piso denomination will fea- 
ture the bust of Quezon facing left with 
the seal of the Commonwealth on the 
first quadrant and the inscription "1878- 
1978" below it. The reverse will be 
similar to that of the 25-Piso except 
for the value. 

This will be the second time that 
Quezon has been honored on the 
country's coins. During the inauguration 
of the Commonwealth on November 15, 
1935, a set of three coins featuring his 
bust conjoined with those of Pres. Frank- 
lin D. Roosevelt and Commissioner Frank 
Murphy was issued and is now considered 
a numismatic rarity. 



156 



BARRILLA 



[pKiirtf® 




It could make many a dream come true. 

PREMYO 
SAVINGS 
BOND^l 



KAUNIARAN " 



When you give Premyo Savings Bonds to someone, you re 
giving him the chance to make his dream come true. From 
the very moment he receives the bonds and for as long as he- 
holds on to them, he gets tne chance to win big cash prizes 
in the daily draws held Mondays thru Fridays (except holidays) 
and in the weekly draws held every Saturday It's as if you 
had actually gifted him with a never-ending ticket to fortune 



So why give cash or just any ordinary gift when you can give something better? 
Give the dream gift: Premyo Savings Bond. After all there could be no nobler 
thought than to seek the fulfillment of a loved one's dream. 



