AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO 
AND THE PHILIPPINES 



_ 



• 1 



(J5 



1 



COMMITTEE ON TERRITORIES AND INSULAR POSSESSIONS 

FRANK B. WILLIS, Ohio, Chairman 
HIRAM W. JOHNSON, California. KEY PITTMAN, Nevada. 

ALBERT B. CUMMINS, Iowa. JOSEPn T. ROBINSON, Arkansas 

IRVINE L. LENROOT, Wisconsin. WILLIAM J. HARRIS, Georgia 

WILLIAM M. BUTLER, Massachusetts. EDWIN S. BROUSSARD, Loui 8 i ail 

SIB AM BINGHAM, Connecticut. THOMAS F. BAYAUD, Delaware ** 

ARTHUR R. ROBINSON, Indiana. SAM G. BRATTON, New Mexico.' 

GERALD P. NTE. North Dakota. 

CriAitLKR A. .Tonus, Clerk 



« 



CONTENTS 

Statement of— Pa __ 

Barcelo, Antonio K ... 

Davila, lion. Felix C _ ™ 

Guevara. Hon. Pedro 4 ' 

Hedrick, Maj. Lawrence il ~~ " o ( ;' ~i 

Iglesias, Senator Santiago III™ 75 

Landron, Enrique 

McGuire, o. 11 I i 

Mondragon, Miguel Guerra __ _ _~ (P 

Osmena, Hon. Sergio _ i in 

Reyes, .Tose S " \ " 

Soto. Jose Tous " -' , 

Towner, Hon. Horace M "1-111111 34 55 

m 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND THE PHILIPPINE 

ISLANDS 



WEDNESDAY, APRIL 7, 1926 

United States Senate, 
Committee on Territories and Insular Possessions, 

Washington, D. C. 

The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10.30 o'clock a. m., Hon. 
Frank B. Willis presiding. 

Present: Senators Willis (chairman), Johnson, Lenroot, Bingham, 
Bayard, and Bratton. 

The Chairman. There are several matters to come before the 
committee this morning, and one of those which will receive pre- 
liminary attention is the bill amending the law relating to the 
powers and duties of the auditor for Porto Rico and the auditor for 
the Philippine Islands. This bill was introduced by myself and 
will be placed in the minutes at this point in order that the record 
may be complete. 

(The bill (S. 3847) is as follows:) 

[S. 3S47, Sixty-ninth Congress, first session] 

A BILL To amend and clarify existing laws relating to the powers and duties of the 
auditor for Porto Rico and the auditor for the Philippine Islands 

#e it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United 
States of America in Congress assembled. That sections 20 and 21 of the act 
entitled " An act to provide a civil government for Porto Rico, and for other 
Purposes/' approved March 2, 1917, as amended, are amended to read as 
follows : 

" Sec. 20. There shall be appointed by the President an auditor, at an 
annual salary of $8,000 for a term of four years and until his successor is 
appointed and qualified, who shall examine, audit, adjust, decide, and settle 
J ill accounts and claims for or against the government of Porto Rico, per- 
taining to, or growing out of, the revenues and receipts from whatever source 
°f such government and for or against its municipal governments or de- 
Pendencies, including public trust funds and funds derived from bond issues; 
:, od shall examine, audit, adjust, decide, and settle, in accordance with law 
and administrative regulations, all accounts and claims tor or against the 
government of Porto Rico growing out of the expenditure of funds or prop- 
erty pertaining to or held In trust by the government or municipalities 
thereof; and shall perform like duties in respect of all accounts and claims 
for or against all government branches. 

"All such adjustments, decisions, and settlements of the auditor shall be 
final and conclusive, except as specifically provided in ibis act. The auditor 
shall, except as provided In this act, have like authority as is now or may 
hereafter be conferred by law upon the Comptroller General of the United 
States, and is authorized to communicate directly with any person having 
claims before him for Settlement, or with any department, officer, or person 
having oflicial relations with his office. He shall keep the general accounts of 



1 



2 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



the government and preserve the vouchers and other papers pertaining 
thereto. 

• It shall be the duty of the auditor to bring to the attention of the proper 
administrative officers expenditures of funds or property which, in his opinion, 
are irregular, unnecessary excessive, or extravagant. 

-The administrative jurisdiction of the auditor over accounts whether of 
funds or property, and over all vouchers and records pertaining thereto, shall 
be exclusive. With the approval of the governor lie shall from time to time 
make and promulgate general or special rules arid regulations not inconsistent 
with law prescribing the method of accounting lor public funds and property 
and funds and property held in trust by the government or any of its branches' 

-Any officer accountable for public funds or property may' require such re- 
ports or returns from liis subordinates or Others as lie mav JuL m ln \,.^<. Jl v 
for his own information and protection. * 1 M 1,1 

"As soon after the close of each fiscal year as the accounts of snifl ve«ir 
may he examined and adjusted the auditor shall submit to the* mUrnor nnH 
the Secretary of War an annual report of the fiscal coneerns of the -ma rnnie 
showing the receipts and disbursements of the various deimrtmlnts and 
bureaus of the government and of the various municipalities .,,,,1 . , k» Jn • 
other report, as may be required of him by the governor -or ^™iwr&&r$ 

"The office of the auditor shall be under the generaWsnn • •• i r h 
governor and shall consist of the auditor, and one assi«if-»«* J ^Kv L 
annual salary of $5,000, appointed in the same manner U s 1 au,Ilt /. ,r ? '"I 
such necessary employees as shall he prescribed by la w -rV* :in«lit<>i . and 

shall sign such official papers and perform such other duttJrS ! or 

may prescribe, and in event Of the death, resignation disflMn?f ! :lll, V 
ever cause, Or absence of the auditor from the jurisdiction™ *L % \ 
auditor shall act as auditor, and shall baVe charge Of such n assistant, 

" in the execution/rf their duties the auditor and the assi t' 
authorized to summon witnesses, administer oaths, and tn foi and. tor are 
in pursuance of these provisions, may issue suhp.enas arid ESS evi ?f nCe ;, am ' 
ance of witnesses, as now provided hy law. 1 enf orce the attend* 

M SE0; 21. That any person aggrieved in respect of hi* « 1 1 

by any action or decision of the auditor may. within nUietv 




appeal and transmit it to the auditor nn.i 1 . .»/,.'. 
decision shall thereupon be final and conclusive. Should UiVv 7 "7 Y,?n ? r 
sustain the act ,rm «»• *-n« mniitnr. he ahull p governoi 



Ction or decision of the auditor, he shall forSwi^SSLnit tb« 
a comptroller General of the United Stater^H^^ " 
uuuua 01 disapproval and the papers necessary to a D roru£ . .\V. ,r 

the matter. The decision of the Comptroller General ^PSL V T < . '» Sf 
such ease shall he final and conclusive." rho United States 

SBC. 2. Sections 2A and 2o of the act entitled "An act to ,\ tu , . 

the people of the United states as to the future politi CU ] sr . Jvf re ™ P ur P°*e 

the Philippine Islands, and tO provide a more autonotnono <H neo P*e 

Islands, approved August 29, 1916, as amended, are anS ^ovornnient for 




trust by the government or the Provinces or municipaii^^ lln £ to or held in 
perform like duties to those hereinabove described in v ; s hereof; and shall 
and claims for or against all government branches, ain ,Kvt of all accounts 

audid the accounts Of all corporations in which said g 0 v sll; ill examine and 
controlling interest. ' *&*nent sh;l11 own :( 

-an such adjustments, decisions, and settlements of 

linal and conclusive except as specifically provided i n uuditor shall bo 

Us fct The auditor 



A.UDITOB I'OH PORTO MOO AKD PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



3 



shall, excepl as provided in this act, have Like authority as is now or may 
hereafter be conferred by law upon the Comptroller General of the United 
si .Mrs. and he is authorized to communicate directly with any person having 
claims before him tor settlement, or with any department oflicer, or person 
having official relations with his office. He shall keep the general accounts of 
tlic government and preserve the vouchers and other papers pertaining thereto. 

" it shall be the duty of the auditor to bring to the attention of the proper 
administrative officers expenditures of funds or property which in his opinion 
are Irregular, unnecessary, excessive, or extravagant 

"The administrative Jurisdiction of the auditor over accounts, whether 
of funds or property, and over all vouchers and records pertaining thereto, 
shall be exclusive. With the approval of the Governor General, he shall from 
time to time make and promulgate genera] or special rules and regulations 
nol Inconsistent with law proscribing the method of accounting for public 
funds and property and funds and property held in trust by the government 
or any of its branches, and he shall have like jurisdiction and authority in 
respect <>r the method of accounting of all corporations in which the govern* 
ment owns a controlling interest. 

" Any otiirer accountable for public funds or property may require such 
reports or returns from his subordinates or others as he inay deem necessary 
for his own information and protection. 

" As goon alter the rlose of each fiscal year as the accounts of said year 
may be examined and adjusted the auditor shall submit to the Governor 
General and the Secretary of War an annual report of the fiscal concerns of 
the government, showing the receipts and disbursements of the various de- 
partments and bureaus of the government and of the various Provinces and 
municipalities, and shall also make a similar report of his examination and 
audit of the fiscal concerns of all corporations in which the government owns 
a controlling interest ; and shall make such other reports as may be required 
<>f him by the Governor General or the Secretary of War. 

"The office of the auditor shall be under the general supervision of the 
Governor General and shall consist of the auditor, three assistant auditors 
appointed in the same manner as the auditor, and such necessary employees 
as shall be prescribed by law. One of the three assistant auditors shall be 
an experienced attorney at law, and one shall be experienced in the super- 
vision, examination, and liquidation of banking institutions. The assistant 
auditors shall sign such official papers and perforin such other duties as 
the auditor may prescribe, and in event of the death, resignation, disability 
from whatever cause, or absence of the auditor from the jurisdiction, the 
Qovernor General shall designate one of the assistant auditors to act as 
auditor and to have charge of such ollice. 

"In the execution of their duties the auditor and the assistant auditors 
are authorized to summon witnesses, administer oaths, and take evidence, 
and, in pursuance of these provisions, may issue subpoenas and enforce the 
attendance of witnesses, as now provided by law. 

"Sbg. 25. That any person aggrieVed in respect of his account or claim by 
any action or decision of the auditor may, within 90 days, take an appeal 
in writing to the Governor General, which appeal shall specifically set forth 
the particular action or decision of the auditor to which exception is taken. 
With the reasons and authorities relied upon for the reversing such action 
or decision. 

* 4 If the Governor General shall confirm the action or decision of the 
auditor, he shall so indorse the appeal and transmit it to the auditor: 
and such action or decision shall thereupon be final and conclusive. Should 
Hie Governor General fail to sustain the action or decision of 1 he auditor, 
he shall forthwith transmit the appeal to the Comptroller General of the 
United States, together with his grounds of disapproval and the papers 
necessary to a proper understanding of the matter. The decision of the 
Comptroller General of the United Smtes in such case shall be final and 

conclusive." 

Skc o\ Section 2!) of such act. approved August 20. 1916, as amended, is 
amended by striking out "auditor. $(5,000: deputy auditor, $3,000." and insert- 
ing in lieu thereof "auditor. $10,000: assistant auditors. SO.000 each.'" 

It is not proposed to lake final action on the biU this morning, 
as Senator Kin«r has advised me he desires to be heard and can 



4 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



not now be present, but Commissioner Gfuevera und Senator Sergio 
Osmena, of the Philippine Islands, are here and we shall be glad 
to hear either one or both of those gentlemen at this time. 

STATEMENT OF HON. PEDRO GUEVARA, RESIDENT COMMISSIONER 
OF THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 

Commissioner Guevara. Mr. Chairman and gentlemen of the 
committee, Senator Osmena, who is the head of a delegation from 
the Philippine Islands, is now present in Washington and he 
happened to learn only this morning that a bill has been introduced 
in the Senate purporting to amend the organic law of the Philippine 
Islands regarding the powers of the auditor of that country. In 
case this bill is to be acted upon by the committee, we request that 
we be granted an opportunity to express our views. p or (foe present 
I will confine myself to presenting Senator Osmena to the com- 
mittee who is here present. 

The Chairman. Before you leave the stand Mr. Commissioner, 
are we correct in understanding that you desire the latter hearing 
upon this bill. 4 1 to 

Commissioner Guevara. Yes, sir. 

The Chairman You desire a hearing as well as to filo i brief? 
Commissioner Guevara. Yes. sir. L * * 

The Chairman. Very well. 

STATEMENT OF HON. SERGIO OSMENA, MEMBER OP Tinr qPNATE 
OF THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS SENATE 

Mr. Osmena. Since the committee has kindlv 
>quest for a hearing, I will await when that timn C ° nsentcd ? Ur 



request for a hearing, I will await when that time 

our views on this bill. Nothing definite can be • a • * * 

because we have had no chance to make a t'nij T5J niorning 
which is very important, in as much as it seek**' St ! ld y of the bill, 
and duties of the auditor for the Phili pp i ne tJ P nl W the powers 
for increase in salary and additional positions i i* n ds and provide 
a full knowledge of the scope and extent of thi* S 0ulcl like to h * ve 
before discussing it. Imposed legislation 

Senator Johnson. Do you favor or oppose the 1 *i 

Mr. Osmena. I am not yet in a position to / 
should like to know exactly the scope of this bill S ^ e m y stand. I 
submit my views to the committee. * A first. Then I can 

The Chairman. Would you and Commission n 
in a week from to-day? 1 might say that it ; ei ,P Ue vara be ready 
committee to hold weekly meetings until we get J* purpose of the 
before us disposed of. ' le matters that are 

Mr. Osmena. We will try to accommodate oi 
lire of the committee, although if I may b e r> U ? e ! Ve s to the pleas- 
being an important matter involving substantiated *° sa 7> ^ s 
administration and additional expenditure of changes in the 
Philippines, in salaries and otherwise, I think^klic f U nds in the 
that the Philippine Legislature be given an on ^ highly advisable 
its own views before the committee takes action 01 tuni ty to cx P ress 



AUD1TOU b'Oli POKTO KICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



5 



The Chairman. There is no disposition on the part of any mem- 
ber of the committee to unduly hurry this matter. I assure you we 
want to give everybody an opportunity to present their views and 
get all the facts. This bill was introduced simply as a basis for 
discussion and, incidentally, I may add for your information that 
this bill came really from the Comptroller General's department, as 
a financial measure. If you will be ready by a week from to-day 
wo will make arrangements accordingly and hear you at that time, 
but if you find you are not then fully prepared to present your views 
we will hear j'ou later. AVe will depend upon you and Commis- 
sioner Guevara to advise us if you will be ready to be heard a week 
from to-day. 

That is all, unless some member of the committee desires to ask 
some further questions this morning. 
Mr. Osmena. I thank you very much. 

(Thereupon, at 10.55 o'clock a. m., the committee proceeded to the 
consideration of other business.) 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND THE PHILIPPINE 

ISLANDS 



SATURDAY, APRIL 17, 1926 

United States Senate, 
Committee on Terkitories and Insular Possessions, 

Washington, D. C. 
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10.30 o'clock a. m., Hon. 
Frank B. Willis presiding. 

Present : Senators Willis (chairman). Lenroot, Hingham, Robin- 
son of Indiana, Pittman, Harris, Bayard, and Bratton. 

The Chairman. The committee will be in order. This meefing 
this morning is for the purpose of discussing S. 3228 and S. 3847. 
We had expected to hear first Doctor Tucker, completing his testi- 
monj', but I learned that Mr. Davila, the Delegate from Porto 
Rico, who desired to say a word on S. 3847, is here and must leave 
in a very few minutes. So, if it is agreeable to the committee, we 
will hear Mr. Davila first. 

STATEMENT OF HON. FELIX C. DAVILA, DELEGATE FROM 

PORTO RICO 

Mr. Davila. Mr. Chairman, the organic law of Porto Rico was 
enacted on March 2, 1917, after a very careful consideration. All 
the provisions contained in this law were considered and discussed 
by the Committees on Insular Affairs in the Senate and in the 
House and by the War Department. This organic law is the funda- 
mental law of our country; it is the constitution of our people; and 
any change that may be contemplated by Congress is cause of great 
concern to my constituents. The constitution of a country is not a 
matter of trivial importance, to be changed or amended without 
careful and serious consideration and without the knowledge of the 
citizens affected thereby, who are entitled to express their views 
and who ought to be consulted in a matter like this which is so dear 
to them. 

^The bill introduced by the chairman of this committee, Senator 
Willis, amending our organic law. deserves most serious considera- 
tion. The amendments contemplated in this bill are most impor- 
tant. I honestly believe that the people of Porto Rico should be 
given an opportunity to study these amendments -verv carefully. 
There is not any necessity to pass this bill at this time. VVe have no! 
any difficulty in Borfco Rico with the Auditor of the Island. For 
many years we have had the existent law without any friction be- 
tween the insular and continental authorities and it* seems to me 
most advisable the postponement of the consideration of this bill 
for the next session of Con|gress. This legislation may be good or 
not. However, we are not prepared yet to render any opinion on 

7 



8 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PIIIL1 PP1 N E ISIiAJNDS 



the matter. We are only asking for time t<> study the proposed 
amendments. It is only fair to grant our request. To change the 
Constitution of a country in 24 hours i>. in my opinion, a very poor 
policy. Congress & Hearing adjournment. P"robably a1 the end <>r 
May'this session will end and I can noi understand the reasons 
which may justify any hurry to press this legislation at this time. 
I am sure that it is your purpose to give us a square deal. I ask for 
the postponement of the consideration of this bill until the next 
session of Congress. 

I know that you are not going to legilate for Porto Rico without 
giving full consideration to the legislation contemplated. By ordi- 
nary procedure. Mr. Chairman, are we not entitled to consider very 
carefully any legislation which will change the organic law of our 
country? Our Constitution is as dear to us as the Constitution of 
the United States is dear to all American citizens, including the 
people of Porto llico as the constitution of any State is dear i<> 
the people of that State. That is; the reason t am asking for a 
postponement. 

For you this is another bill introduced in Congress, but for PortO 
Kico it is not an actional bill introduced in this country-it is a 
change contemplated in the fundamental law of our country: and 
fid? Si ? Cnair^n 3 toll}** 9*S«* b about to adjourn it is not 

fJ^^r^t^r the v#&*f 1- this t 

are not prepared to have to'Sndo, 6 ^ "frw^T i 1,, 
tion is good ; maybe it will be advk7, °? inion - Ma >', be ( th ' S i t' 
Who knows at this time? Usable for our people to accept it. 

The finances of a countrv w „ , i 

have to study this power of S SOmethlu g ver . v important, and you 
there are some doubts abonf l 1( ' v,, ""»' for many years and still 
and do you intend that we P ft " s '^'slation in the Tjnited States; 
tion shall only have a terriblv l Rlcans when we study this legisla- 
a long time to study that wli }? rt tmie - when vou have taken such 

On this matter, Mr ChS atl0n ? 
I ask that you give us reasonnKi 1 a - nd S en tle» ien of the committee, 
that you postpone the same till it tlme to stuclv this le « islation :liul 

(The committee thereupon r! next session of Congress, 
business.) 1 Preceded to the consideration of other 



AUDITORS FOR PORTO RICO AND THE PHILIPPINE 

ISLANDS 



ttjesi^y, april 20, 1926 

United States Senate, 
COMHTTTRE on Tkwut< rati ES and Insula \i POSSESSIONS, 

\Y axh'uHfton., D. C T 

The committee mot, pursuant to adjournment, at 10.30 o'clock 
a. in., Hon. Frank B. Willis presiding. 

Present: Senators Willis (chairman). Lenroot, Bingham, Bayard, 
Bratton, and Nye. 

The CHAIRMAN. The committee will be in order. The hearing 
this morning is for the purpose of considering Senate bill 3847. 

T wish at this point to insert a letter which has come to me from 
the Secretary of War. setting forth the purposes of this bill. 

(The letter referred to is as follow:) 

Hon. Frank B. WlLUS, 

Chairman Committee on Insular Affair*. United States Senate 
Dear Senator Willis: i have your letter of April 10 Inclosing a copy of 
s. 3847, a bill to amend and c larify existing laws relating to thk powers and 
duties of the auditor for Porto RiCO and the auditor for the Philippine 
Islands. 

1 have caused a careful study to he made of this bill and l have personally 
given it careful consideration. 

The provisions of this hill strengthening the personnel of the auditor's 
office in Porto Kico and the Philippine Islands by Increasing the number 
of persons therein to he appointed by the President and the salaries of these 
positions have my unqualified approval. 

In view of the great responsibilities of these otlicers and the great losses 
to the governments concerned that arise when they are not competently filled, 
together with the fact that the present salaries provided are inadequate and 
make it difficult and at times Impossible to secure proper personnel, I think 
that the action proposed in this respect is most urgent This has likewise 
been the view of my immediate predecessor in the War Department. It has 
also been urged by the Governor General of the Philippine Islands, and you 
will recall that the Legislature of Porto RiCO went so far as to lix an in- 
Creased salary for the auditor in the appropriations act approved July 14, 
1023, subject' to the approval of Congress, which had lixed the salary at 
$5,000 per annum. Congress increased the salary not to the $7,000 provided 
by the legislature, but to £0.000 per annum. 

The object of the remaining amendments is to make clear that the account- 
ing systems provided for Porto Rico and the Philippine Islands are sub- 
stantially identical to the accounting system of the United States, which 
has been in successful operation in this country since the ordinance of Sep- 
tember 20, 177S. of the Continental Congress. 

Until 1865 when the Court of Claims came into existence claims against the 
Government were under the exclusive jurisdiction of the accounting officers 
and the Congress. Such was thought to be the situation in Porto Kico and 
the Philippine Islands, and it seems clearer that the Congress so intended to 
provide in the organic acts of these two Governments. However, recent deci- 
sions of the Supreme Court of the Philippine Islands have cast doubt upon 
such a construction of the organic acts, hence it appears advisable that the 

9 



10 



ATDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLAM'S 



situation be clarified, for unless and until the Congress sees til to eonsent i<» 
these governments beiiitf sued in their courts, it is believed to be desirable to 
retain the exclusive jurisdiction of the accounting officers and legislatures over 
claims against such governments. 

Such a plan will be in keeping with the procedure followed by the Con- 
gress in dealing with such matters in this country with a degree of Success 
which speaks for itself. 

There may be some question as to whether the bill as now drawn gives 
the auditor jurisdiction over claims for refund of custom duties and taxes 
in the Philippine Islands. If it is the desire of the Congress thai the juris- 
diction of the auditor should include this class of claims that intent would be 
made clearer by inserting after the word " fiereof " in line page 6, the 
words, - including claims for refund of customs duties and taxes/' This does 
not apply to Porto Rico, for at least in so far as custom duties are concerned 
the coUwtion and refund are under the control of the custom authorities of 



With regard to the reduction of the time in which .... anneal can be taken 
Sincerely yours, 

D wight F. Davis, 
''\ Secretary of War, 

Ihe Chairman. It will be noted fhat n • i -n i i ti« A ri^floc 

of the Auditor for Porto Rico tod iSli cpL-^ " " 

I wish to say in explanation th« °a ^^PP 1 *® 8 ' , p 

Rico, came here vesterdav in cW^L 9 °^? r 1 , ,nv '"' r - of J%S& 
and adVised me that their fi£S* W ,", h , '''/' Sec * e %^ ° V 
and that they wanted an opport " ° uW J K> ^ 1 V" ' i" 

this matter as it relates to ¥brto V S ° r 0nfer beforc the ? L d i SCUSS f3 
be entirely agreeable and that the ?' J tolfl them tl,at that TV", 
confined to a discussion of this 1 iii T et,n S this morning would be 
to the Philippines. We will ;,84T - !,s i( ™ ]ilto * especially 

upon that theory. lll <-ietor e proceed with the hearing 

Senator Osmena has been here ^ ( • j i 

been very patient, so we would bo t ° or tnree meetings ;lI,<1 nus 
first in any statement that he cares to' J m gl , ad to hwir Senator Osmena 

STATEMENT OF HON. SERGIO OSMt^t » 

OF THE SENATE, PHIUPPD^^A- PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE 
SENTATIVE OF THE PHILlPPTwi? b T LA NDS, AND SPECIAL REPRE- 
STATES (resumed) atl LEGISLATURE TO THE UNITED 

The Chairman. Whal isyour offi • 

Senator Osmena. I am president situation? 
Senate and special representative i H '° tem Pore of the Philippine 
States. ot the legislature to the United 

The Chairmanj All right s<> 
with any statement that you (l,l;',! Ul ! 01 '- Proceed in your own way 

Senator ( >smbna. Mr. ChaiS make - 
we are grateful to the committee ? u<3 members of the committee, 
chairman that no hasty steps Z,,7i 4e assurance given by the 
the pending bill, this measure i be taken in connection with 
Filipino people. It amends the f Vei 7 great importance to the 
may also affect the fundamental p ; "^damentel law of the land. It 

I d appearing before you to^av^T of its citizens. , 
nary statement. Should it be nee 1,lx ' *ubmitting only a prelinu- 
eomprehensive statement of our itt : T U y Wo shall submit later a more 

lt,l de toward this measure. 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 11 



A brief examination of the bill convinces ns that it contains pro- 
visions of highly controversial nature. Those provisions raise such 
important questions of policy that it seems the part of wisdom not to 
have them anally decided upon during the short time that remains 
before the adjournment of Congress. 

There are no urgent reasons that call for enactment at this time. 
On the other hand, the existing laws governing the auditor's office in 
the Philippines have been on te whole in successful operation for 
over 20 years. 

The bill affects the duties of various administrative officers of the 
Philippine government and would involve additional appropriation 
for greatly increased salaries. If it be passed during this session 
of Congress, there would be no opportunity for full consultation 
with the Philippine Legislature and the Philippine administrative 
officials whose duties would he affected by the law or for a thorough 
examination of the issues raised by the provisions of this bill. 

In giving the auditor of the Philippines a salary equal to that of 
the Comptroller General of the United States and in creating the 
position of three assistant auditors at $6,000 each per annum, it 
woidd conflict with the principle of economy followed not only by 
the Philippine government, but also by the American Government 
as well. The auditor of a government which spends not more than 
$35,000,000 a year for the central administration would receive a 
salary as large as that of the .Comptroller General of the United 
States Government, the appropriations for which total over $3,000,- 
000,000 annually. Such disproportionate salary would be paid with 
Philippine public funds, but without the indorsement of the Fili- 
pino people or their representatives. 

There is in this bill no limitation on the authority of the auditor 
for the Philippines which would make his power less than that of 
the Comptroller General of the United States, but on the contrary, 
the bill proposes to confer upon him very important additional 
powers. The law, as it stands at present, aiready gives the auditor 
of the Philippines greater powers than the Comptroller General of 
the United States. To. increase those power still, in view of the 
present political situation in the Philippines, woidd seem to be 
unwise and would be a step not calculated to produce greater har- 
mony in the administration. 

Under the proposed bill the auditor of the Philippine Islands 
would occupy a place in the Philippine government entirely unlike 
that of the Comptroller General of the United States. The latter 
official is responsible to the Congress of the United States. The 
auditor of the Philippines, with much greater powers, would exer- 
cise those powers without the slightest intervention of the repre- 
sentatives of the Filipino people. This is certainly a Step not in 
harmony with the policy enunciated by McKinley and followed by 
his successors of granting ever increasing self-government to the 
Philippines. 

The Jones law makes the auditor's decisions binding upon the 
executive departments only. It leaves the door open to judicial 
determination. Under the proposed law the u adjustments, de- 
cisions, and settlements" made by the auditor will be final and con- 
clusive subject only to appeal to other executive officials. The law 
would give the auditor besides the powers usually pertaining to 



12 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



a comptroller, those which properly belong to a trial court. This, 
we venture to say, is something entirely out of the harmony with 
American political principles and practices. 

In removing the right to make final decisions on appealed cases 
from the Secretary of War and placing it in the hands of the 
Comptroller General, a very important departure in the policy 
governing the administrative system, which has been in operation 
for almost 30 years, .is made. " It may be the entering wedge for 
placing the contacts between the Philippine government and the 
American Government through many departments or bureaus in- 
stead of concentrating them in one department. 

Because of these considerations, involving as fchey do, very im- 
portant questions and upon which legitimate differences of opinion 
are certain to arise and in view of the lack of time to consider fully 
these very important points of polifcv, we request the committee to 
postpone consideration of the bill until the next session of Congress. 
The President of the United States has just announced the appoint- 
ment of a commissioner to investigate Philippine -affa i rs and to 
report not later, than November. What harm can there be in with- 
holding action on legislation affecting the Philippines until the 
report of this special envoy and the views of the Philippine Legis- 
lature are made available? 

The Chairman Does any member of the committee desire to ask 
questions ot benator Osmena? 

Senator Raynaud May I ask a question? 

The ( bcairman. Yes. 1 

Senator Batabd^ Your present auditor works on an annual basis 
and makes a report at the end of every year? 
Senator Osemexa. Yes, sir y ' 

» fb?!£^ff W^ h6 ****** to the Governor General, and 
JSSS^S^ST- appeal lie from decisions of the anditor 

Senator Osmena. We have th-,f ov i 

Senator Bayard. You have it? W 

Senator Osmena. Yes. 

Senator Bayard. Does thnf i ^ , i 

to individuals? a PPeaJi to the Governor General apply 

Senator Osmena. Occasionally ^ , ^ ^ 

eral; but this does not pr^Wi y the y appeal to the Governor Gen- 
circumstances. Qe ^course to the courts under certain 

Senator Bayard. What is , , , 

your present auditor? ne an iount set up in the budget for 

Senator Osmena. I don't 1^ 

Senator Bayard. Tell u s ahn T exactl y- 

Senator Osmena. About ton^' 1 don 't mean exactly. 

Senator Bayard. Yo^S2l°9°- 
operation under this proposed l ln your statement that the cost of 
present cost of operation * aw would be greatly in excess of the 

Senator Osmena. Yes; f or fli 
his salary is increased and e reason s: According to this bill 
created. His functions beinc* * n Edition two new assistants are 
ery will necessarily be expand ^j 0 *^ 5 ^ his administrative machin- 



ATI UHHI FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



13 



Senator Bayard. T just want to get your idea of what in dollars 
and cents would be the excess cost under the proposed law as com- 
pared to the present law. 

Senator Osmena. Tt would be difficult to make a definite state- 
ment now. Under the new law his salary and the expenditures of 
his office would be increased. If you allow an increase of his salary 
which is now equal to that of the President of the Senate and the 
Speaker of the House and the members of the Cabinet, you open 
the door for a general increase in salaries. 

The Chairman. What salary does the present auditor receive? 

Senator Osmena. $0,000. 

The Chairman. What is his proposed salary? 

Senator Osmkna. $10,000. That is a salary equal to that of the 
Comptroller General here. We think that his is a much less im- 
portant office. 

The Chairman. Has any other member any question to ask? 

Senator Lenroot. What powers does the auditor now have? Has 
he any discretionary powers or power to determine matters not 
ministerial ? 

Senator Osm i.xa. Generally speaking, he has, I think, more powers 
than the Comptroller General. 

Senator Lenroot. Haven't there been some decisions of your 
courts recently denying him that yower^ 

Senator Osmkna. No, sir; I think there was one case where he 
was trying to interfere with the action of other administrative 
officials. 

Senator Lenroot. That is what I say. He has no right to review 
the action of any other department in allowing claims or accounts. 

Senator Osmkna. He has that right except in special cases where 
the law provides otherwise. 

Senator Lenroot. He hasn't any power to review the action of 
other departments of the Government respecting the legality of 
allowances? 

Senator Osmena. Yes; except in those special cases referred to. 

Senator Lenroot. He isn't given any power under the law to re- 
vie w the action of any department with reference to the legality of 
a claim after it has been passed upon by another department, is he? 

Senator Osmena. No, sir ; in cases where the law expressly gi ants 
discretionary authority to another administrative official. 

Senator Bingham. That is a very much less power than the Comp- 
troller of the United States has. 

Senator Bayard. Have there been any controversies between the 
present auditor and the President of the Philippine Islands with 
reference to these accounts? 

Senator Osmena. No. 

Senator Bingham. I notice that you say that under the present 
system the door is left open for a judicial review for those aggrieved 
by such decisions. Is it not true that the Comptroller General of 
the United States is not subject to judicial review ? 

Senator Osmena. The decisions of the comptroller are not review- 
able by the courts. In the Philippines the courts do not interfere 
with the discretionary power of the auditor. 

9550S— 20 2 



14 



\rmToK FOB PORTO RICO AN!) 1M i I LI PP1 X E [SLANDS 



Senator Lenroot. His refusal to perform would be a ministerial 
action ? 

Senator Bingham. Yes; but our Supreme Court has no power to 
set aside his decision, whereas in the Philippines the court exercised 
the right of setting aside the decision of the auditor. 

Senator Osmena. You have your Court of Claims. I think that 
your Court of Claims has jurisdiction over certain cases which have 
already been passed upon bv the Comptroller General'. 

The Chairman. Have you a Philippine court of claims? 

Senator Osmena. No, sir. 

The Chairman. That raises another question. It makes a dif- 
ferent situation. Where you have a court of claims it is quite 
different from the situation that exists when vou don't have one. 

Senator Osmkna. They don't have any. 

Senator LENROOT. Under your government over there can an 

attorney sue the government? 

Senator Osmkna. With the permission of the government, 
Senator Lbnboot. If h e has a claim against the Philippine Gov* 

enment lie can only bring a suit with the consent of the Government? 

t^ : T^ n° s: mth fch * consent of the government. 

I he C hairman. Mas any other member of the committee a 
question ! 

Senator Binoham. Vou state that the auditor of the Philippines 
rfniw s LC \Vi/r?' l,, " s tllan lh,; Comptroller General S the 
g t i m V C °mptroller General? 

exr e u unite ()? right now. if you wgi 

S , I S 5 '( ?"!'i e - °* lowers of the auditor of the 
55«Sit^'wiS5re^ Gen ^ al ( >f the United States are 

auditing of claims and a ccom i" } ? r ° Uer herc ' *2 that ^ Sld f Jfc 
present law, bring to thfaXX? 6 m: , iy -, or must ' acco r d, "K to l3 * c 
penditures of funds or prone T 01 lhc government officers cx- 
unnecessarv. excessive, or v / wh,ch m his °P m,on ar f ^regular, 
Senator Wboot. Is thatSl"^- 
Senator Osmbna. No tint i" *fe bill? 
The Chairman. That is <1 n" 1,0 P resent law - 
says here at the bottom of . • SP at is Provided in this bill. It 
auditor to bring to the attend** 2 * " Tt sha11 be the dut y of th ° 
expenditures of funds or nro . ■ 6 Proper administrative officers 
lar, unnecessary, excessive (11 lH '- v which, in his opinion, are irregu- 
lar and also in this bill. ? e «ravagant.'' That is in the present 

Senator Osmkna. It j' s „ ,. 
do that, and in that sense U l" ,led in the biU fchat thc editor can 
General. " llas more power than the Comptroller 

Senator Lbnkoot. 




Senator Osmi xa. No, sir- k 
ters not possessed by the Co'. e llas other powers in other mat- 

Senator Bingham. I don? P ller General, 
power; it gives him additional *] Q • tllat this S' veS - an J r moie 

duties. 



AUDITOR BOB PORTO RIGO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 15 



Senator Lf.nkoot. ruder your existing law each department is 
passing upon claims: its determination in favor of a plaintiff is 
final? 

Senator Osmkna. In certain eases only, such as in the ease of 
customs, for example, and also internal revenue. 
Senator Lkxroot. Those two classifications? 
Senator Osmkna. Yes. 

Senator Lenkoot. Refunds of taxes or refunds of duties? 
Senator Osmkna. Yes. 

Senator Lknroot. Other than that the action of the collector or 
head of a department is final? 
Senator Osmkna. No. 

Senator Lexroot. If agaihsi the Government? 
Senator Osmkna. It would not be final. 

Senator Hinoiiam. Will you point out in the proposed law the 
particular paragraphs or sentences that you object to? 

Senator Osmkna. Of course, Senator. I do not desire to make a 
detailed examination of the bill without consulting first my own 
people. That is why I. am askinir the committee to postpone con- 
sideration of this hill until next session. But if you would like 
me to submit a statement on that, I will do so. 

The Chairman. I think the committee would be glad if you would 
do that, if you will submit your objection to this bill, particularly 
to the part that relates to the Philippines, that being section 2 and 
what follows. We would be very glad to have your written analysis 
of your objections, if any. We would like to have it as soon as you 
ran <ret it to us. 

Are there any questions? 

Senator LenROOT. I would like to have the Senator express his 
view, not as to any particular provision of the bill, but whether 
there should not be lodged some power over the action of the ad- 
ministrative officials for allowing claims against the Government. 

The Chairman. All right. 

We will now hear Mr, O. R. McGuire, a representative of the 
Comptroller General. 

STATEMENT OF 0. R. McGUIRE, ATTORNEY IN THE OFFICE OF 
THE COMPTROLLER GENERAL 
• 

The Chairman, What is your official situation? 

Mr. McGt Attorney in the office of the Comptroller General. 

The Chair max. Where is the address? 

Mr. McGuire. The Treeasury building. 

The Ciiaikmax. Yon may proceed with such statement as you 
care to make. 

Mr. McGuirk. I should like to say at the outset that I do not 
appear in an official capacity for the Comptroller General, because 
he is neither an opponent nor a proponent of this bill. He has 
sent me here to give the committee such information as may be 
requested and as will be of assistance to it in consideration of its 
bill. 

The Ciiaikmax. 1 might say, in order to relieve any embarrass- 
ment in that respect, that 1 requested Mr. McGuire to come here, 
knowing that he has information on this subject. 



16 A.TTDITOB FOB PORTO HTCO AND PHII.IPI'IXK tSLANliS 

Mr. McGpIKB. This present hill before the committee docs noj 
confer on the Auditor for the Philippine Islands or the Auditor for 
Porto Rico any greater powers than are possessed hy the Comptroller 
General of the United States or than hare been possessed by the 
former accounting officer of the Treasury since tne beginning of 
our Government. Our accounting system began with the Con.' 
tinental Congress, with the ordinance* of September -2C>. 177*. The 
Comptroller and the Auditor for the Continental Congress were 
•riven more power than they possessed under the act of September 
•> 1789 (1 Stat. 65), organizing the Treasury Department. 

This comptroller — now the Comptroller General — had the sole 
power of settling and paying claims from appropriated moneys and 
Ins decision was final and conclusive upon the executive depart- 
ment and all other departments of the Government: This was con- 
strued as final and conclusive on the courts, because under our 
Constitution — and there is the same provision in the Jones law. the 
organic law of the Philippine Islands— no money ran he taken from 
the Treasury without the consent of Congress"; and Congress has 
never seen fit. except in a very limited number of cases, to pernlM 
rtifl judgments of courts to be paid from the appropriations made 
of September 30. 1*W (20 Stat 537). i„ othe r words, the juriSr 
mftn ts to be reported to them for a special appropriation before 
hW'may be paid. Ttepresent statute on the subject is the act 
S September 30. 1890 2G Stat. 537).I n other words, the furi* 
. Amrntallw — i - • isdietion of the 



s correctly 
(38 Court 



of Septemoei — - v - -^-/.xu ouier wuui», 

diction of the Comptroller General and the jurisdicti 
, rts do not conflict or cross each other. This' matter i 
stated by the Court of ( hums m Geddes ,•. United States v 
/(•Hims 428, !)• 444), as follows: 

"The accounting officers are the guardians of the appropria- 
tions It is their business to see that no money is paid out of the 
Treasury unless the payment is.authorized by an appropriation act. 
t*S not their business to adjudicate abstract auctions of legal 
tLht bevond the legal right of a person to be paid out of a specific 
rinropnation. An W™W**«>n constitutes P the means for dis- 
K g&g the legal debts of the Government. 

The judgment of a court bas nothing t£to vflth tb( . nu , m ,_ xvith ,,,, renie dy 
f( „ "uisfyi"- a J^fSeexect^ttveofflS 1 ^ of courta to render judgment* 
IZvUx* u.iW** a "" 1 ' % " ulv ofsatlsfylng them. • - 

'The Supreme Court of the Un,ted States-prior to 1855 we had 
no Court of Claims-held toat *o sm t could £ b ht - mst ^ 
T?nited States, except m a few r stances where Congress gave special 
Permission to bring ? suit Theie jvere attempts during that 
Se to get money ou| ^^^^ IWry by mandamus 
ocrninst some oftcei » * ,««w^. t; and the Supreme Court, in 

ff r Sse of the United btetes against Guthrie-I might give the cita- 
thecaseo teen th Howard, 284-. t he court used this language 

"-r,,,. only l^fiSfSJS^S SSA^^Om upon the case before 
11 ,1 "•' ff^rflawWrelS ^ the Federal Government «.r by 
* ,s ' vn P' iI,ciP l!?or the District of => Power in the Circuit Court 

V i lc«" sti, VT, ; .,« or sums of u , lui »Wa or in this court to command 
"' °t 1,1, rnwal O* <J isfacion of ' v f ''"m the Treasury of the [Jutted 

the wlthar» app ued w ••' «spute<j or controverted claims against 

States, to 



A r M l <>K FOB PORTO RICO -VXD PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



17 



*h& Uniteti States? This is the question, the very question presented for our 
determination; and its simple statement would seem to carry with it the most 
startling considerations — nay. its unavoidable »negation — unless this should 
be prevented i»y some positive and controlling command; for it would occur 
a priori tq every mind that a treasury oot fenced round or shielded by fixed 
: »nd established modes and rules of administration but which would be sub- 
iected to any number or description of demands, asserted and sustained through 
Hie undefined and undefinabjle discretion of the courts, would constitute a 
feeble and Inadequate provision for the great and inevitable necessities of 
Hie Nation, 

The (iovernment under such a regime, or, rather, under such an absence 01 
•'ill rule, would. If practicable at all. lie administered not by the great depart- 
ments ordained by the Constitution and laws and guided by the modes therein 
Prescribed but by' the uncertain and perhaps contradictory action of the courts 
in the enforcement of their views of private interests. 

In the case of Brashear v. Mason ((> How. 92), which occurred 
prior to LS55 also — a case against the Secretary of the Navy to 
require him to pay money out of the Treasury— the Supreme Court 
said : 

We are also of opinion that if the plaintiff had made out a title to his pay 
as officer of the United States Navy a mandamus would not lie in the court 
below to enforce the payment. 

The Constitution provides that no money shall be drawn from the Treasury 
but in consequence of appropriations made by law. (Art. I, sec. J>.) And it is 
declared by act of Congress Stat J... p. 689, sec, 3) that all moneys appro- 
printed for the use of the War and Navy Departments shall be drawn from 
the Treasury by warrants of the Secretary Of the Treasury upon the requisi- 
tions of the Secretaries of these departments, countersigned by the second 
comptroller. 

And, by the act of 1817— 

Which is continued in existing law — 
it is made the duty of the comptrollers to countersign the warrants only in 
•cases when thev shall be warranted by law. And all warrants drawn by the 
Secretary of the Treasury upon the Treasurer shall specify the particular 
appropriations to which the same shall be charged; and the moneys paid by 
Virture of such warrants shall, in conformity therewith, be charged to such 
appropriations in the books kept by the comptrollers; and the sums ap- 
propriated for each branch of expenditure in the several departments shall 
be solely applied to the object for which they are respectively appropriated, 
and no others. 

The court further said in that case that if a writ of mandamus 
should lie against the ofMal of the Government, the proceedings 
by mandamus would become as common as actions of assumpsit 
against individuals, in other \*ords, that by indirection claimants 
could accomplish their purpose of suing the Government although 
the Government had not given its consent to be sued. 

\ow. in the Philippine Islands they have the same kind of an 
accounting system that we have here! In fact, section 24 of the 
Jones Law was modeled on our system as it has existed since 1879. 
The Jones Act provides that "No moneys can be taken out of the 
Philippine treasury without the consent of the auditor/' But in a 
recent case, the one the Senator referred to. the Ynchausti case, 
and also the city of Manila case, the auditor was commanded and 
required by the 'Supreme Court of the Philippines, a divided court, 
to countersign warrants and pay money in the Ynchausti case to a 
steamship company in settlement of a customer's claim which he 
had held to be improper. In the other case he was required to 
transfer and pay over to the city of Manila certain moneys when 
he was required to enforce settlements between the city of Manila 



18 



AUDITOR FOB PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE tSLAXPS 



and the metropolitan water district, and he had ruled that the 
money belonged to the water district. 

Senator Bingham. T\v.\\ is a power not possessed by any cotlri 
in the United States, isn't it \ 

Mr. McGtjire. It is a power possessed by do couii in the United 
States, except that we have had in the last y car. since the establish- 
ment ot the General Accounting office, a few cases similar to the casj 
of Smith v. Jackson (241 Federal. 747: 246 V. S. 388). Thai case 
is one where a mandamus was brought against the uditor for the 
fanaina Canal Hp wa s not an auditor In the strict sense, beeausS 
after he had settled a claim it had to be settled by the Auditor for 
the War Department, now the comptroller. He was not a dis- 
852%!!^ ^^Pted to withhold part of the salary of a 
L ^andaSn^ ^ ^ a S trid ^tthe Canal Zone issued 

• T s'iv I r u i r 7 |mrc<1 tl,is iu " li:( "- to pay the salary. I'.ut. 
nor he u "m.iT ™ T V]tor for fch « Sta.es Treasury 

*SewL&SS3SS5fi the 561186 that the A,,<li,< "- of fche ,M,ili,> - 

: „,iiiKfthp Pnmnf,,i... / utJln &&va] officer brought an injunction 




-SSnOt 1)'1V WUJLOC, UJC HUU1LUI UL Mir 

the coiirts have .sustained fl^X ° V nav - y oflicers - At the sani( ' time J 
refusing to pay claims si \? ^ om P tr °Uei; General only recently in 
case in the Philippic' E? j ls . tll(> Ynchatisti case and the Manila 
and discretion. viands involving the exercise of judgement 

Senator Lbnroot. [sn't ft *. 
ministerial act? General! distinction whether it is a purely 
to exercise, no action unl i V sP^ng if the official has no judgment 

Mr- AM; run;/ Geneva h 
said in the Brashear asai slH V lkln r- r - However, the Supreme Court 
admitted, he could not eef^ij Mason case that even if the claim be 
vided for such suits or i ^oney because Congress had not pro* 
iji such manner. m% tue paymenl of general appropriations 

Senator Lexroot. Ther 
Congress' Bre Would ITave to he an appropriation hv 

Mr. McGijirk. Under \ ■ 
y e |; Article. I ? section 9, of the Constitution; 

Senator Lknroot. If fk 
then would a mandamus ?fV Vasonean d if it was purely ministerial, 

Mr. McGuire. Then a 
decisions as they now stan,? an v? amus wo "ld probably lie under the 
or comptroller perform^ «<L . ou can see, however, that the auditor 




has been adjusted, etc ^Priation. whether the approprial 
.unary writ to draw * eoiirse, if he is required by an extraor- 
wou d have to draw it \; ;»;'>-ant for the payment of a claim, he 
or else go to jail. Aether there was any money there or not 



.vrniToi: 101: i>orto hico and Philippine islands 



19 



This bill, in my opinion, does not increase the powers the auditor 
for the Philippine Islands is supposed to have under the Jones law, 
because, as I say. up until within these recent cases, this last year — 
and they only relate to the pay of Army and Navy officers — there 
has been no writ in the history of the United States issued against 
the accounting officers. Such writs were expressly denied in United 
States v. Lynch (187 U. S. 280). The Federal Government had 
given its consent to be sued in the Court of Claims, so it was believed 
that the language was "final and conclusive on the executive de- 
partments," and the courts, having nothing to do with appropri 
ations, gave the auditor over there the same power as that pos- 
sessed by the accounting officers of the Treasury, now the Comp- 
troller General. But the courts seem to think that they have a 
right to review by extraordinary judicial process, with the result 
(hat its settlements are not final and conclusive and the Government 
is being sued without its consent. 

Furthermore, in these cases — for instance, in the case of the city 
of Manila — the court did not attempt to determine the merits of the 
claim against the Philippine Islands. It held that the money should 
be paid and the auditor there was authorized by act of the Philip- 
pine Legislature itself to enforce settlements between these munici- 
palities of the Government. 

The court said that if the water district had a claim against the 
city it should sue the city. Such a suit would be somewhat like 
the War Department here suing the Navy Department. It would 
be foolish for the War Department to sue the Navy Department 2 , 
when the Government has its machinery to settle that claim 
and such machinery lias been in existence and operation since the 
beginning of the Government. If the War Department was in- 
debted to the Navy Department, such indebtedness would be settled 
by the Comptroller General who would enforce his settlement by 
debiting the appropriation of the War Department and crediting 
the proper appropriation of the Navy Department. 

The ChaXRjVIAN. Then, it is your contention, if I may interrupt 
you right here, that this bill, if enacted into law. proposes to give 
the power to the auditor which he heretofore has been assumed to 
ha ve already \ 

. Mr. McGijire. Exactly. It simply clarifies the power that he 
is supposed to have already. 

Senator Lenroot. lias the auditor heretofore exercised the power 
of judgment and discretion upon the merits of claims? 

Mr. McGriKK. Yes. He denied the claim in the customs case 
and decided in favor of the water district in the other case. 

Senator Lenroot. Has this been the accepted practice in the 
Comptroller's office? 

Mr. McGuHtiS. Yes. It has been his practice to settle all claims 
in which the government of the Philippine Islands is interested 
either as debtor or creditor. 

Senator Lkxkoot. In other words, it does not accept the judg- 
ment of the heads of departments or of administrative officials as 
final in any case? 

.Mr. McGi nn:. No. 

1 would like to cite the language of Chief Justice Taft at £age 
81 of his boook on "Our Chief Magistrate and His Powers' 3 with 



20 AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



reference to the authority of the former auditor- and comptroller^ 
of the Treasury, now the Comptroller General: 

Then consider the drawing of money from the Treasury Department under 
an appropriation act The drawing of the warrant musl be approved by the 
Comptroller pf the Treasury (now the Comptroller General), it is for him 
to say how the appropriation act shall be construed and whether the warrant 
is lawful and whether the money can be drawn. The Comptroller of tihi 
Treasury is an appointee Of the President, and in a general sense IS his sub- 
ordinate. If the President does not like bim as a Comptroller, he ran remove 
him and with the consent of the Senate put in another nne, but under the 
act of Congress creating the office, the President can not control or revise 
the decisions of this officer. His work is Like the work I have referred fctfi 
quasi judicial. If the claim is rejected by him, the claimant may in some 
cases carry his claim into the Court of Claims— 

I notice that ho says. - In some rases " 

but i* he decides for the claimant, the public and tllose interested In main- 
taining the side of Government have no appeal, and his decision is final. 

I should also like to cite the language of a report of the House of 
Representatives Committee on Revision of the Laws in a reporj 

f?!o d $S b ™ ar y 16 > 1869, republished in 26 Congressional Record 
4342. as follows: 

»m»*»i!a IhZVL \ J L Xh <-' » ead nf ,n<> War or any other department to set 
feat wSr^tttte^^P, 01 ,h " aecounting officers of the Government 
ttmtate Ind settirmaif P ^l iple ^ n wM <* lh(i astern is eased: that the 
SS^iffh^S^^ th ° d ^^ment of all public funds should be 
Ste Ht»lf C ^ 0ther different from those Who made the 
hvthe head 0 ^StSSSSlS 9 ^ menta * «** ™« 
the claim accrued, then " hn 3** ^ d ? eC t tlon lh " "F 0 ** ^as panl. or 
Which it was supposed JtbffiiM^^ gJgSZ 

Treasury, either to SSSfKl^ •PP—l.fKWP .^PW of the 
Vow in tort nftcJc W th ela\v or allow a particular claim. 

of claims, such as loss of Z \ ^W" ' "'7 '■ 'T 
arc settled administStiif^^T 1 ^ ai £ ^"W n***' 

Senator Lbnhoot. t ' ; ' ^ ls - h - v ,lu ' Comptroller General, 
damages can be brought J£ trw fchat clauns for , " ,l!< l""l ; >"'' 1 

Mr Mc(u„u, Yof J ( ° Urt 
can liquidate them unl.Ju - s for unliquidated damages the court 

Senator LenbW ( £J a , n>(,fi in tort ; . , „,.,.' • ' 

if they had arisen in thl v • ' ( ;ls( ' s that arlsc 1,1 the 1 '"lippinf . 
Court of Claims? United States courts, have resorted to the 

Mr. McGujHB. Yes Tfn, v , • i 

United States, its claim™* ^nchausti case had originated in the 
not think the Manila cms COuld have resort « d to the courts. I do 
because one department f °° - ll:lV( ' 1)( ' on entertained by a court, 
the Federal Government " 0 right to sue another department of 

Senator Lenboot. CouTA+t ~, • 

in these particular cases/ ,V V(! ,( ' sort<>(1 to the Court of Claims 

Mr. McGuiRE, In tho V t 

Senator Lenboot Y« n l,sti case? 
of Claims in that case? L °nkl they have resorted to the Court 

Mr. McGuire. Yes. 



AUDITOR FOB PORTO BICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 21 



Senator Lenroot. So. they have the same remedies in the Philip- 
pines with reference to the Court of Claims 

Mr. McGuire. Xo. The Philippines have no court of claims. 

Senator Lenroot. That is what I am getting at. If it had arisen 
in this country 3 they could have in the one case resorted to the 
Court of Claims? 

Mr. McGuire. In the Ynchausti claim their remedy would be 

Senator Lenroot. That is for refund? 

Mr. .McGuire. Yes; for refund. The remedy would be to appeal 
to the Governor General. That appeal was not taken. 

Senator Lenroot. So there was no judicial review permitted in 
the Philippines? 

Mr. McGuire. No judicial review. 

Senator Lenroot. Where there would have been one according to 
a line of cases in this country ! 

Mr. McGuire. Strictly speaking, it is not a judicial review. 
Senator Lenroot. A judicial determination? 
Mr. McGtuRE. Yes: a judicial .determination. 

Senator Binoiiam. 1 understand that they did have an appeal to 
the Governor General, which was not taken. 

Senator Lenroot. I am speaking about the action of the courts 
in the Philippine whereas if the case had arisen in this country 
they conld have gone to the Court of Claims. 

Mr. McGuire. In the other case Ynchausti would have had to go 
to the Philippine Legislature for legislation had its Governor Gen- 
eral sustained the auditor just as, prior to the establishment of the 
Court of Claims in this country, a claimant was required to go to 
Congress for legislation. 

Senator Bingham. I notice that Senator Osmena says that in this 
proposed legislation there are several clauses which would clearly 
confer upon the auditor of the Philippine Islands very important 
additional powers over those that the Comptroller General of the 
United States has. Do you understand that statement? 

Mr. McGi ire. I do not know of any additional powers that he 
would have except the one pointed out. which is really a duty 
rather than a power, that of bringing to the attention of heads of 
departments any expenditures that he thought were irregular, etc. 
However, the Comptroller General of the United States is required 
by Congress to report to it every expenditure and every contract 
made in violation of law. 

Senator Lenroot. There is no appeal from the Comptroller Gen- 
eral in the United States, while there is one in this bill ] 

Mr. McGuire. There are two in this bill; one to the Governor 
General and one to the Comptroller General. Of course, under the 
existing law if the Governor General disagrees with the auditor, then 
he must transmit it to the Secretary of War. The Secretary of War 
is not a judicial officer, nor does he normally perform accounting 
duties. So, it was believed to be more satisfactory to the people of 
the Philippine Islands and to assure them of semijudicial determi- 
nation in substituting the Comptroller General as an appellate offi- 
cial who is performing like duties in the United States and who 
would be familiar with accounting problems. 



22 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO A X \) PHILIPPINE ISLAM'S 



The Chairman. I wonder whether at this point of your remarks 
I had not better insert in the record section- 24 and 25 of the existing 
law. You have been referring to those sections. 

Mr. McGuire. Yes. 

The Chairman. I will insert them at this place. 
(The law referred to is as follows:) 

[Public No. 240 j Wxa Congress] 
AI J ft^<t T £-^* r f <{£ e J?!^ 08e * {h " people of the United Statea na to the future 

Skc. 24. That there shall be appointed bv the President an auditor, who 
shall examine, audit, and settle all accounts pertaining to the revenues an* 
S! r :';' t • Y !' ^ ^ ,,1,| ■ , ' Of the Philippine governmenl and of the 
C : (1 mi /«'v,n, 111 , 11 ts of the Philippines. Including trust 

h n i Mcfm SSLSSfJ? r ° m 1,011,1 audit, iii accordance with 

^thereof. He shall p^g* Bff^^^ 

vou^s^ of the governmenl and preserve the 

It shall be the duty of tho ••^-ri;*- . , 

oministrative officer «™^J?2™ r ° bring t( > lh <" attention oi the proper 




esignation, sickness aucutor may prescribe, ana in case oj 

from any cause, the deputy anrl?f 0,,l(>r ai ^''> t '«' Of the auditor from his oilier 
of the absence from duty from sll;l11 nave ch ^rge of such office, tn case 
auditor, the Governor General cauj3e * of ,,(>ni ll,< * auditot and the deputy 
charge of the office. lnay designate an assistant who shall have 

The administrative jurisdicti 
funds or property, and all y, i 01 ,ll( ' auditor over accounts, whether of 
exclusive. With the approval t T S 1111(1 rocortls pertaining thereto, shall he 
time make and promulgate Ken© i e Governor General he shall from time to 
sistent with law covering ^i, ^ rul <>r special rules and regulations not ineon- 
property held in trust by the n m * tll0(1 nf iiccouiitiiitf for public funds and 
That any officer accountable p r0vernm ent or any of its branches: Provided* 
additional reports or returns fwf plI,,|i '' funds or property may require such 
necessary for his own Informant 1,is ^bordinates or others as he may deem 

The decisions of the aumSSSSif^ 1 t )r °tecfllon. 
branches oi the Government £v 0 Qnal a,1(l conclusive upon the executive 
the party aggrieved or the head \y* tl,at appeal therefrom may be taken by 
in the manner hereinafter , ' ?' tn « department concerned within one year, 
after provided, have Like authn^U bed< ™ auditor shall, except as herein- 
auditors of the United states n y :,s t,,:lt conferred by Law upon the several 
nry and is authorized to c 0 i lm ' Comptroller of the United states Treas- 
before him Cor settlement, o r ni ! al< * directly with any person having claims 
official relations with his offiep 1 a,1 - v department, officer, or person having 

As BOOU alter the close of 
he examined and adjusted thi 1 ^ Cal y ^r as the accounts of said year mav 
tod the Secretary of War an llt()r s,,:,, l submit to the Governor General 




authorized to summon WitneaS^ the and the deputy auditor are 

111 tbe DUisuance oi these p r ovi a,hllini ^' 1 * <»aths. and to take evidence, and. 

attendance oi witness^ as ^stons, *ay issue subpeenas and enforce the 

The office ol the auditor P r °vided by law 
Governor General and shall ^ ,J( ' under the' general supervision oi the 
such necessary assistants a* of the auditor and deputy auditor and 

' 06 Prescribed by law. 



At Mini: FOB POKXO BICO .VXD IMIIMPPI SK ISLANDS 



23 



Sec, 25. Xha1 any person aggrieved by ilie action or decision of the auditor 
in thf settlement Of hi* account or claim may. within one year, take an 
appeal in writing t<> the Goyeraor General, which appeal shall specifically set 
forth the particular action of ttie auditor to which exception is taken, with the 
reason and authorities relied on for reversing such decision. 

[f the Governor General shall confirm the action of the auditor, he shall 
so Indorse the appeal and transmit it to the auditor, and the action shall 
thereupon be final and conclusive, Should the Governor General fail to 
sustain the action of the auditor, he shall forthwith transmit, his grounds 
Of disapproval to the Secretary of War. together with the appeal and the 
papers necessary to a proper understanding of the matter. The decision of 
the Secretary of War in Such case shall he final and conclusive. 

Senator Lbnkoot. So you say. Mr. McGwire, that this bill in tact 
eoiilers loss power upon a supposed auditor than is now exercised 
by the Comptroller General; so far as his final authority is con- 
cerned ! 

Mr. McGtJTRE, I do not think that as far as final authority is 
concerned the auditor in this hill will have any more power than he 
has under the Jones Act. The auditor has certain administrative 
duties with reference to the auditing of property aeeounts whereas 
now the Comptroller General of the United States does ijot audit 
property matters. So that is one difference in their duties. 

The Chairman, Arc there any other questions that any member of 
the committee desires to propound to Mr. McGuire? 

Senator Bayard. May I ask him one question? 

The Chairman. Yes. Senator Bayard. 

Senator Bavakd. On page IK the next to the last sentence, it reads 
like this: "The decision of the Comptroller General of the United 
States in such cases shall he final and conclusive." That means of 
course, except that review may he had by a court of law as to the 
legality of the decision? 

Mr. McGuiRE. There is really no review. Senator. The Philip- 
pines have no court of claims, you see. 

Senator Bayakd. You misunderstand me. I am reading from 
the proposed law. 

.Mr. McGuuiE. Yes. 

Senator Bavakd. It jjive> this right of appeal from the Governor 
General to the ComptrollertGoneral of the United States and then 
it says that the decision of the Comptroller General of the United 
States shall he final and conclusive. I suppose that that means that 
it is final and conclusive except that a man may test the legality 
pf the decision from an accounting point of view I 

Mr. Me Gi i re, He could not test the legality of a decision unless 
it was a ministerial act to he performed. 

Senator BATAKD, That is what 1 mean. 

Mr. McGi nn:. Or unless there was a provision in the law of the 
Philippine government that the government could he sued. There 
is no such provision in it. You take a tort claim against the Tnind 
States. If the Comptroller General should decide a tort claim, they 
can not test the legality of his decision in law. They would have 
to come to Cohgress to the Committee on Claims to get an appro- 
priation. 

Senator Bayard. This language which I have just quoted from is 
similar to the law governil^g the action of the Comptroller Genera! 
in regard to affairs wholly in the United States? 



24 ATJMTOB FOR PORTO RICO AND IMUI.IPPIXK ISLANDS 

Mr. McGuire. It is exactly similar, except there has been dropped 
from the law as it now stands in the Jones Act the clause " on the 
executive departments." That was dropped because the Philippine 
supreme court in these cases undertook to review the auditor of 
the Philippine Islands, which the courts in this country do not do. 

The Chairman. Are there any further questions? Thank you, 
Mr. McGuire. 

We shall next hear from Mr. Guevara, Resident Commisisonej! 
from the Philippine Islands. 

STATEMENT OF HON. PEDRO GUEVARA, RESIDENT COMMISSIONER 
FROM THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS (resumed) 

Mr. Guevara. Senator Osmena has given the committee our point 
of view fully in regard to this question. We believe that consid- 
eration of this bill by the committee should be postponed until 
the next session of Congress, in order that the people of the islands, 
through their representatives, may express their point of vit w in 
regard to this bill. 

Anyway, I wish to advance the idea that, in my opinion, the pro- 
posed bill increases the power of the auditor in this way: First, in 
the existing law the jurisdiction of the auditor of the Philippine 
Islands is limited to the executive branches of the government, 
while in the proposed bill the jurisdiction of the auditor of the 
Philippine Islands extends to all branches of the government. There- 
ai Di .^. ecis . ion ? adjustment, or settlement made by the auditor 
1 flf 1 l .PP ine Islands will prevent any action by the courts or 
by the legislature itself, because its decision is binding op. all 
branches of the government. 

fceconcL the auditor of the Philippine Islands is given judicial 
power, in the existing law he is not authorized to decide any case,, 
hut in the proposed law he is given the power to decide any case 
brought before hiru. fo 

cr,w!. inSertion of the Vord " decision " in the proposed bill gives 
ni fhl i?°T e i t° nim t 1 *™ that enjoyed by the Comptroller General 
el' in States. The word " decision " means "judicial proc- 

bill and fl? ? ; aud tnat word nas bcen insertecl in tne Proposed 
stricken out W s " u P on the executive branches of the govejpimeW 



9 claimant l -y^vu ifiiu^n'u vihwi. v^v/m.*~*.»« 

the Comnt^U "25* be a Private citizen— has no right to appeal to 
Philim^! r ? r General against the decision of the auditor for the 
pointl are v mds c ^&^d by the Governor General. These 
sideration '^Portant in my belief; they deserve mature con- 

heard on this u^ Ve 1110 rhili P pino Le ^ sl * ture should be 
the Strict 11,0 attention of the committee to the fact that 

jurisdiction wS^^ tllis r()l | ntl '. v iiave < in cor ! ain eases, cpneur^ent 



to matters 
24 Statutes, 
concurrent 
necessary we 



auditor fob PORTO Kico and Philippine islands 25 



The C iiAiiiM an. Particularly this pending bill? 
Mr. (ii EVARA. Yes: just this pending bill, comparing it with the 
existing law. 

The Chat km an. The committee has requested you to prepare and 
file that as soon as possible so as not to delay any action that might 
be taken. 

Mr, Guevara. Yes. 

Senator Lenkoot. Is it your present view that the present law is 
satisfactory in view of this decision? 

Mr. ( rUTSVARA. The law has been working satisfactorily for the last 
2h years. 

Senator Lenroot. What have you to say as to the statement made 
here thai until the time of this decision the auditor did exercise 
the power of judgment and review and now under the decision he 
is not permitted to t 

Mr. Guevara. His decision can be reviewed by the Supreme Court 
of the Philippine Islands. 

Senator Lenroot. No. Was the statement correct that up to the 
time of this decision the auditor did exercise the same power that is 
proposed to confer upon him now i 

Mr. Guevara. No. The other side made that statement. 

Senator Lenkoot. Was his attempt to set aside the determination 
in this customs case something entirely new. something that he had 
never tried to do before? 

Mr. Guevara. He never exercised that power with regard to 
customs duties. 

Senator Lenroot. That was the way the case arose — from the re- 
fund of certain customs that they claimed the head of the division 
had allowed and the Auditor had disallowed? 

Mr. Guevara. Disallowed; yes, sir. 

Senator Lenroot. Had he ever exercised a similar power before 
that time? 

Mr. Guevara. He had never exercised such a power with ref- 
ereince to customs duties. 

Senator Lenroot. He never had attempted it before? 
Mr. Guevara. Never. • 

Senator Lenroot. He had always accepted the findings and de- 
terminations of the head of the customs and internal revenues de- 
partments as final? 

Mr. Guevara. Yes, sir. 

This Ynchausti case is now pending before the Supreme Court 
of the United States. 

The Ciiaikman. Well, Commissioner, under the present situation, 
in effect, the Government of the Philippine Islands can be sued, 
can't it?' 

Mr. Guevara. The government of the Philippine Islands can 
be sued by authority of the Philippine Legislature, by anybody. 

The Chairman. But, as I understand it, under the present state 
of the law, without giving any express authority or without creating 
any Court of Claims, there is power of review which the court in 
this case has claimed to exercise over the decisions of the Auditor, 
and in effect, the government is suable without its own consent. 
Doesn't it work out that way? 

Mr. Guevara. No. I don't think so. 



26 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



Senator Lenroot. But this case arose out of a mandamus on the 
theory that it was performing a purely ministerial act. 

Mr. Guevara. In this wise Mr. Ynchausti has contended be- 
fore the court that the Auditor has exercised a power that was not 
granted to him by law. 

Senator Lenroot. But vou say he has never attempted to exercise 
such a power before? 

Mr. Guevara. Never before in a case like this; no, sir. 

In this proposed bill we believe that the Auditor of the Philippine 
Islands will have more power than the Governor General himself. 

Senator Bingham. There are some people in Washington who 
think that the Comptroller General in the United States' has more 
power than anybody else in the United States. 

Mr. (tukvara. Congress can remove him at anv time. 

Senator Lenroot. All we can do is to kick him out. We can not 
review his acts. 

Mr. Guevara. But we can not kick out the Auditor for the Phil- 
ippine Islands because we have no power. 

ine Chairman. Is there any further question of the commis- 
sioner* All right. We will next hear from Major Hedrick. 

^f^ 3 ^ aTt £ F MAJ - 1AWEENCE H. HEDRICK, UNITED STATES 
^THE AEMY TY ^ THE 0FFICE 0F THE ADJTITANT GENERAL 



General's office. 



KSor ' v • W la ' is " flk ' iil1 station? 
Majoi IIhM„ lu . K . ! ilm on d Xhe Adjutant 

SS?^*"- S^ 0 * d0 y^u represent? 
T S cv! mfICK - ? think 1 ^ sa| 

Vnior W« * I r ma(1 ° a reqtiest of the Secretary of War 

Jn&ESfS* Inn! ( ' i,n ^ t] t 1 T 'T for The £ dj £ 

nf fK« v« Y un ? ce > 1T * that capacity. I am the attorney in charge 
MeSpoS^^.fd.thl ease of the city of Manila ? the 
in the Supreme Cowi t nct ' ,low on P ctltl0n tor wnt of certiorari 

bill/bStTimplv e to H? emen ' ab , either P^P 01 ?** or opponent of the 
inadvertently been ,! ?ar Up a few erroneous ideas that I think have 
First in L? r glven to th * committee. 
a ii sr in connection win. i' .„.,ff,.,. 



r ll'St in r-nnn *• w " 5 "JUUUhwci 

with refereS t T with the last matter that the Sena£or askod 
had ever attenfn^^ e ™ er or not the amlltor ()f the PHilippineS 
cise in the Ynch exercise the power that he attempted to exer- 
considered caL ESS ( T 0: What W(> insider is probably the best- 
fche auditor is n 1( ; e Philippine Supreme Court on the duties of 
several years ago a ° f ^ amb Phipps. That Qase was decided 
presented in the -Y^ i arose on the identical question which is now 
said: " TJie nionev £ / ^ ( ' ase - In that Case the sll P reine court 
to get out of ti H ? w V*? h the collector of customs is now attempting; 
propriatibn tlvit^* tr easury 3 based upon said permanent ap- 
pirfe commissiohfer f' S ' the a PP r opriation about 1902 by the Philip- 
erroneously or ill 0 <r !! tlle Payment of refunds and taxes or duties 
the refund of mo* c °lfected— " is simply appropriated to meet 
tended that the n,,r! s er ™neouslv collected. If the legislature a> 
a «ciitor should be bound bv the decision of the col- 



AUDITOR FOB POBTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 27 



LeCtor of customs, it would- haye SO stated in plain terms. In view 
of the fart that under tin* law in force in the Philippine Islands, no 
money can be paid out of the treasury except by warrant, and no 
such warrant is valid unless it is countersigned by the auditor, ii is 
plainly evident that, in the absence of anything in the law to the 
contrary, the auditor is fully within his authority in refusing to 
countersign such warrant until and unless he has satisfied himself 
that the money in question was. in fact and actually, erroneously 
collected. No effectual check can ever exist upon the expenditure 
of public funds in any case where the same officer authorizes the 
expenditures and then audits, or controls the audits of the accounts." 
That, of course, gentlemen, is the fundamental principle underlying 
our system of checks and balances in the United States. 

Senator Lknkoot. May I ask at this time, did the recent dovish n 
reverse that ? 

Major Hkdiuck. The recent decision did not distinctly or actually 
in words reverse the Lamb r. Phipps case, but their decision is abso- 
lutely contrary to the Lamb r. Phipps case. 

Senator Lenroot, Did they refer to it in the decision? 

Ma jor Hedrick. The dissenting opinion referred to it. 

Senator Lknkoot. Xot the majority opinion? 

Major Hedrick. No; that did not. I think there was some little 
reference made, but no distinct mention was made of it. 

The situation in the Philippine Islands with reference to the 
auditor, as we view it, must be looked upon as the situation in the 
United States prior to the establishment or creation of the Court of 
Claims. With regard to that we believe that Congress, and Congress 
alone, has authority to create a court of claims in the Philippine 
Islands and that the Legislature of the Philippine Islands has been 
given general legislative powers, if those powers or when the exer- 
cise of those powers are not inconsistent with the organic act. The 
creation of a court of claims, as we view it, would be in direct con- 
travention to the powers of the auditor, as conferred by Congress in 
the organic act. 

There have been some attempts to give the courts in the Philip- 
pine Islands court of claims jurisdiction. That has not been accom- 
plished, except that there is now, I think, on the statutes a bill which 
provides that if the auditor does not pass upon a question within 
60 days after it is submitted to him they can take it into court. 
The auditor has prevented any cases being taken into court by pass- 
ing upon them within, 60 days, although it is contended that that 
bill, that law of the Philippine Legislature, is in contravention of the 
organic act and is said to be unconstitutional, using the organic act 
as their constitution. 

Senator Bingham. Are you going to touch on the question as to 
the ways in which the auditor has exercised his powers up to the 
time of this first reversal by the courts ? 

Major Hedrick. Yes, sir. I read the case of Lamb v. Phipps, 
but I forgot to say that that was the case where the auditor had ex- 
ercised the identical power that he exercised in the Ynchausti case. 

Senator Bingham. What was the year of that case? 

Major Hedrick. I can not give you the exact year, Senator, but it 
is 8 or 10 years ago. 



28 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PIUMPPIXK ISLANDS 



Senator Bingham. Are there any other cases where the auditor 
has exercised this power? 

Major Hedrick. There have been a few case- where the auditor 
has been mandamused prior to the recent cases. In two or three of 
them his acts were considered to be purely ministerial. In one cose 
an official, an American, who was appointed, an oflicial in the Philip- 
pines, had either resigned or his appointment had run out and he 
was about to come home. The auditor had audited his accounts 
and had fixed the amount that was due. This official had some other 
relations entirely separate and distinct from the Government, and 
the auditor refused to countersign his warrant until he squared up 
these other things, which was a matter over which the auditor had 
no control whatever. It was probably being done in order that all 
American officials should leave the islands with a clean slate behind 
them. Practically the action of the auditor might have been cor- 
rect, but legally it was entirely wrong. He was mandamused and 
the Supreme Court held in this case that there was nothing left 
for him to do, no discretionary act for him to perform. He had 
already passed upon this account and had found the amount due, 
and after that the mere countersignature of the warrant was a purely 
ministerial act, which, of course, was a correct decision. 

As to the exercise of the powers, I do not think that anyone will 
contend for one moment that the auditor has not been exercising 
these powers consistently right along. There has been some fric- 
tion, I think you will all recall, about the auditor's exercise of cer- 
tain powers with reference to the $1,000,000 independence fund. 
Senator Hin<;„ am . ^ at was that? 

Major Hkdiuck. That was the fund that the legislature passed an 




S^Wttft" * aUcUt01 - ™£> Setl t0 all ° W an >' m ° ne - V t0 - dr ?.n U 

uT™ l at flind * °» the ground that it was not authorized. 1 he 
know ^W 0118 ,W**Sd with that I can not give, because I only 

wXreWce £jS*5 t0 y °* 1° ^ S" T^S! 

Senate £ 0 the expenditure of funds. 

El u NOBA11 ' What was the eventual outcome of that case? 
The°r^f RICK - !t was not spent, 
to be exp^id«n A « X * dei whose i u, isdif tion was this 1,000,000 pesos 

- The Cttat, y the legislature. , 
left it so tZ?lV N - The legislature appropriated 1,000,000 pesos and 
spent? e le gislature was to say how the money was to be 

S^ake?of tt^TT 1 ' was t0 be s P ent under the direction of 11,0 

Maior Hp Hous e and the President of the Senate. 

Mr Gnrv K * Tllat matter was never taken into court, 
monev w^«! A ' Su bject also to the auditor's review in case the 

The Cn>I ex Pended as appropriated by the law. . 

Mr Gml^ A \ Aml the auditor held against its legality? 
spent as an^' Th e auditor held that the nfoney can not be 
Jones law Priatecl bv th e legislature because it is against the 



AUDITOR I" OR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



29 



Senator Lenroot, Then, you want to modify your testimony a few 
minutes ago that the auditor did not exercise discretionary powers 
prior to the time of this case i 

Mr. GrTXBVARA, Not in this kind of case. The Ynchausti case was 
a private claim against the Government. Certain taxes collected 
by the collector of customs were supposed to be illegally collected. 

Senator Lkxkoot. Bilt the case which he read was just such a 
case. 

Mr. Guevara. The Ynchausti ease* 

Major Hedrick. No. I read the case of Lamb versus Phipps. 
Senator Lenroot. Thai is certainly such a case. 
Senator Bixoiiam. Vou gaVe the committee the impression that 
the auditor had recently started to exerrise additional powers which 

he never had before. Is that not a correct statement of the case? 

Mr. (ii BVARA. We do not know about this case that Major Hed- 
rick read. We were simply discussing the Ynchausti ease. 

Major HEDRICK, No. That was the Lamb versus Phipps ease, 
eight or ten years ago. The situation. I think, can be belter ex- 
plained by showing that — which, 1 think, is in entire accord 
with the facts, -the auditor has been exercising these powers right 
along. The attempt to take these matters into court is a new de- 
velopment in the situation. It was tor that express reason that 
matters which had been by reason of the fact that the auditor had 
been exercising those powers right along, thought to be clear until 
tic Supreme Court of the Philippine Islands under these two reeent. 
decisions has not found them clear, that this clarification is sought. 

Senator Bingham. Is the present auditor the same one who dis- 
allowed the million peso fund i 

Major Hedrick. Yes. 

Senator BlNGHAAT. That accounts for his unpopularity? 
Major Hedrtck. 1 don't think he gained any popularity by that 
act . 

Now, we know that changes in this law, as for instance to add — 
and I think you will all agree that it would not seem normally 
necessary to add it — to the word " accounts " where he shall audit, 
in the present law -i( says "accounts" with reference ;<> expen- 
ditures — no one had ever thought prior to that that it did not give 
him authority to audit claims of anyone who submitted a claim; 
but in the Ynchausti case the supreme court defined the word 
" accounts " and held that an account was only a paper upon which 
or a statement iilcluding items both of debit and credit side. With 
regard to the claim in the Ynchausti case, the decision stated* "In 
the instant case, there was only one item which grew out 01 one. 
transaction, and the only question involved was the legality of the. 
claim. Ilence, petitioner's claim was not an account within the 
definition of the word." 

Now that, of course, would deprive the auditor of any Control 
whatsoever over any expenditure upon a voucher which included 
only one item. Under their definition as to an account — that it 
includes debits and credits — if there were no debits or credits, only 
debits, he would have no control over them. They also defined the; 
word "audit*' to mean merely a mathematical calculation in check- 



9550&— 26 3 



30 vrDlioil FOR PORTO BI< - IXD PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 

Lug over the figures; and in thai we found thai the auditor's duties 
with regard to this claim were purely ministerial. 

In connection with the Ynchausti matter an entirely different 
question— the only question, I think, a> I view it. that there is in the 
case — is whether or not that particular class of claim- is a class oi 
claims set apart to be handled in an entirely different way than the 
genera] run of claims. That is one class 'of claims in which the 
Philippine Legislature and the Congress have consented that ;he 
Philippine government be sued, and they only have an appeal fronj 
the Collector of Customs to the court- oi first instance. 

That, I think, answers the statement of the gentleman that it has 
been in successful operation for 25 year.-. That Ls perfectly trw 
since the present law— of course the presenf law- -only since the 
organic act— I think the organic act gave the auditor a little greater 
power than he had before; but, generally speaking, he has had more 
powers and up until now the courts have not attempted to assume 
jurisdiction. 

Senator Bingham. May I ask at that point, has there been any 
change b the personnel of the higher courts which might have led t<> 
a different attitude on this question from what it was formerly? 

Major Hbdrick. Yes. sir. The writer of the majority opinion in 
both oi th^ cases has only been on the Supreme Court three or 
tour years. I think: not longer than that. How Long has JustiCjg 
j0 * e s been on the Supreme Court? 

S * l ' KVAIIA - I guess not for five years now. 
" nat,)r Bingham. Have there been any other changes in the pei> 
sonnelol the court? 

-ihv'T ? EDRICK - Oh, yes. There has been considerable change 
Kfrvfi kamb versus Phipps case. Justice Johnson, who was re- 
phi!. JUst a l,tt1 ^ while ano. was on the court when the Lamb versus 

M>l>s case was decided, and he wrote the dissenting opinion in the 
Citv f M °^ Se ' Justice Offstrand wrote some of the opinion in the 

The P n ^ case. Justice Johnson did not sit in that case. 
The i S I,A11:M .- XN - T think I ought to interrupt you at this point, 
will von 6 ' mee * * n a inomen t s - How* much more t im^ 

Maior Ti to P resen * Illillt(M " s 'hat you desire to present ? 

Thi P l ~ 1,:,, -n k. Not verv much more; 10 or 15 minutes. 

Set'. IIA, t I{MAX - We want to give von full time. 
sten^oX Bi ^ g ham, May I ask that Mr. Maguire give to the 
by S^at p ' (>1 t ' 10 record a discussion of the point brought out 
( ; oi., t a °, 1 rH ev ara as to the concurrent jurisdiction of the District 

£l d the Court of Claims ? 

\Tr u A " IJ,AX - Will you take note of that request? 
• 'feteFSE D °you^u1 it now? 
The V I KlN0HA M. NTo. 

That is irS^' Submit a little statement and put it in the record. 
(Therl t ' I( ' P^ esen * measure, 

to tin- at 12 o'clock noon, the committee adjourned subject 

<al1 of the Chair.) 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND THE PHILIPPINE 

ISLANDS 



TUESDAY, APRIL 27, 1926 



United States Senate, 
Committee on Territories and Insi lar Possessions, 

Was/ii/u/fon, /). ('. 
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10.30 a. m., in the com- 
mittee room. Capitol. Senator Frank B. Willis presiding. 

Present : Senators Willis (chairman). Bratton, Bingham, Butler 
Harris, Broussard, and Nye. 

. The; Chairman. The committee will please be in order. The hear- 
ing this morning is particularly given over to our friends from Porto 
Kico. who desire to present various matters. The specific bill before 
the committee is S. 3847, to amend and clarify the existing laws re- 
lating to the present duties of the auditor for Porto Rico and of the 
auditor for the Philippines. In as much as .Major Hedrick had not 
quite finished his statement on that bill at (he previous hearing, we 
Will first hear him. and as soon as he has finished we will <rivc the 
hearing to (lie various gentlemen from Porto Rico. 
Major Hedrick, you may proceed now. 

STATEMENT OF MA J. LAWRENCE H. HEDRICK— Resumed 

Major Hedrick. I wan( just briefly to point out what I thir.k is 
l ie real object of this bill. I want" to say to you gentlemen that 
me accounting system of (he Philippines*, just* as the accounting 
system in the I nited States, to my mind, should be kept entirely 
separate and distinct from any theory of a suit against the Govern- 
ment or the Court of Claims. The accounting system of the United 
states is practically the same as it has been down through the his- 
tory of the country. It ran along together with the Court of 
J-daims, but the two are not in anv way intermingled, and that 
is exactly what lias happened in the "Philippine Islands at the pres- 
ent time. I he courts are, in my opinion, attempting to intermingle 
the (Iay-in-court theory and the accounting system and to assume 
jurisdiction which has not been given to them heretofore. 

Ihat brings me to the reason for striking out of the present law 
tie words "the executive branches of the government"; that i^ 
the decisions of the auditor shall be final and conclusive upon the 
executive branches of the government. The Supreme Court, in the 
> nchausti case, to which I have referred before, pointed out that 
wI^T m #?. ,law » in the organic act, and, while not directly, at 
least mferentially, made a claim that that was one of the reasons 

31 



32 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PBj I LI I MM X K ISLANDS 



that they assumed jurisdiction. They say in the majority opinion 
that, the law having defined and limited the finality and conclusive- 
ness of the derision of the auditor to and upon the executive branches 
of the government only, it must follow that the appeal for which 
section 25 — that is, the appeal to the Governor General and Secretary 
of War — provides is an appeal from a decision of the insular auditor, 
which would he final and conclusive upon the executive branches 
of the government only, and that it was never intended that the 
provisions for such an appeal should apply to questions which are 
purely judicial. 

It was suggested the other day that the basis of the courl s de- 
cision was that the auditor's actions in these cases were ministerial, 
an<J hen ce controlled by mandamus. That is true in one sense and 
not true in another. It is true that the court has held that Ins 
actions are mhiisteriaL but analysis will show that they have held all 
of his actions practically pertaining to claims are ministerial. 1 hat, 
of course, is not (he theory which our courts in this country have 
followed. 

.That brings us to the point, then, where we see that the courts 
there are assuming a jurisdiction which our courts in this country 
have never sought to assume and never would assume. 

fcorthat reason h is necessary :<> clarify the law so that there can 
be no question at all about it. * , a 

m the inchausti case, I might inform the committee, the bupreme 
Jj^urt granted the petition for the writ of certiorari yesterday. 
Anat we hope. v ,i]| ena bl e U s to clear up one part of the question, 
hm l * is not hvnad enomdi to clear it all up. The case is not broad 



K nOU # h ' Neither is the'ease of the City of Manila v. the Auditoi 
oroad enough. That only deals with settlements of accounts between 
uitrerem governmental entities. So there still is this broad question 
Mineral claims that we do not know what we will do about. 
. 1 he < n.\n;M AX _ you feel, then that notwithstanding the action 
h . ll(i l >y the comt, there is still a necessity for Legislation of this 



aracter I 



whSo>? « Pkraxc*. I do, Senator. There are a number of things 
Z , J* 1 * c °urt will not necessarily pass upon in either one of thes* 
"BJS Still remain yery dubious. 

Dlac^ • AU:MAX - 1 wonder if it would be convenient for yon to 
£ Qu ^? ^ the record some time in your statement the opinion of the 

vr - Una t!l ^ dissenting opinion iii this Vnchausti case? 
the off * bdrick . Yes. i w ill give it to you right now. This IS 

/rJ transcript of the record, includinsr both opinions, 
mittee u°? mions referred to are on file with the clerk to the com- 

Seivo S re not Panted because of they? length.) 
preme r Bratt °n« Of course, you interpret the fact that the Su- 
nt, least fW* F anted the writ of certiorari yesterday as indicating 
soiitwK 1 is some question in the mind of the court as to the 

Mafer° f «M decision? 

S, , , H 5V«K. Yes: of course. That is all. 

M-ii, 11 ,T,,X - That is all < but i<: is indi cative to that extent ! 
question ^ EDWCK - Yes. It > s not m an y sense a decision upon the 

I,, S : " .' Kbatton. No. Oases are frequently defined by the Su- 
""'i where writs <>f certiorari have been issued where, il" the 



AI DI'IOU FOB PORTO UICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 33 



court did not entertain some doubt as to the soundness, it would have, 
denied the writ. 

Major Hedrick. Yes. That raises the next question, and the dis- 
senting opinion says that after having granted it, we still would 
not have the questions that are here determined at all. 

Senator Broi ssard. Is it your purpose to vest in this jurisdiction 
the same authority that is vested in this country? 

Ma jor Hedrick. Yes. There is now, as was pointed out the other 
dav, a little greater, not power, hut duty, imposed on the Auditor 
of the Philippine Islands than exists in the Comptroller General, 
although with each it is simply a point of extravagant expenditures. 
Hut thai already was in the present law and there was no change 
in that at all. 

We believe that Congress intended when it passed the organic act, 
in very clear language, to give the auditor exactly the same powers 
that the Comptroller of the Treasury, now the Comptroller (general, 
has. They make that statement in the organic act. We believe that 
Congress 'intended to create for the Philippine Islands identically 
the same accounting system as that of the United States: and that 
has been the operation of the law ever since its enactment until just 
recently. 

There was a statement made the other day that the auditor had 
no power of review over a decision upon a claim of any of the heads 
of departments. I think that statement was inadvert ment, because 
that is exactly what he was put there for — to have this power of 
review, lie lias it over the heads of departments. The collector of, 
customs in the Yhchausti case is the one exception that the courts 
OVer there have denied so far. 

Now in the case of the city of Manila % the Auditor, that case 
illustrates another extent to which the courts are going. That is 
not the organic act, in fact, that they are practically setting aside, 
but an act of the Philippine Legislature coupled with the organic 
act. The laws of the Philippine Legislature provide that the city 
of Manila and the metropolitan water district shall be regarded as 
provinces for the purposes of the accounting law; and that they 
comprise only auditing districts. They also provide that the auditor 
is empowered to authorize the audits and enforce settlements of 
accounts subsisting between provinces, municipalities, bureaus, and 
offices of the Government. That is analogous to the power which 
the Comptroller General has here of settling accounts between our 
various departments, such as the War Department and the Navy 
Department; and from his decision in those matters there is no ap- 
peal, not even an executive or administrative appeal. In the Philip- 
pines these is an appeal to the governor general and the Secretary 
of War. But the courts in this case, in which the auditor had settled 
an account subsisting between the city of Manila and the metropoli- 
tan water district, set aside his action entirely and by a mandamus 
directed them to, in effect, settle it in a certain way. It absolutely 
makes that law inactive. 

There was one other matter that came up the other day with 
respect to Smith v. Jackson, in which our courts and the Supreme 
Court sustained the granting of a mandamus against the auditor of 
the Panama Canal Zone. Mr. McGuire pointed out that the auditor 



34 AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 

t^VY* I J ot : an auditor in the sense that the auditor of the Philip- 
ho nnfir? 1S * ^ e . does not h *™ the final say upon claims. Wh'n 
D e n^nJ P °^ C i ai ^ the y came to the old Auditor of (ho War 
ffi^ wnc if nd he *' aS the one who ac-t»allv passed upon them. 
Tho HnTm \ vever 5 m that case another very distind difference, 
was 11 QM 0VCM ' which no discretion could be exercised. D 
inciivir h,ol • ^ ?PI? r °Priation of an express amount to an express 
Zone tIV atltlt Wastll( ' ^larv of a judge of the Panama Canal 
Question n, Tw? no ( I ues *-ion that the individual was the judge in 
to pS,? () w ^**ing; so there was nothing fcir the auditor 

be m tC no i e the acts are Purely minister ial. They would 

I think S° ° any 0ne ' 
isnothWjnorefe Unlcss you have seething <<> ask, there 

The Ch vtp t ve 10 ,say ' 
If not vou !^ X ' as an . y member of the committee anv question? 

for your testbionT' Maj ° r * W * *** **** mUch obli S ed to . vou 

Now the hearing *n i 
as possiblo tl,„ 1'^ WU1 be continued, it being the idea that so far 
which is aho wi^ c,I . scl !f lon shaU be directed toward the bill S. 3847', 

We would I f m the record - 
particularly si y °- U ? entlemen from Porto Rico t( > discuss this bill 
have come a lonr^ 6 1<: * S beforc t,ie committee; but vou gentlemen 
this which vou \T* T*? and if * you navo other matters in addition to 
to give you a o-^i i dlscuss ' 1 think the committee will be inclined 
• I «hall call g fi?i deal of l^itude. 

Rico. 4 81 on Gov. Horace 3ML Towner, Governor of Porto 

STATEMENT OP unv * 

ilON. HORACE M. TOWNER, GOVERNOR GENERAL 

OF PORTO RICO 

Governor Tow 

mittee: The Wi^n?' ^ Ir ' Chairman and gentlemen of the com- 
ply memorialiy- A of Porto Kico a • ycar a S° P assed an act 
tion. They had nt^i Con ^ es s with regard to some desired legisla- 
deed, they had nnf°* ld an opportunity to vbte in support of it. In- 
had it introduced nnulatefl that Ie " isIation in the form of a bill or 
previous session e * ce P fc the bill which had been introduced in the 
resentatives andfl consider ed by the Senate and House of Rep- 
were other bills h was a bil1 for an elective governor. There 
tive parts of til p ever ? tnat pertained mainly to the administra- 
considered. e Government which had not been presented and 

very briefly\!^ s ^ a ^ v ^ committee desired to come up and present 
governor, thev t your consideration the question af an elective 
these other m a tt ted to formulate a bil1 which should embrace 
Among those Mr nu 0 - whi ch your attention will be called now. 
of our organic .f'f ^ ,lairm an, were some amendments to section 20 
jj audi tor. ' which is the section pertaining to the duties 

of the org^nfc nnf y l hat with regard to the provisions of section 20 
provisions 0 f th* Porto Rico < they differ considerably from the 
pines. I think .^ or g a nic act relating to the auditor, of the Philip- 
n almost every particular the Porto Rican bill con- 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



35 



vers «n-eater power as it now Stands than is cpnferred upon the audi- 
tor in the Philippines^ fundamental act. Rut some changes were 
thought beneficial and are among others to be considered and 

presented. _ ' . 

We were somewliat surprised when we heard about the introduc- 
tion of this bill which is before the cbnjmittee now- -S. 3847-^which 
provides for granting additional powers to the auditor, both of 
Porto Rico and the Philippines. The provisions of the bill that are 
inserted here relating to the duties and powers of the auditor are. in 
our judgment, not suitable for Porto Kieo. and in some instances arc 
entirely unnecessary. It will not be necessary for me to rail atten- 
tion as relates to the various provisions that we expected to incorpo- 
rate in the amendment to the provision with regard to the auditor. 

Now, I don't know just what will be your final judgment, gentle- 
men of the committee.' about the matter. It' we might be allowed to 
express our preference, we should be very glad indeed to haye these 
bills considered separately: in other words, to act as you think bes< 
upon those parts of this bill that relate to the Philippine Island., but 
to consider them along with the other propositions that we shftU 
have to oiler that refer to the auditor tor Porto Kieo. If in your 
judgment you think that probably the provisions should be in one 
bill regarding the auditors of both Porto Kieo and the Philippine, 
then we would ask you to consider as a substitute for the provision- 
in 3847 the provision that we will call your attention to. That, or 
course, is a matter for your determination: and whatever you shall 
determine as the most advantageous and proper from your point of 
view, we shall be glad to acquiesce in them. 

Xow. I am going to call your attention as briefly as I can to the 
provisions of this act, H. R. 11610, which we desire to introduce, 
amending the provisions of our organic art affecting the auditor 
and his duties. They are not greatly changed. In fact, it would 
not be going too far'to say that they are comparatively Unimportant 
and that we would not insist on them at all unless something was 
to be done with regard to the auditor, and then we should like to 
have the changes made which we suggest, if it shall meet with your 
approVa] when you come to consider them. 

The first paragraph relates to the appointment of the auditor. In 
the bill which is presented here, Senate bill 384f, the first change 
Suggested is to raise the salary of the auditor from £0,000 to sS,on;) 
a rear. Permit me to say onbehalf of our people that that will be 
rather unfortunate for us. I agree that it would be advisable that 
salaries should be raised. But here is the situation in Porto Kieo: 
The heads of the departments receive $0,000. The auditor now 
receives the same salary that the heads of departments do. 

Senator Bratton. When you say M heads oi departments." Gover- 
nor, you mean the heads of* the departments of the government 1 

Governor Towner. Yes; exactly. We have a regular cabinet, 
with a commissioner, or, as you say, a secretary of education. We 
have an attorney general, who is head of the department of justice. 
We have the commisisoner of the interior, who has charge of all 
public works and matters of that kind, charge of all public lands; 
matters relating to the roads, and other important subjects of that 
character. Then, we have a department of health and sanitation. 
Those are the ordinary executive departments of government. 



36 AUDITOR FOR PORTO RK'O AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



Senator Bratton. They all get $6,000? 
Governor Towxmt. They nil get $0,000. 
Senator Bratto^. Are they appointed or elected I 
Governor Townkr. Part of them are appointed and pari of them 
are elected. The attorney general is appointed by the President. 
The auditor is appointed'by the President. The secretary of edu- 
cation is appointed by the President. All other heads of depart- 
ments are appointed by the governor. 

Senator Bratton. You feel that it would be unfortunate to pro- 
vide that the auditor should get more salary than the heads of 
the general departments? 

Governor Towner. Yes. Let me call your attention to this part icu- 
lar situation: Fortunately, we have for the auditor, for the attorney 
general, and for one of tlie justices of the supreme court, who is an 
American, we have private residences which they are furnished; so 
that really the auditor receives the benefit of that, which amounts 
/£n would amount to at least between one and two thousand 

aoiiars a year besides his salary. That is given to him as, of course. 
In that 1 c '° m Pensation, and it is in fact an addition thereto. 

v. uv r !rPtfSk already receives more than the other members, 
tin ?h t a //V7- 000 to the salary, and then to take into consideration 
rirL ; In A l r ? cei ves this house, would raise his compensation 
jX oa? between nine and ten thousand dollars, almost as much 
be a m^^A^^^ his salary being $10,000. So, there would 
tor and 32 ! Ference > as y° u see > between the salaries of the audi- 

departments having positions of like 

the SUfS? nfel^i 1 W0lllcl be vel T S Iad inclee ^ ^ you could raise 
Some of nil i » Uleso We are having difficulty to hold them, 

ment of ednr are ver y much desired. The heads of the depart- 
receive a verv tlu - (le Partment of health and sanitation would 

Depart Hu nt ofTV^ compensation outside. The head of the 
pensation Ti l L I^rior would receive a verv much larger com* 
could get" am 1 1 (1 (,f the Department of Agriculture. ' 1 think, 
disposed to L salai \v that he had a mind to name if ever he was 
the position of s7 UuI "° llWil >*- . Ht> lvU : l " alar . v ()f *^ 00() U) take 



men. ,\Ve are ve are remarkably efficient and very strong 

departments. \i? u p n * or tunate indeed in the heads of our executive 
themselves But \ *i t ' lese men are now s ^ r ^ng at a sacrifice to 
To pass that M" ^ rea * honor, and that, of course, is something, 
the organic act T? next paragraph there is a slight change in 

and so forth ,« i 1 accounts pertaining to revenues, 

h a,,,,,,,,,,;;,,,' , ,K ' n ifc tel1 * what he shall audit- 

However w e *° UU(1 il(lininistraLiV(1 regulations all expenditures. 

used here; $hat°?^fL^' fc ' le same uin " ua " e llse d above should be 
s ' that he should not only audit, but he should 



AUDITOR FOR POKTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 37 

examine, audit, and settle, that it should be in the second clause of 
that paragraph the same as in the first, in other words, putting it 
into harmony with the proposed extending of the powers of the 
auditor to that extent. 

The Chairman. Just a minute. I don't understand. As I see it, 
in the first portion of the section the language is: 

M Examine, audit, adjust, and settle. 

Governor Townkr. That is in your bill t 

The Chairman. Yes. It is the same language in the latter part 
of the paragraph. 

.Governor Towner. Yes; it is in your bill, so there would be no 
difference between these: but I am calling your attention now to the 
difference between our bill and the organic act as it was. 

The Chairman. Oh, I see. You* don't object to this language 
here? 

Governor Towner. No. I think not. In so far as they are the 
same, of course, we could not object at all. 
The Chairman. No. 

Governor Towner. Now, the next paragraph contains this pro- 
vision : 

The auditor shall keep the general accounts of the Government and preserve 
the vouchers and other papers pertaining thereto. 

In the original organic act the provision was that the auditor 
should keep the general accounts of the Government and the words — 
be the custodian of and preserve the vouchers pertaining thereto 
were omitted. 

Now, the auditor— and we have a new one, a man that the Presi- 
dent just sent down there, a very excellent gentleman — and all these 
recommendations are joined in by him and also joined in by a man 
that we brought down from the States to assist in the treasury depart- 
ment. They have gone over them carefully, and they bring to the 
examination of these questions a high expert knowledge, and we 
have very great confidence in their ability to clearly and thorough!? 
understand the situation. 

Here is the reason for the addition of these words to give to the 
auditor the preservation and custody of these vouchers: The habit 
had been there for a number of years that when these vouchers came 
from one of the departments, after they had been passed on by the 
auditor, they were sent back to that 'department. That was the 
method of preservation of the vouchers. Now. it seems that the bet- 
ter practice is that the one who last passes upon a voucher, in. this 
case the auditor, ought to have the preservation and custodv of all 
of the vouchers. In other words, we believe that they all should 
be be kept under a single control and all be preserved in a single 
way, for the better preservation of them, as well as for the fact that 
they ought to be where the last action was taken with regard to them. 
So we have added at their suggestion the words that the custody 
and preservation of the vouchers should also be given to the auditor. 

Senator Bratton. In line ±2, following the word "preservation." 
you say that he shall have custody of the vouchers. 

Governor Towxki; (reading) : 

He shall he the custodian of and preserve the vouchers pertaining thereto. 



38 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



I would suggest that that i> well worthy, perhaps of considera- 
tion with regard to your bill, if you retain the bill. Of course, that 
is an administrative matter and it is not really essential, but it is 
well worthy of consideration. 

Senator Bingham, You suggest for the word.- "shall keep " the 
words " shall be the custodian of and shall preserve" I 
. Governor Towner. Yes. 

preserve the vouchers and other papers pertaining thereto. 

Senator Bingham. That is in the act — 
other papers pertaining thereto ? 

Governor Towner. Yes. 

Now, in the next paragraph, referring to the provision thai the 
decisions of the auditor shall be final except for appeal therefrom:: 
My attention was called to the fact that — of course you are consider- 
ing this with regard to the bill that is before you. particularly— 
and L call attention to the change there made between our su^estion 
as to what ought to be contained in this under the organic act as it 
is now. However, what I say regarding it may be pertinent to the 
whole question and perhaps 'mav throw some liirht on it for your 
consideration. 

The paragraph relates to the decision of the auditor, which shall 
be final and conclusive except that appeal therefrom may be taken 
by the party aggrieved or the head of the department concerned 
within one year in the manner hereinafter proscribed. Now. the 
language in the Philippine bill was that the decisions of the auditor 
should be final and conclusive upon the executive branches of the 
Government. That was in the Philippine act. and constituted, oj 
course, a limitation upon the powers of the auditor. However. W 
never was in our act, and it would be entirely unnecessary to change 
the act in regard to Porto Rico. , 
«ow, there is another change, going back to the provision— i 
oont know what it is, but it is the provision with regard to giving 
tne auditor power to summon witnesses and administer oaths. I 
y* at in both of the original organic acts of the Philippines 
and ol lorto Ri co the language was identical. It only extended 
uown to the enforcing of the attendance of witnesses, 
of li i - me snow you exactly what that means: In the execution 
m :-- ? du ties the auditor is authorized to summon witnesses, ad- 
vi ion ° at - 1 ^ and take evidence, and in pursuance with these pro! 

" *°ns can lS ue subpoenas and enforce the attendance of witnesses. 

Ih^ret^ 

to%di'*i audito ^ and Treasury officials both say that we ought 
of th • ■ WOr(ls — thev say so* because of the fact that in some 
sumnu niVl ' stl ^ at ions that thev have been making, while they could 
not w , ltnes ^s and enforce the attendance of them, thev could 
court h n V 16 wit nesses to produce books and letters, etc. The 

provision? i th ^ must be £ iven that P ower b y a s P eclfac 
. * ' an( l *o we have added in this provision: 

and an m <Sh wit,l(lss <'s to produce books, letters, documents, papers, records, 
under invertig^^ clea (loomecl essential to a full understanding of the matter 



.u'ihtoi! koh poi'.ro i;ico .vxn Philippine islands 



39 



In any event, I think you will find that they should be added. 
Senator Bingham. Will you read that again? 
Governor Townkk (reading): 

And compel witnesses to produce books, Letters, documents, papers, records, 
and all other articles deemed essential to a full understanding of the matter 

under invest itrat ion. 

Senator Bingham. All other articles? 
Governor Towner. Yes. 

Senator Bingham. The ustial phraseology of legislation is "to 
compel the production of books n etc. I suppose you have no 
objection to that? 

Governor Towner. Oh. certainly none at all. 

The CHAIRMAN. I am just a little curious to know what would be 
included in that "other articles," 

Senator Broussard. That might include automobiles. 

Governor Towner. We have left unchanged the next provision, 
which under our organic act is section 21, which, however, you have 
dealt with in the bill which you have introduced. That provision, 
as it relates to the Philippine Islands, is that appeals from 
the auditor are said to be final when an appeal is taken and the 
governor and the auditor agree. If they do not agree, the appeal 
has to be sent to the Comptroller of the Treasury. 

Now, our law is that the decision of the governor is final and there 
is no appeal from his decision regarding these matters. I don't 
know; you gentlemen are as well qualified, perhaps better, to de- 
termine that question than I am; but there never has been any ap- 
peal taken from the decision of the governor. 

The provision of our organic act is that any person aggrieved by 
the action or decision of the auditor in the settlement of an account 
or claim may within one year take an appeal to the governor, which 
appeal shall specifically set forth the particular action of the auditor 
to which exception is taken, with the reason and the authorities 
relied on for reversing such decision; and the decision of the gov- 
ernor in such case shall be final except as to such rights of action 
as may be otherwise provided for by law. Of course, that does 
not take away any right that the courts might have. 

With all due deference, gentlemen, it occurs to me that it would 
be unfortunate for us to change the existing law. In fact, with 
regard to all these matters, if you shall determine that it is best to 
copy the provision of the law regarding the auditor in your bill, then, 
of course, we shall have to ask consideration of these other matters 
in a separate bill, another bill; and, in fact, we would think it best 
if we might have the right to ask ior all these amendments to the 
organic act in the same act, and therefore that we should be ex- 
cluded from the present act and that it should apply alone to the 
Philippines. 

Senator Bingham. May I interrupt you there? 

Governor Townkk. Certainly. 

Senator Bingham. In connection with this proposition to grant 
an appeal from the governor to the Comptroller General, would 
you have any objections to the appeal being granted to the Court 
of Claims? 



40 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO A N I > IMLILUMMXK ISLAM'S 



Governor Towner. Senator, I should object very much. You see^ 
the difficulty is that most of these matters, and. in fact, all cases that 
come to me for decision, have been inconsequent al cases, eases that 
ought to be decided immediately, eases upon some claim that some 
person has and the auditor says, 44 No. It can not be allowed be- 
cause it is not within the purview of the statute/' Then he appeals 
to the governor. Of course, it takes only about IS minutes to de- 
cide a case of that kind. If it should come up here to the Comp- 
troller General 

Senator Bingham. Excuse me. I don't think you have not the 
point, Governor, of what I was trying to bring out. You made a 
very able argument against its coming to the comptroller. There is 
no court of claims in Porto Rico? 

Governor Towner. No. 

Senator Bingham. In our system of jurisprudence we have a 
Court of Claims here. If a case was important enough to bring it 
on appeal to this country, would it not be better that it should come 
to the Court of Claims rather than to the Comptroller General? 

Governor Towner, The only thought that I had in my mind was 
this: Of course, this matter is executive and the position of our 
present organic law leaves parties the right to go to the courts if 
they desire, and therefore a case would have its proper legal course 
rr it was of sufficient merit or of sufficient importance to do so. 
iNow, if you have either an appeal to the Comptroller General or an 
appeal to the Court of Claims, it means interminable and heart - 
Ttw ? %\ ^ and tn *t is the principal reason to my mind why 

tmn ^ the appeal in this case ought to be Confined to the governor 
crT^t ? P ers °n can be injured if he can still have his day in 

urt, and the provision, of course, is made by which the cases may 
do Drought in the court. So, I really do not see any necessity for it 
no^with 1 us t0 US< Jt mi " ht 1x5 diffcrent in the Philippines, but 

GoT*? 1 ' B ?°^ssard. There is now an appeal to the court? 
guao-e-^1^ 1 ^ (nvNKU - Oh, yes: it is preserved, not in specific lan- 

Govt^ B ^ rs *Ai<D. In the organic law? 
^oveinorT<nvM; U . Yes. I will quote it : 

right^ac'nil!! 1 ° f the governor ui such case shall be final, subject to such 
on as m *y be otherwise provided by law. 

vided bv^^° HAM > What are those rights of action that are pro- 

CjOV r 

those vulu Towxk, <- It would be quite a long story to tell you what 
g a re. 

Goverm t? :ciiiam - I mean, just in connection with the auditor, 
late the ore •°^ rNE * L Well > of course, many acts which would vio- 
validity of 810118 01 the organic act— for instance, regarding the 
bill of riffl f 0 ^^ or matters of that kind— you see, we have a 
of the t T mt»d a 6re wnicn is more extensive than the Constitution 
any act 'wl * i StilUkS; and that governs the courts of Porto Rico — 
the provisin °t hmvi ^ would be constitutional, if it falls within 
control and f the bil1 of ri g nts in tlle or S anic act, is subject to 
the courts bourse, recompense, modification, and reversal in 



auditor Foi; L'oirro niro and piiiupptne islands 41 



Now. gentlemen, is that all that you desire of me? 

The Chairman. I wanted to make this suggestion, Governor, if 
it meets with your approval: The committee is not in a position 
at this time to say what its action will he. whether it may decide 
to consider this in separate hills or to consider it in one bill. I was 
about to suggest that if it would be convenient it would be a great 
help to the committee if you would prepare amendments which you 
think ought to be made to this bill embodying the ideas which you 
support. 

Governor Towner. That would he very easy and very simple, 
because we just simply ask you to take the amendments which we 
have suggested here and insert them in lieu of the language that is 
in that lull there. Ybu will find that wherever you might think it 
necessary to extend the powers, you will find, 1 think, that in almost 
ali cases, if not all. thai we already have them in our organic act 
and therefore we do not need any change. The changes that we 
have suggested, while perhaps they ;ire not fundamental, not vital, 
we think they will be beneficial. If it is -till the judgment of the 
committee thai you should have the pari relating to the auditor of 
Porto Rico contained in the same bill that you have the pari relat- 
ing to the auditor for the Philippines, if you do that, then we ask 

you to take these provisions that we have here, which will be pre- 
sented, of course, to you in belter form than this, and substitute that 

language. 

The Chairman* I might suggest that you get that in the form 

which you de-ire and that we have it in the record at this point, 
so that we can have access to it. 
Governor Towner. It is already in. 

The Chairman. Mas any other member any inquiry! Doe- that 
complete your statement, Governor? 

Governor Towner. Yes. it does, with regard to the auditor. 

The Chairman. I think we would Like tp get through with the 
discussion of this bill first. Then we will give everybody the full- 
est Latitude in the discussion of other matters. 

Senator Btttler. I understand that the gov.ernor prefers a sep- 
arate bill for Porto Rico. 

The Chairman. That is my understanding of the governor. 

Senator Butler. Yes. And perhaps the suggestion is^thal nd 
legislation is necessary, but if the committee desired to provide other 
legislation, he would like to submit certain amendment- to the 
present law to the committee as a separate proposal for Potto Kicp, 
Now, could you also, in addition to what you have been requested to 
do, prepare a separate bill or amendment providing for the sugges- 
tions which von think might be adapted to the Porto Riqan situa- 
tion? J 

Governor Towner. Well, that is just exactly, Senator, what T 
was suggesting. 

Senator Butler. I thought that the inquiry was that you were to 
incorporate your suggestions in this bill, which applies to both the 
Philippines and Porto Rico. I would like to have for my own use 
a separate proposal for Porto Rico. 

Governor Towner. Oh, yes. 

Senator Butler. So that we could keep the two things apart. 



42 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



Governor Towner. Let me see, Senator, if I understand yon. 
You mean that you would like to have it drawn up in the form of 
a bill affecting only the auditor? 

Senator Butler. Well. aS^cl the subject matter of this bill. 

Governor Towner. Yes. And not with anything else? 

Senator Butlkr. Not with anything else. 

Governor Towner. Very well. I will see thai thaj is done. 

The Chairman. If it would clarify the situation, you could pre- 
pare a bill embodying all the things that you want and we can 
introduce it and it will aid in the discussion. 

Governor Towxi;i>. I think thai Judge Davila introduced such i 
bill. 

Judge Felix C. Davila. Yes. That bill was introduced in the 
House yesterday. It is H. B LI610 

Governor Towner. Has it been printed vet? 
Jptdge Davila. It has not been sent to my office, 
ihe Chairman. It will be out this afternoon. 

senator Bingham. And thai bill contains the section with regard 
to the auditor i 

Judge Davila. Yes. The other matters, in my opinion, it will 
be very simple to consolidate them. I believe that we can incor 
porate them very simply, because now you know what we want. 

governor Fowner. We will he very -lad indeed to present thosd 
matters to you. A bill will be introduced in the Senate, will it 

nf T tt n^^f-If X * Yos - If ^ will help the matter in any way sonic 

.>i-,.r..i ^» /.. , • T" . 1 Butler's ofliee and it it meets with lus ap^ 
fore us "Produce the bill and have it printed and have it be-= 

miuFoS^mt w m H ?a i^ at V ,lso i] r ] \: h: U-; u shou1 ; 1 r !i, r 

and Porto Ri co sep .^ * Ms l »" ™< ] ™™ l ?° r 10 ""hpi"™ Islands 

The ('ii\!pm\ t, v - 1 bellcve thal 1S t! "' Proper solution, 
visement We a « committee will take that matter under ad- 
want to get QuSSSh W ;'u nt , to tilko ?P to ° many ma «ers now. We 
Does thai mm, T h tliese hearings. 
Governor testimony, Governor? 

this proposition of K • 1 was i ust " oin " to sa y in su PP ort 01 
relates to Porto V tne part about the auditor, in so far as L1 

organic act, that it 1C °' H^ u dea with the other amendments to the 
for the amendment %°l llcl P robablv be in l)etter form if propositions 
and include those wjranic act of Porto Rico could be together 

separated. But a* r e ^ r ding the auditor, than that they should be 

The Chairmxx T C0Urse ' that is not essential, 
committee or to S t 8 ?*BG8t that you prepare that and <rive it to the 
we can introduce it ° r ] ' utler > and if it meets with his approval. 

Senator Btjtu P ' w u 
that have been rof ° mve S0lnc matters now affecting Porto Rico 
>ul1 n ed to Senator Harris and myself. At the 

irestions. 

t is a wise determination. 

r - Barcelo. 



that have been r 0 f I1Jlv e some matters e 
proper time I woulrl ri 6(i to Senator Harr 
The Chaium \v \\\ k * to make some siigg< 
I will next call on ir n< &' 1 ^ink that 
mv. Bareeln 



A.UDIT0B FOB PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



43 



STATEMENT OF ANTONIO It. BARCELO, PRESIDENT OF THE 
SENATE, PORTO RICO 

(The statement of Mr. Barcelo was delivered in Spaifish and was 
translated by Mr. Miguel Guerra-Mondragon.) 

Mr. Barcelo. Mr. Chairman and gentlemen of the committee^ the 
delegation from the Legislative Assembly of Porto llico has cqjne 
here before this committee to ask by order of the said legislature the 
introduction of several amendments to our organic act, with the main 
object in view that our island will enjoy greater powers in the exer- 
cise of self -government. 

We appeared during the last session of Congress with the same 
purposes in view. We were able to obtain that bills were introduced 
in both Houses of Congress granting us, among other reforms, the 
right to elect our own governor. The said bill, the elective-governor 
bill, was passed bv the Senate bv a unanimous vote, with several 
amendments, among which was one determining the date of the said 
election as the year L932. Hut the bill was not approved by the 
House in spite (it* the fact that it had been reported upon favorably 
by the Committee on Insular Affairs, because it was detained by the 
strict rules governing matters at the last days of the session. 

So. we are again insisting upon that measure, which to us is funda- 
mental and just. I shall not detain your attention very Long, and 
therefore I shall not repeat the lengthy arguments and reasons that 
were presented before this same committee before and before the 
Committee on Insular Affairs of the House, since. those statements 
are of record and thai is the best reference that can be made tor your 
consideration at this time. . 

But we will say, however, that this bill is the object of the 
greatest anxiety on the part of our people, who feel anxious to be 
treated with tffe justice that they deserve and in order that we may 
be better able to fill our own responsibilities. 

Our people have demonstrated that thev have a high, progressive 
spirit. They have also shown that thev can make good use of liberty 
in all lines of endeavor. What has been accomplished by our people 
in the matters of sanitation, health, public works, and everything 
of that nature, political economv. and social life represent the high- 
est achievement that could be realized by any people in the world. 
The annual report of our governor, Horace M. 1 owner, expresses 
with data and statistics the truth of our statements; and our prog- 
ress can be seen bv everyone who visits Porto Kico and is able to 
compare Porto Kico as it is now with what it was Id years ago. We 
have lots of things to do yet. We need to solve some serious difhcul- 
ties of an economic order. . 

Our legislature recently approved a resolution whereby, besides 
insisting on our petition for complete self-government, we demand 
other amendments of the Organic act tending to solve some ot these 
difficulties in some manner. I be" to deliver now a copy of such 
resolution and ask you gentlemen That the same be included as part 
of this record. 

The Chairman. That order will be made. 



44 AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 

(The resolution referred to is ns follows:) 

CONCURRENT RESOLUTION To rwjupst tho Congress of th< United States t.» amend, 
reenflct, and add ceir.dn siTiidns to tin- organic net <>f Porto Rico 

He it resolved by th< Eouai of Representatives of Porto Rico (tin s* ,<<it> 

of Porto U\c>> conrurrhnj) : That the Legislature Of PortO Rico, in the per- 
formance of its duty and exercising the righl of . the people it represents; 
according to the principles of liberty ami democracy Informing the traditions 
and life of the American people, and inspired by pure sentiments of humati 
dignity, requests the Congress of the United States to amend and re-enact 
the following sections of the organic act of Porto Rico, entitled "An ad to, 
provide a civil government for Porto Rico, and for pther purposes/' approved 
March 2. 1917. 

Section 1. That section of the organic acl of Porto Rico is hereby amended 
to read as follows : 

Sec: 3. Thai no export duties shall be levied or collected on exports from 
porto Kico. hut taxes and assessments on property, Incomes, Internal revenue 
and license fees, and royalties fojt franchises, privileges and concessions may 
be Imposed for the purposes of the Insular and municipal governments, re- 
spectively, as may be provided and defined by the Legislature of Porto Rico; 
which is also empowered to direct the custom and post officers of the United 
States In Porto Rico, to collecl in the island and to cover Into the insula; 
treasury the taternal-revenue taxes imposed by authority of the Legisla- 
te of Porto Kico on imports from the United states and foreign countries, 
when a similar and unilorm tax is also levied on like articles produced or 
producible in Porto Rico. With the approval of the President of the United 
Siates the Legislature oi Porto Rico is also hereby empowered — 

To impose import or customs duties on imports from the United States 
or f 0re ign ^ nnt ™ 8 w aen .™ar articles are produced in Porto Rico and are 
n0 \ produced in tne mted States, for the purpose of preventing reexportation 
of such articles as ^^ -nu, , <>u 0 f Porto Kico; 

on all 



.1(3) To levy a tax additional ft the United States customs duty 
articles of any class imported ftyfai foreign countries ; 

••(d To reduce cne tax levied articles of foreign origin when such articles 
are raw <ood pio uucts aad ,t ; s &hown thai such measure is necessary to re- 
iuc€ the peopAescosi oi uving, or subsistence : Provided, That articles on which 
the cui oms carin is ; re< meed 0 n importation into Porto Kico, shall pay, if 
reexported to ri mteci states, an export duly equal to such part of the 
United States cann uui.\ as they failed to pay upon their introduction into 




to 

States. 



"When J^ewnr^to anticipate taxes and revenues, bonds and other obli- 
gations may . j , • w to Ri co or any municipal government therein 
as may ^J^^S^fS^ ,y °* Legislature of Porto Rico; and when 
necessary t p 0 rto Rico S 1 re venues, bonds and other obligations may 
be is " U( -i ri'hv law and I any municipal government therein as may, 

■*'* r %h2t nc ^ public indehtedn^ 0 ^ toe vuh]U ' cre ^ t: Provided, ho# 
ever, lh \ l iv thereof shall , lll( ' ss of Porto Rico or of any subdivision or 
niunicip; im > ^ fl ** oe authorized or allowed in excess of ten (10J 
per centum government n? * x valuation of its property, and aU bonds 
taxation by the m , orto Rico « « h - v its authority, shall be ex- 
empt froui u . <( m 0 ^rnmen< of the United states, 0 r by the go,* 
(M-nincni S(<lt( , or by any com** Political or municipal subdivision thereof, 
or by a gLte or Territory of \\ Municipality, or other municipal subdivision 
6t any in- the IndebtedneW y liu ' (1 States, or by the District of Columbia, 
in < ' ,I,IP ! of Porto Kico Beem£*°t the &">& e of Porto Kico bonds issued hy 
* ,J(t ^Sioratiohs or school h , y an equivalent amount of bonds of munic- 
ipal c0 l nod for irrigation hi of Porto Rico sna11 11(,t be counted nor 
bonds p ort o Kico when [ p( ; sos by the different municipalities or the 
peOP le , i tas levied on the Ian? bonds are redeemable with the proceeds of 
a Spec" U i 0 aiis are to be ! • vners benefited by the irrigation system to 
whidi SUCU c a PPli^d." 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 45 



SEC. 2. That a new section is hereby inserted between sections 5 and G 
of the said organic act to read as follows: 

M Sec. 5a. That the citizens of the United States referred to in section r> of 
'An act to provide a civil government for Porto Rico and for other purposes,' 
approved March 2. 1917. and other citizens of the United States permanently 
domiciled In the island for more than three years, shall also be citizens of 
Porto Rico: Provided* That the persons horn in Porto Rico of alien parents, 
referred to in the last paragraph of the said section, who did not avail them- 
selves of the privilege granted to them of becoming citizens of the United 
states, shall have the period of one year from the approval of this act to 
make the declaration provided for in the aforesaid section: And provided 
further, That the person Who elected to retain the political status of citizens 
of Porto Rico may become citizens of the United States in the same term 
and manner as provided for the naturalization of native Porto Ricans born of 
foreign parents." 

SEC, That section 12 Of an act entitled "An act to provide a civil govern- 
ment for Porto Rico, and for other purposes," approved March, 2. 11)17, be, 
and the Same Is hereby, amended to read a^ follows: 

" Se& L2. That the supreme executive power shall be vested in an executive 
officer, whose Official title shall be the governor of Porto Rico. He shall be 
appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, 
and hold his office at the pleasure of the President and until his successor 
is chosen and qualified. He shall have general supervision and control of all 
the departments and bureaus of the government in Porto Rico, so far as is not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this act. and shall be commander in chief 
of the militia. lie may grant pardons and reprieves and remit tines for 
offenses against the laws of Porto Rico, and respites for all offenses against the 
laws of the United States until the decision of the President can be ascertained, 
and may veto any legislation enacted as hereinafter provided. He shall com- 
mission all officers that he may be authorized to appoint He shall be responsi- 
ble for the faithful execution of the laws of Porto Rico and of the United States 
applicable in Porto Rico, and whenever it becomes necessary he may call upon 
the commanders of the military and naval forces of the United States in the is- 
land, summon the posse comitatus, or call on the militia, to prevent or suppress 
lawless violence, invasion, insurrection, or rebellion, and he may. in case of re- 
bellion or invasion, or imminent danger thereof, when the public safety requires 
it, suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus, or place the island or any 
part thereof, under martial law until communication can be had with the Presi- 
dent and the President's decision therein made known. He shall annually, and 
at such other times as he may be required, make official report of the transac- 
tions of the government of Porto Kico to the executive department of the Gov- 
ernment of the United States to be designated by the President as herein pro- 
vided, and his said annual report shall be transmitted to Congress, and he shall 
perform such additional duties and functions as may. in pursuance of law, 
be delegated to him by the President. 

"At the general election to he held in Porto Rico in the year and 
thereafter at each general election the qualified electors of Porto Rico shall 
elect the governor, who shall Qualify as such on the first Monday of January 
of the succeeding year, and upon such qualification, the office of the appointed 
governor shall cease and determine! A lieutenant governor shall also, at such 
time, be elected for a term of four years, under like conditions. He shall act 
as governor in case of a vacancy, the temporary absence or removal., resigna- 
tion, or disability of the governor, and shall exercise all the powers and 
perform all the duties of the governor, during such vacancy, disability, or 
absence. The lieutenant governor shall he the ex oilicio president of the 
senate and shall receive such salary as the Legislature of Porto Rico may 
determine. The governor and the lieutenant governor thus elected shall hold 
their offices for a term of four years and until their successors have been 
elected and shall have qualified. 

u The elected governor herein provided for may be impeached by the insular 
house of representatives, and on trial by the insular senate may be removed 
by a two-thirds vote of that body for any impeachment cause. Judgment in 
cases of impeachment shall not extend further than to removal from office 
and disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honor, trust, or profit in 
Porto Rico, hut the party convicted shall nevertheless be liable and subject 
to indictment, trial, judgment, and punishment, according to law.' 



95508-^-26 i 



46 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND I'lITTiTPPyNE I-LAXDS 



Sec. i. That section 13 of the organic act, approved March 2, r.'iT. be, anj 
Uie same is hereby, amended to read as follows: 

"Sec. 13. That the following executive departments are hereby created: 
A department of justice, the head of which shall be designated as the attorney 
general; a department of finance, the head of which shall be designated as the 
treasurer; a department of the interior, the head of which shall !> designate^ 
as the commissioner of the interior; a department of education, the head of 
which shall be designated as the commissioner of education; a department of 
agriculture and commerce, the head of which shall he designated as the com- 
missioner of agriculture and commerce; a department of labor, the head pi 
which shall be designated as the commissioner of labor: and a department qt 
health, the head of which shall be designated as the commissioner of health. 

"The heads of departments shall be appointed by the governor, by and with 
the advice and consent of the Senate of Porto Rico, Cor the term of font 
years, and until their successors are appointed and ipialilied. unless sooner 
removed by the governor. 

"Heads of departments shall reside in Porto Rico during their official 
Incumbency. 

"The heads of departments shall collectively form a council to the gov- 
ernor, known as the executive council. They shal perform under the general 
supervision of the governor the duties hereinafter prescribed or which may 
hereafter he prescribed by law and such other duties nOl Inconsistent with 
law as the governor, with the approval of the President, may assign to them: 
and they shall make annual and such other reports to the governor ns he may 
require.* which shall be transmitted to the executive department <>r the Gov* 
eminent of the United states to be designated by the President as herein 
provided: Provided, That the duties herein imposed upon the heads of de> 
partments shall not carry with them additional compensation/' 

Sec. 5. That section 18 of the said organic act, approved March 2. L01T, 
be. am i the same is hereby, amended to read as follows: 

"Sep. 18. That the commissioner of agriculture and commerce shall have 
general charge of such bureaus and branches of the government as have been 
Or Jhall be Legally constituted for the Study, advancement, and benefit oJ 
agriculture^ commerce and the industries: I he chief purpose of this depart- 
ment being to foster, promote, and develop the agricultural, commercial and 
industrial interests and the welfare of the farmers of Porto Rico; to in* 
prove tlieir market conditions and to advance their opportunities for profit 
able sale- Of their products, and shall perform KUCh Other duties as may be 
prescribed by law/' 

Sec. 6. That between sections is and 19 0 f said organic act, approved 
March 2, 1917. a new section is hereby inserted to read as follows: 

"Sec. 18a. That the commissioner of labor shall have charge of such 
bureaus and branches ol the Government as have been or shall be legally 
constituted to tester and promote the welfare of the wage earners of Vovio 
Rico; to improve their working conditions and to advance their opportunities 
£or profitable employment, and shall perform such other duties as may be 
prescribed by law. 

Sec. 7. That section 31 of the organic act of Porto Rico, approved March 
2 n,]T. be. and the same is hereby, amended to read as follows : 

" Sec. 31. That members of the Senate and Hons- of Representatives of 
Porto Rico shall receive compensation at the rate of twenty (20) dollars a 
<Uv for the first sixty days of each regular session and one (J.) dollar a day 
for eaSi additional day ol such session while in session, and mileage *?* 
each session at the rate oi ten nth cents u kilometer for each kilometer, 
actually and necessarily traveled in goillg fl>()m thelr legis i a tive districts to 
the capital and therefrom to their place of residence in their districts by the 
usual routes of travel. 

SJV . s. That section o3 of the organic act of Porto Rico, approved March 
9 1017. be. and the same is hereby, amended to read as follows: 

■u SBa 33. That regular sessions of tne i egislature sha u be held annually, 
convening <>» f lie , s ^^ Monday i n February of each year, unless otherwise 

raided by the .^^ure The gQvernor ; ; ( , lU spr( , al sessions of t*e 
SLptaiAtnre or ol the senate at any time i« ids ooinion the public 



legislature or oi the senate at any time when in his opinion the pnbUc 
interests may require n. hm no speciai sessions shall continue " 

V, ;i vs. np i includ^ Sundays aml hi J » n0 le . islal 
^nsidered at such session other than that specified in the call.' 



AIDITOR FOR POUTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 47 



Sec. 0. Thai the first paragraph of section 34 of the organic act of Porto 
Rico, approved March 2. 1017. be. and the same Is hereby, amended to read 
as follows : 

'•Sec. Thai the enacting chn:se of the laws shall be, as to acts. 4 lie it 
enacted by the Legislature of Porto Rico,' and as to joint resolutions, ' Be 
it resolved by the Legislature of Porto Rico. 1 Except as hereinafter pro- 
vided, bills and joint resolutions may originate in either house. The governor 
shall submit hi the opening of each regular session of the Legislature a budget 
of receipts and expenditures, which shall be the basis of the ensuing biennial 
appropriation bill. No hill shall become a law until it he passed in each 
house by a majority yea-and-nay vote of all of the members helonidnir to 
such house and entered upon the journal and he approved by the governor 
within ten days thereafter, if when a bin that has been passed is presented 
tq the governor for bis signature ho approves the same, he shall sign it: or 
n not. ho shall return it. with his objections, to the house in which it origi- 
nated, which house shall enter his objections at large on its journal and 
proceed to reconsider it. [f after such reconsideration, two-third of all the 
members of thai house shall agree to pass the same ir shall be sent, together 

With the Objections of the Other house, by which it shall likewise be recon- 
sidered, and if approved by two-thirds of all the members of that house, it 
shall become law the same as if it had been approved by the governor. The 
vote ot each house shall be by yeas and nays, ami the names of the members 
Voting lor and against shall he entered on the journal. " 

Siv. 10. That the first paragraph of section :(s of the organic act of Porto 
Rico, approved March l>. 1917, be. and the same is hereby, amended to read 
as follows : 

"Sec. 38. That all -rants of franchises, rights, and privileges of a public 
nature shall be made by a public service commission, consisting of a public 
service commissioner appointed by the governor, with the advice and consent 
Of the senate, for a term of four years and until his successor shall be ap- 
pointed and shall have qualified, and two commissioners elected at each gen- 
eral election for the term of four years and until their successors are elected 
and shall have qualified, whose terms shall begin the second day of January 
lollowin- their election. In the election of the said commissioner each elector 
shall be allowed to vote but for one candidate. The salary of the commis- 
sioner who presides over the commission shall be six thousand (G,000) dol- 
lars a year, and •the compensation of each member elective shall be ten (10) 
dollars lor each day's attendance at the sessions of the commission; hut in 
no case shall they receive more than one thousand (1.000) dollars during 
any one year. The said commission is also empowered and directed to dis- 
charge all the executive functions relating to public-service corporations 
heretofore conferred by law upon the executive council and such functions as 

may be conferred thereon by the legislature. Franchises, rights and privi- 
leges granted by the Baid commission shall not be effective until approved bv 
the governor; and shall be reported to Congress, which hereby reserves the 
power to annul or modify the same." 

SEC. 11. That the following section shall be Inserted between sections :;o 
and 40 as a part of the organic act of Porto Rico, approved March 2. 1917. 
to read as follows : 

" Sec, 39a. That tin' Legislature of pprto Rico is hereby empowered to 

enforce the provisions of the joint resolution approved May first, nineteen 
hundred, with respect to the buying, selling or holding of real estate, ami 
also empowered to raise the limit of the live hundred acres provided for in 
the said joint resolution, up to a limit of two thousand acres: and to Impose 
additional and progressive taxes on all property owned or controlled in excess 
oi Ave hundred acres by corporations, partnerships, associations and individuals 
and to provide for the forfeiture of alt lands owned or controlled bv corpora- 
tions in violation of the prohibition established in the aforesaid joint resolution 

or of any other law on the subject enacted by the Legislature of Porto Rico 

by virtue of the authorization hereby conferred on it. after giving a term of 
no less than one year to the owners for the disposal* of their property so 
owned and controlled: Provided, That the legislature shall have power to 
levy progressive taxes on the property and income of nonresidents, in excess 
of the taxes levied on the property ami income of residents." 

SEC. 12. That section -11 of the organic act Of Porto ttlco, approved March 
2, 1017, be, and the same is hereby, amended, to read as follows: 



48 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



"Sbg. 41. That Porto Rico shall constitute a judicial district to be called 
4 the district of Porto Rico/ The President, with the advice and consent 01 
the Senate, shall appoint one district Judge, who shall servo for a term «>t 
four years and until his successor is appointed and has qualified. Ilie saiarj 
of said judge shall be seventv-flve hundred (T.oOO) dollars per annum. A 




terUl v/i * .... umi«» jwvuiui * t . - . 

district court for said district shall ho called Mho District Court ol the I nltea 
States for Porto Rico: and shall have power to appoint all necessary officials 
and assistants, including the clerk, interpreter and such commissioners as may 
be necessary, who shall he entitled to the same foe- and have like powers and 
duties as are exercised and performed by United states commissioners. Sucn 
district court shall have jurisdiction of all cases cognizable in the district 
<H>uvt< of the United States, and shall proceed in the same manner. In addi- 
tion, said district court shall hatfe jurisdiction for the naturalization of aliens 
and Porto Ricans, and for this purpose residence in Porto Rico shall pe 
counted in the same manner as residence elsewhere in the tinted State-. 
Said district court shall have jurisdiction of all controversies where all 01 
the parties on either side of the controversy arc citizens or subjects ol a 
foreign state or states, or citizens of a State, Territory, or district of the 
United Slates, not domiciled in Porto Eico, wherein the matter in dispute 
exceeds, esfclusive Of Interest or cost the sum or value of five thousand 
(5,000) dollars, and 0 f ail controversies in which there is a separable 
controversy Involving such Jurisdictional amount and In which all or 
tlu . parties on either side of such separable controversy are citizens or 
subjects of the character aforesaid: Provided, That nothing in this act shall 
be deemed to impair the jurisdiction of the District Court of the I'nited States 
for Porto Rico to hear and determine all controversies pending in said court al 
the date oi the approval of this act. Upon the taking effect .of this act 
salaries of the judge and officials of the District Court of the United States 
for Porto Rico, together with the court expenses, shall he paid from the 
rjnited States revenues in the same manner as in other I'nited States district 
courts. In case of vacancy or of the death, absence or other legal disability 
on the part of the judge of the said District Court of the United States for 
portO RiCO, the President of the United States is authorized to designate OHO 
o£ ^e judges of the Supreme Court of Porto Itico to discharge the duties of 
ju(fee ,,r said court until such absence or disability shall he removed, and ther* 
w on such judge so designated for said service shall he fully authorized and 
empowered to perform the duties of said office during such absence or di% 




i" 1 "",' 5 "' . ... .. n i« 7 J* executlnK an order made by any administrative 

board or c. i mission acting „,„.,.,. aml ,, m . snalU to any statute of said island. 

,: r.,: : "1 M" 1 :."-" b > •■«. judge oi the Dnited States District Courl for 




days' aotice 
attorney general 



annlu-ati... V " I,,s »'d two judges or me supreme <J< 
% e "S frS n0t H "efore at least five 

"'. p ,.,„ Hi.'-, and t„ s„T "" to " K> governor and to the atto.--., ~ 
1 faring upon s Li ' " ilu ' r Persqns as may be defendants in the su it. 
' I '' . d,u< • n ''/''"""'ations for interlocutory injunctions shall be 
- p l >.„« a< the . .... n l e,u, ar of said Federal court and shall be assigned 
V"; ^SSrffi^S Practicable day after the expiration of the flg 
' u,} '.I- Courl of the th .' ovi,i " (l for, An appeal may he taken direel to H> ' 
• i 1 ' ., SCntorj Injunction States from any order granting or denying a 

" !t ,1 unless ,•„„,,„, ,„ • 8uch cases. No permanent Injunction shall be 
grant**' u.rea m t)v luajor itv of the aforesaid three judge*! 



AI'DITOK FOB PORTO BICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



Provided Thai 11 before the final hearing of such application a sun shall have 
been bronchi in the insular ports of Porto Rico to enforce such statute or order 
all proceedings or suits in the Federal court of Porto Rico questioning such 
statutes where an order has been Issued t<> stay the execution of such statu e 
or order, shall be stayed pending the final determination of such suit m t e 
insular courts; hut such stay shall he vacated Rppn proof made after due 
hearing and service of notice on the attorney general of Porto Rico that tne 

suit in the insular courts is not being prosecuted with cliliuviuv and irood hut i. 
SEC. 13. That section 42 of the organic act Of Porto Rico, approved March 

2, 1917, be, and the same Is hereby, amended to read as follows: 

"Sec 42 That the laws of the United states relating to appeals, writs or 
error and certiorari, removal of causes, and other matters or Proceeding as 
between the courts of the Dnited States and the courts of the several Maus 
shall govern In such matters and proceedings as between the District y ou } 1 
of the United states and the courts of Porto Rico. Regular terms oi saia 
United States District Court shall be held at San Juan, commencing on ti e 
ftrsl Monday In May and November of each year. Also a t Ponce on the secona 
Mondav in February of each year, and annually at Mayaguez at sucn Stateu 
time as said judge may deem expedient. All pleading and p^^; 1 ! 111 -^ 
said court shall he conducted in the English or Spanish languuire. 7. " 

district court shall be attached to and included in the first circuit oi uu 
United stales, with the right of appeal and review by said circuit court 
appeals in all cases whore the same would lie from any district com t u * 
circuit court of appeals of the United States, and with the right oi appeal ai i 
review directly by the Supreme Court of the United States in all cases \\npr« 
a direct appeal would he from such district courts." 0 

Six-. 14. Section -}<) of the organic act of Porto Kim. approved Maun 
1017. i< hereby amended to read as follows: 

u SE0. 49. Hereafter, and until the "Legislature of Porto Rico otherwise p - 
vides, the judges, marshals, and seeretaries of the courts at present esta 
lished. or of such courts as may he established in future, shall he aPP°" " 
by the governor with the advice and consent of the Senate oi Iforto iu • 

Beg, 15. That a commission from the Legislature of Porto Rico, a PgJ2^ 

by tlfe president of the Senate and the speaker of the house of ropn^MU<n i ^ 
shall proceed to Washington as soon as it may deem advisable altei tin 
veiling of the coming session of Congress, to continue the work lett p« 1 ~ 
by the commission sent to Washington under resolution of the last lrL ' lM<u , u \ 
and said commission shall have ample powers, which are hereby .^rnnu 
it. to demand a most complete and absolute self Government l ierml !, tlll M( . in <, 
island to develop its economic and social progress to the point ol 1 . 
itself in condition some day to propound the problem of its final status thiols 

a plebiscite of our people to express their sovereign will. . . f 

SEO. 16. That a copy of this resolution be transmitted to the President 
the United States, <he President of the Senate, the Speaker of tin; 1 \°" s 
Representatives, the chairman of the Senate Committee on Territories g» 
Possessions, the chairman of the House Committee on Insular Affairs. an< 
Resident Commissioner for Porto Kico in Washington. 

Mr. Barcelo. The speaker of our house, Mr. Jose Tous S0tP5 *kj 
vice president of the house, who is also chairman of the W&y s a , 
means committee, Mr. l£i£uel Gucrra-Mondragon, Senator Gonza* 
Mena, and Representative Mendez are ready and prepared to a,li ^ 
any question that you might desire to ask with reference tp J1 . 
problem that affects our petition. Also there is with us bona 
Iglesias, who is ready also to cooperate with us. , • ^ 

We know that in the Senate, besides the elective-governor 
another bill has been introduced referring to the poweWj <> 1 
auditor of Porto Kico, which is the bill now under consider^™ <^ 
AVe believe that this auditor bill is unnecessary. The auditoi^ ^ 
Porto Rico has practically to-day in our island the same P (, ^ 0I ifc ± s 
which this new bill refers; but our delegation believes that 1 _ 
better to suggest the convenience of including some of these ] 
visions affecting the powers of the auditor in the new bill that 



50 A.TJDIT0B FOR POKTO RICO PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



already been introduced in the House by our Resident Commissioned 
of which Governor Towner has given you a copy. 

This bill contains other amendments than the one- 1 have referred 
to before. These amendments, I expect, will merit your careful ana 
favorable consideration. All these amendments have been drafted 
after caret ul^considenition on the part of the delegation and on the 
pari oi our Resident Commissioner and on the pari of our governor. 
Hop. Horace M. Towner, who shares with us in these labors, indi- 
cating his responsiveness to the high, Lofty principles which have 
made him an object of our affection and of our highest consideration* 

viovernor Towner has been identified with our problems such as 
tne most competent authority among our men cou ld h&ye been or ever 
could be. The action of Governor Towner in supporting our 
demands, taking into consideration his high spirit of justice and his 
deep Knowledge of our insular problems, is the best guaranty that 
we can present to you in support of our cause. 

JJo not vacillate in expending this justice to us. Do not delay 
longer your action. Porto Rico anxiously awaits to obtain the 
thai they ask now. and this delegation in behalf of out 
peome assures you that the gratitude of our island shall be eternal 
- oat the loyalty of our people and their patriotism is the same as 

iu oi good American citizens can not be doubted, since you know 
I™ m Sh proofs that we have furnished at the right moment when it 

mjf ec ^sary— our blood and lives in defense of the Nation, 
comntitt^ ^ mcA **- tli0n ' an - v M IUS{ ions from members of tl> r 

right, Senator; we thank you, 
Uc? shall next hetfr from Speaker Jose Soto. 

STATEMENT OF JOSE TOTJS SOTO, SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF 
REPRESENTATIVES, PORTO RICO 

tlie^r\ S r ! 1( '' GJteHemen of the committee, if I understand well what 
thiriH i i ei ! mn stated, we are not going to discuss now any other 

Tfe V m in re - ard to the all(litor - 
Of cour^ CA3 ^ MAK< 1 not mean to mal ^ e it quite that restrictive! 
to o-et v ' Sm - Ce we liave tllis bil1 before us, we should like especially 
Theref ° Ur -J lews on tllis biU ; but we dl(1 not mean to restrict you. 
go ahead^ J ° U Wlint to ex P 1 ! ess • vour ^ ews 011 an ? other matters. 

°f^Porf 0T p'- * n le &**& to tne about tn ^ powers of the auditor 
so I \vin° co > Governor Towner has covered the whole question. 

I ao . y - Vor . v kittle about that matter, 
question ^ Resident Commissioner of Porto Rico that the 

stricken fv regard to the auditor in Porto Rico should be 
legislati ^ tIle ^ under consideration. It seems to me that 
to Porto T^ 1 ** re £* r< * to tne P mli PP ,ue Islands and with regard 
Policv (°r f V <0 sll(H,1(1 treated separately. This lias been the 
Phil;' - r (onimilt(,(k of ootl1 Houses up to this time. The 
own or ( ' n ° S - e their own organic act; Porto Rico has also its 
Pine To i C act ' 1 lu * P olic V of Congress with regard to the Philpi- 
have SS ls . diflfer ent to that for Porto Rico. The Philippics 
organic P 1 ; 0 ^^ independence. We are American citizens. Our 
is different in some respects to the organic act of the 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AXD PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 51 



Philippines. So, it seems to me that those questions should not be 
involve-! in the same act 3 in the same bill* 

On the other hand, 1 agree with Governor Towner — and that is 
the opinion of the legislative commission now appearing before 
this committee — thai it is not necessary to Legislative about the 
powers and functions of the auditor of Porto Rico. Perhaps it 
may be accessary to legislate in regard to the Philippines. That 
is not a question for us. But the powers of the auditor in Porto 
Rico are clearly slated in our law: ami ; i seem- to me that the law 
as it is at the present time is enough for our purposes. But, of 
course, if it is the opinion of the committee that the salary of the 
auditor should be raised, I do not see any objection to that. 

The Chairman. You say you do not see any objection. 

Mr. Soto. No. I dbn't see any objection." 

The Chairman. You don'i agree with Governor Towner? 

Mr. Soto. Yes. 1 agree with the governor, because the salary 
of the auditor is *r>,0()0, so I agree that the salary should be raised 
to $6,000 in order to equal the salary of the several heads of the 
depart mcnts. 

The Chairman. Let us se£ if we understand you. The heads of 
the departments now get how much ! 
Cr. Soto. $0,000. 
The Chairman. How much does the auditor get? 
Mr. Soto. The auditor gets $5,000. 

The Chairman. Sou would be in the favor of raising the au- 
ditor's salary to that same amount? 

Mr. Soto. Yes, the same as the heads of the departments. 

Senator BrotjSSARD. Does not the auditor get a residence fur- 
nished? 

Mr. Soto. Yes. He has a residence, but the attorney general has 
one also. 

Senator Butler. I think the salary of the auditor was raised in 
the lasit session of Congress to $0,000. 

Mr. Soto. I don't remember that. I supposed that his salary was 
$5,000. 

Governor Tow>;ia:. It was amended last year. 

The Chairman, That was my recollection, that it was raised. 

Mr. Soto. Of course, if his salary has been raised, the auditor 
now gets $6,000. ? 

The Chairman. Then you would agree with Governor Towner. 

Mr. Soto. I agree with the governor that the auditor is not entitled 
to have more salary than the several heads of departments. 

The Chairman. All right. 

Mr. Soto. Now, in regard to appeals to the Comptroller General: 
It seems to me that that is not wise, becatise that will entail expenses 
for the heads of the several departments or private persons WJO 
want to appeal from the decisions of the auditor. T think at tne 
present time an appeal can be taken from the auditor to the ^ovei - 
nor. Then, article 21 of the organic act provides that the deeision 
of the governor will be final, but subject to any right of action 
provided by law. It seems to me that the organic act refers to trie 
laws of the Legislature of Porto Kico, so we may provide amp le 



52 



AUDITOR F OK PORTO RICO AND PHIF JPI'INK ISLANDS 



remedy in the courts for appealing from the decisions of the gov- 
ernor. 

Of course, I agree also with the governor thai if the committee 
wants to put these matters that the governor has mentioned in a 
separate bill, it will be wise to provide in regard to the keeping o| 
records and accounts in the office of the auditor, and also to give 
the power to the auditor, which is not clear now in the law, to compel 
not only the obedience of witnesses in appearing before him, bill al9Q 
to compel the production of records, papers, and bonks. It seem| 
to me that those should be the only amendments that should be madr 
in regard to the auditor. 

Now, there are several matters that the Commission of Porto Rico 
wants to present for the consideration of this committee. 1 will 
touch lightly on all those matters, because Mr. Guerra-Mondragorij 
who will follow me, will treat these matters with more attention* 
Those suggestions have been embodied in a bill introduced in the 
House by Mr. Davila. 

You gentlemen have a copy of this bill now which refers to the 
organization of the public-service commission. That is an important 
measure. At the present time the public-service commission is com- 
posed of two members elected by the people and of the several 
heads of departments beside- the auditor, so it is a very large com- 
mission. It is impossible to transact business in a proper and eflici- 
ent way. The heads of departments are very busy with the matters 
belonging to their departments, and for that reason it seems to me 
that it is wise to have a commission composed of three members, one 
commissioner and two associate members, the commissioner to be 
appointed by the Governor of Porto Rico, with the advice and con- 
sent of the senate, with a salary of $G,000, the same as the several 
heads of departments; and the two associate commissioners .without 
a fixed salary, to have a per diem, as it is now in the law. but instead 
of $6 a day, to have $10 a day. That is the change that we suggest 
in regard to the public-service commission in order to make it more 
efficient. 

I have some other suggestions to make in the bill introduced by 
Mr. Davila. The most important matter, in the opinion of our 
commission, is in regard to the collection of internal revenues im- 
posed by the Legislature of Porto Rico. Our organic act provides 
that the internal revenue Law of the United States does not apply 
to Porto Rico, so we have our own interna] revenue laws. We have 
always had a law in regard to this matter. That law was enacted 
in the year li)'J5. But in the enforcing of that power it is difficult 
for us to reach the goods, wares, and merchandise subject to the 
tax, that goes to Porto Rico from foreign countries and from the 
United States. According to a decision of the court we must wait 
until this merchandise or goods is placed for sale in the several 
stores in order that the taxes attached to those goods and merchan- 
dise can be collected. 

Of course, that has a double effect. In the first place it makes it 
impossible for the treasurer of Porto Rico to collect taxes sometimes 
on these merchandise and goods that come to Porto Rico from 
foreign countries and from the United States, so that they are prac- 
tically exempt from taxation. In the second place the effect is that 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 53 



there is an unfair competition with the houses that must pay taxes 
on their merchandise. 

All the merchandise that comes to Porto Kico through the mail or 
by express is not subject to taxation. They are subject to taxation 
by law, but it is impossible to impose the tax because the law says 
that the tax will attach to those goods, merchandise, and wares which 
are subject to the tax imposed by authority of our legislative 
assembly, as soon as those goods are manufactured and introduced 
into Porto Rico. 

I think I have explained clearly that matter to the committee, but 
anyhow Mr. Guerra will further" explain that matter and show you 
that it is very important from the point of view of our revenues. 

It seems to me that these are the most important matters that the 
commission w r ishes the committee to consider. 

• The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Soto. Is there any question that 
any member of the committee desires to ask I 

Now. we have only live minutes left. I want to ask a few ques- 
tions that will take 'more than that length of time. # I should like 
the committee to meet to-morrow morning at 10.30, if it is convenient. 
Senator Mondragon desires to speak ; Mr. Iglesias has wired me from 
New York that he desires to be heard. So we shall have to give our 
Porto Rican brethren another morning. 

This committee will stand adjourned and will meet to-morrow 
morning at 10.30, at which time this hearing will be finished. 

(Thereupon at 12 o'clock noon the committee adjourned until 
Wednesday, April 28, 1926, at 10.30 a. m.) 



4 



X 



I 




AUDITOE FOR POETO RICO AND THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



WEDNESDAY, APRIL 28, 1926 

United States Senate, 
committee on territories and insular possessions, 

Washington-^ D. C. 
The committee met, pursuant to adjournment, at 10.30 o'clock 
a. .in., in the committee room, Capitol, Senator Frank B. Willis, 
presiding. 

Present Senators Willis (chairman). Bayard, Harris, and Nye; 
later also. Senator Butler. 

The Chairman. The committee will be in order. We will con- 
tinue our hearing this morning by calling first upon Governor 
Towner. He did not quite finish his statement and I understand 
that he has some other observations that he desires to make. 

STATEMENT OF HON. HORACE M. TOWEIU— Resumed 

Governor Towner. Continuing the statement that I made the 
other day, I again call attention to the fact that if there are any 
amendments to be made to the provisions of the organic act with 
regard to the auditor, we would prefer to have those which have been 
suggested by the representatives of Porto Rico. 

I am quite sure that you will find that they increase the power 
of the auditor to at least the same degree that you have increased the 
power of the 1 auditor of the Philippines, having due regard to our 
different conditions; and I think it would be unwise for the commit- 
tee to adopt the suggestion for amending the organic law of the 
Philippines and make that, applicable to Porto Rico rather than the 
amendments which have been suggested to our own organic act, 
which is inharmonious with the organic act of the Philippines. 

The Chairman. I think I didn't get what you said the last thing. 
What was the argument about the Philippines? 

Governor Towner. It is like this: The provisions with regard to 
the organic act of the Philippines are intended to amend the organic- 
act of the Philippines. Now, to take those provisions and apply 
them to the organic act of Porto Rico is not harmonious to the 
Porto Rican organic act; and therefore it would be wiser and in 
harmony with our situation if the amendments were adopted that, 
we suggest, which would increase the powers of the auditor but 
do it in accordance with our own needs and necessities, rather than 
to take that which was intended primarily to affect and enlarge 
and increase the powers of the auditor of the Philippine Islands. 

Senator Bayard. May I ask a question? 

Governor Towner. Yes. 

55 



56 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



Senator Bayard. Have you suggested amendments with this pro- 
posed change in the Porto Kican act? 
Governor Towner. Ytes. 

Senator Bayard. T just wanted to know whether you had. 

Governor Towner, Yes. You will see it if you look at this bill 
which was introduced. 

Senator Bayard. Don't bother to refer to them. You say you 
have suggested them? 

Governor Towner. Yes. 

Senator Bayard. I will get them all right. 

Governor Towner. You will find them, Mr. Senator, in this bill 
which has been already introduced in the' House of Representative- 
and which will be introduced here, which amend- section 20 of the 
organic act. which applies particularly to the auditor of Porto Ric<K 

Now, gentlemen, m tins feill— which is the House bill at the pre- 
sent time, but which wdl be introduced in the Senate— the matters 
referred to in this hill will be discussed by Mr. Guerra and of course 
I will be here to be heard if t} 1( > committee desires to ask anv <|ue<- 
tions about l.t. rhese provisions. I think, you will find entirely 
reasonable and entirely in consonance with 'the progressive devel- 
opment of Porto Rico. 

I think I can say to you gentlemen that Porto Rico is making 
progress and making what might almost be called rapid progress 
I do not know whether you desire anv discussion: in fact, I would 
not try to take up your time in telling vou about our financial diffi- 
culties, Which arose not because of anv fault on the part of the 
legislature bedaUSt they feU short more than a million of meeting 
the required budget but whirl, arose because of the fad that the 
taxpayers really united to resist the payment of taxes and took the 
matter to the courts. Now the courts have decided those propositions 
favorably to 1 orto Kico, as they a l] were legallv enacted and rea- 
sonable in their application. & * 

The Chairman- Would you sutler an interruption at this point? 

governor IWjtcr. Yes. 

The Chairman. T don't care to have vou go into a detailed state- 
meni 0 f this matter, but I wondered if Vou would not care to make 
a very briel Statement with reference to certain newspaper articles 
that have appeared in this country an d have been quite generally 
Circulated. Thpse articles appeared in the first instance in the 
"Baltimore Sun. read nil those articles and I read the reply 

to them from one ol your Porto R ic , m newspapers. I should he 
glad to have a very brie! statement from you as to the situation 
described m those articles. J 

Governor Towntek. I think perhaps I might answer •that in a 
very general way bv saying that it is rather singular that a single 
pep orter from, a smgle newspaper in the United States should find 
conditions which be says he was told exist, because he was only 
ther e for a couple. of weeks and all of his information, he says, was 
told to him. It s ^Prtuuate that nearly eyery statement that 
he made was union ded and was just the result of rumor and gos- 
sip of those who, ver f a^Jiag the administration. 

The tact ^^^J^Vnmmt 0 f Porto Rico is doing well. 
We would be full) justified in claiming that it is as clean and pro- 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 57 



feressive a government as there is anywhere in the United States. 
That may seem almost a strong statement?, but I do not care what 
sort of test yon choose to make with regard to it. I think we would 
in- justified in asking for a comparison with almost any State in the 
"Union that you might choose. We have a government there that 
is a c redit to Porto Rico and a credit to the United States. 1 do 
not believe that anywhere you will find any dependency or any 
colonial possession anywhere on the earth of any nation that can 
compare with Porto Rico in the progressive development that it 
has made under the American occupation. 

Now, with regard to the financial status: Just as soon as these mat- 
ters of controversy with regard to the legality of these tax rates 
was settled this opposition fell to the ground. Xow we are not 
only metting all the budgetary expenses, hut we are accumulating 
a large surplus. 

I want to call your attention to a statement that I just received in 
a letter dated April 18, and also submit one dated April 25. It 
states that at the close of March the available cash balance in the 
insular revenue for budgetary expenses amounted to $111,197.64. 
We have paid all expenses up to date and our balances to-day show 
an available cash balance of insular revenues amounting "to — as 
shown in this statement dated April 21— s700,374.:W. We have a 
balance of trust funds, and other deposits in the treasury and in the 
various banks in cash, according to the statement made here, amount- 
ing in the aggregate to $10,400,868.20. This statement made charg- 
ing the island with being a bankrupt concern, of course, is laughable 
when you come to consider the real facts, 
/rhe CriAiiiMAX. Do you want this statement to go into the record? 

Governor TowNik Yes, certainly, if you desire. It is the report 
of the treasurer. 

The Ciiaikman. Let me make a brief inquiry about it. 

Governor To\vxj:r. Yes. 

The Ciiaikman. What are these funds? Some of them are rather 
large. It says American Colonial Bank three millions and some- 
thing, and the National City Bank two million and something. 

Governor Towxkk. We never make. Mr. Chairman, any loan with- 
out providing for an amortization feature, and accumulating from 
time to time the money necessary to pay the loan. The most of that 
balance that is in the treasury there is what might be called trust 
funds. 

The Chairman. Sinking funds? 
t Governor Towner. Sinking funds Tor the payment and amortiza- 
tion of the debts. Those deposits are kept intact and they are ac- 
cumulating more rapidly than was anticipated, >Ve have never de- 
faulted in the payment of the interest or the principal when due on 
any obligation that the Government has made. We have a surplus in 
almost every fund so .that whenever we can buy a bond before it is 
due — we have word left with our New York representative bankers 
that whenever a bond of Porto Rico is offered before it is due at a 
price that would be at all advantageous to us financially, we would 
be very glad indeed to take it up. And we are taking them up in 
advance of their maturity Whenever the opportunity occurs. 



58 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



The Chairman. Did I understand you to say that there was a cash 
balance of some seven hundred thousand I 

Governor Towner. Yes. You see. that statement is made there. 
(The statement referred to is as follows :) 

Balances in depositaries at the close of business April :l. JHJ<> 



American Colonial Bank, San Juan, P. R s:;, i\<)r>. 370. S3 

Banco Commercial de Puerto Rico, Sun Juan. P. R «;n<i. ikki. <m» 

Banco Territorial y Auricula, San Juan. l\ R 750, 000. 00 

Credito y Ahorro Ponceno, Ponce. P. R 520, 000. 00 

Mechanic and Metals National Bank, New York. X. Y 443.323.01 

Royal Bank of Canada, San Juan, P. R l."»o. 000. 00 

Municipal bonds <;.">."». ( km). 00 

School-board bonds • 30, 000. 00 

The National City Bank, San Juan, P. R 2, 127. 17.;. 7»; 

Banco de Ponce, Ponce, P. R r>n<>. (ion. <m> 

Banco Popular de Economias y Prestainos. Sun Juan. P. R 30, 000.00 

Banco Masonico de Puerto Rico. San Juan. P. R 7."), 000. 00 

Banco de San German, San German, P. R__ _ lo. ooo. oo 

Irving Bank Columbia Trust Co.. Now York, N. Y " 00 

First National Bank of Boston, Boston Mass 200.000.00 

The Baltimore Trust Co 300, 000. 00 

Banco Agricola de Aguadilla, Aguadilla, P R _ 9,000.00 



Total cash on hand 10, 400. SOS. 20 



Available cash balance, $700,374.39. 

Governor Towner! Now, gentlemen- if you would like me, I 
would like to make a short statement 

(At this point Senator Biijtler entered the room.) 

Governor Towner. Xow, Senator Butler is present. You spoke to 
me and said that you had some question in your mind that you 
were going to ask me. I would be glad to have you ask me now. 

Senator Butler. I think perhaps you might go on with what you 
had in mind and later I will be prepared to ask you a few questions 
about this report that I have here which was placed in my hands a 
little while ago. 

Governor Towner. The matter that T was going to talk about just 
at present was the matter of the elective governor. I think there 
is a feeling of apprehension existing in the minds of some of the 
people that it would be unwise to extend this privilege to Porto 
Rico, and that it is and would be a very <n eat extension of power to 
Porto Rico. I think perhaps that 'idea~ is based upon not a full 
knowledge of the real terms and provisions of the act, but rather 
on the fact that they think it would be turning over without restraint 
all the present limitations that exist between\he United States and 
Porto Rico. 

The bill provides that in the year 1932 the governor shall be elec t- 
ed by the people. At the present time the governor is appointed 
by the President. The appointment by the President is for an in- 
definite tune, but the election of the governor by the people will be 
for four years, and provision is made^that the President may, as he 
may now, discharge or call for the resionation of the Governor of 
Porto Rico at anv time. So, although he may be elected by the 
people, the President may recall him and appoint one to act as his 
successor for the remainder of the term. So there does not exist such 



AUDITOR FOII PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 59. 



a great deal of difference between that and the conditions that exist 
at present. 

The Oiathmax. Will you permit an interruption? 
Governor Towner. Certainly. 

The Chairman. It seems to me that there is quite a difference in 
this. In the one case the governor is appointed by the President. 
There would not he any reflection at all upon the people if the Presi- 
dent should decide that he wanted some other governor. But, on the 
other hand, if the governor that was removed should be a governor 
appointed or elected by the people, would not the people regard that 
as a pretty serious reflection upon their capacities and would not 
that arouse a great deal of hostile criticism? 

Governor Towner. Of course, it might, Mr. Chairman. Of course, 
there is no question but what that might be the case. I think, how- 
ever, that the people of Porto Rico would approve the act of the 
President in any case where the removal was justified. What they 
want is a good governor: that is, a governor who deals fairly and 
acts justly with the people. 

We must consider this matter as a part of our general policy, I 
think, with regard to all of our insular possessions. We ought to give 
them the largest measure of self-government of which they are 
reasonably capable of exerc ising. I don't think anyone would take 
exception to that proposition. ^ 

Now, it occurs to me that tile record that has been made so far by 
the Porto Rican people and their legislation and their general rela- 
tions to the United States Government, which have been increasingly 
friendly, increasingly harmonious, increasingly advantageous to the 
mutual interests both of the United States and of Porto Rico. I 
think perhaps in view of this record Porto Rico is justified in asking 
that we do something to indicate to them that we appreciate what 
they have done and that we are not going to stop conferring rights 
upon them until they have acquired self-government. 

Now, if this elective governor is given to them, Porto Rico will 
be in a position that is very satisfactory and defensible. The United 
States could not possibly be criticise*!. Any administration that 
takes tliis action, I think I am justified in saying, will do so with 
the approval of the American people. I think I am justified in 
saying that they will feel that the United States is doing what it 
ought to do and what justly is its obligation, if it does extend to our 
insular possessions such a measure of self-government as they are 
justly entitled to. 

Now, that does not mean in the case of Porto Rico that it shall 
leave it independent, because Porto Rico does not desire independ- 
ence. They understand that it is a irroat deal better for them to be 
a part of the United States: and I think that if they have an elective 
governor given to them they will be satisfied for years and years to 
come. Of course, they might say that their ultimate ambition is to 
by a State of the Union, but they recognize the fact that that is at 
least away off in the dim distance*. If they have an elective governor 
they at least will be able to have what might be called as complete 
a system of State government as even the States of the Union have. 
So, it seems to me that that objection is hardly sufficient to overcome 
what might be considered our obligation to the people of Porto Rico 
for what they have accomplished in the past. 
95508 — 2G — pt 2 2 



60 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



Then, besides that, we have also, and will have under this new 
arrangement if it becomes a law — we will have t he right of appoint- 
ing the auditor, which is. under the extensive powers thai he will 
have, a . very great check. We will also have the appointment of the 
attorney general, which takes care pf the legal situation with re- 
gard to these matters. All of the new offices of the National ( l< \ - 
ernment, such as the Post Office Department, are operated entirely 
by the United States. Our monetary system is that of the Tinted 
States. Qur commercial system and commerciaj usages. are all those 
of the United States. The collection of the internal revenue pf the 
United States will be under United States officers. The collection 
of customs dues will be under United States officers. So there will 
not be a very great material change in the relations between the 
two countries, if }'ou choose to call them two countries, under the 
elective government and that of the present system. 

Senator Bayard. The same relations as far as the Federal Gov- 
ernment is concerned exist between the Federal Government and the 
States of the Union as exist between the Federal Goyernmenl aad 
Porto Rico. So, even if Porto Rico were made a State, that change 
would not occur. 

Governor Townek. Xo, sir; and I am trying to show that there is 
not such a great change as it is anticipated might occur, because we 
would have very much the same relation. 

Perhaps I might be justified in adding this, which 1 sincerely 
believe to be true: If this law could be passed now, its consideration 
by the Porto Rican people would not be in a spasmodic, excited 
campaign; but the question of who in 1932, is to be chosen as Gover- 
nor of Porto Rico wotdd be one upon which they would deliberate. 
I feel quite sure that there are men in Porto Rico — and I could name 
them if it were necessary to do so — that would make just as good a 
governor as we have reason to expect will be elected l>y the people 
here in the United States in the States. In other words, it would 
not be a politician; it would be the best man. The politician's 
desire and ambition would have a hard time in existing for six- 
years before they were brought to fruition. So I think that their 
judgment would be one of wisdom rather than of politics. 

Let me suggest another matter or t wo that I think are very per- 
tinent to be considered. 

Where a change of administration is made, then there is a change 
in the Governor of Porto Rico. That ought not to be, because 
it is a political change and the appointments are made for political 
reasons. Happily they might be good, but unhappily they might 
and have been and perhaps sometimes will be bad. In other >vordsi 
the selection is not made of the person who is best qualified to serve in 
Porto Rico but is made because of the fact that some good man 
is supposed to be adapted for service in Porto Rico, perhaps with-' 
out ever having been there and without knowing anything about 
the people — their characteristics, their habits, their methods of 
thought and of life — that he is going to serve. I really believe that 
it would be the wiser and juster course to let the selection be made 
in this way. subject to the right of removal, than that it should 
be made by political appointments with every change of adminis- 
tration up in the States. 



auditob for pouto nico and Philippine islands 



61 



\~<>w. if there are ;iny gentlemen who have any questions to ask 
or any objections in their mind, I would be very glad indeed to 
have you express them and would be glad to refer to them if you 
think best. 

Senator BayAhdj Is there anything particularly in your annual 
report thai you want to stress? 

Governor Towm.k. I was just going to call your attention to an- 
other thinir. It is not necessary to put in here the record of prog- 
ress, but 1 want to call your attention to a few items, just press 
items from our own newspapers. They report the weekly financial 
transactions of business in the Government. 

Of course, you know that the price of sujgar is very low. Not- 
withstanding the fact that the price of sugar is low, the shipments 
Of SUgaf that have been made since January 1, from the commence- 
ment of this year, were 1 t>:>,S tons. These are the shipments of 
this year with the price at least a cent lower than it was Last year. 
The shipments last year for the same period were 123,440 tons. 
So. the excess of this year over last year, notwithstanding the fact 
that the price is a cent lower per pound than it was last year, is 
about r0,000 tons. A ton of sugar is quite a good deaJ of sweetening. 

I want to call your attention also to this fact: The San Juan 
Bank clearings— and that almost means the clearings for the island, 
because the banks there have, branch banks in other parts of the 
island and most of the financial transactions that are transacted 
in the island arc finally transacted in some one of them — the San 
Juan Bank clearings for the week— this is just for one week— end- 
ing Saturday, April 10, were $8,819,780, as compared with $-US2,48i 
for the corresponding week of the preceding year. So, you see. 
this week's total of bank clearings in San Juan is nearly twice as 
much as it was last year. 

Now. of course, i think that that proportion is greater than it 
was during any other week: but I do not think that you can find 
a single week's report during this year that does not show a large 
increase over the preceding year. The financial condition and the 
progress, especially in the production of sugar, which last year 
was by far the greatest production, amounting to about 506,000 tons 
greater than had ever been produced before, a larger production 
of coffee, which is probably the largest production that has been 
made, at least for 10 or 15 and perhaps 20 years, with an increase 
in the production of fruits and the increase in the production of 
tobacco; all those indicate a prosperous condition. 

Of course, gentlemen, we have poverty in the same way in our 
island that you have poverty in the United States. But we are 
trying to bring about better conditions. There has been a marked 
improvement and increase in the price of labor and the wa-es of 
the laboring people. There is room for a great deal of improve- 
ment there. We have a dense population and during parts of the 
year we have unemployment. But you do not find anion-- the 
people of Porto Rico the discontent that exists in almost every 
country and in some parts of our own country. 

It has been suggested that various immigration projects should 
be proposed and carried out. But when you come to trv to induce 
these people to leave, although they live, many of them, in little 
one-room houses up on the sides of the mountains, vou will find that 



62 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



they do not want to leave Porto Rico. Porto Rico is a beautiful 
place to live, an easy place to live, a place where if you can eradi- 
cate some of the things now that seriously afflict the people, for 
instance, such as diseases — and we are opening and have opened 
in every large town in the island three clinics for the people who 
are diseased and who are too poor to purchase service: we have 
three dispensaries also, so that they can have medicine. We pro- 
vide physicians in these municipalities for the service of the poor 
without charge to them* , . 

We are every day enlarging the school facilities ol the island. 
I think we can sa v. without the statement being challenged, that the 
progress of the Government of Porto Rico is such that it ought to 
make the people of the United States feel that the people of Porto 
Rico are taking good care of themselves and that they are using to 
good advantage the freedom that has been given to them and the 
privileges that have been given to them. 

They appreciate the fact that they are people of the 1 nited State- 
ami a part of it. They are rapidly adjusting themselves to Ameri- 
can conditions and American usages. American textbooks are used 
in the schools. English is taught throughout the entire course <>t 
our public school svstem, and exclusivelv after the fourth year 
English textbooks and English methods of teaching are used in 
the grades and throughout the high schools and in the universities, 

if there are any further questions I should be glad to answer 
them. 

Senator Bayard. You say there has been a material increase in 
the production of sugar and coffee in the past year? 

( rovernor Towner. Yes. . ^ 

Senator BATARD. Is that increase in the production of collce due 
to a better crop or to better methods of handling the crop \ 

Governor Towner. It is largely due to a better price, Senator, and 
to better methods that are being used bv the larger interests ami 
especially in the cooperative feature which we are introducing 
down there. 

Senator P>.\yaki>. Has the development in better roads to the crop- 
growing district made a material dilference? 
Governor Towner. A verv great difference. 

Senator Bayard. As a rule an increase in sugar production is 
due to a better method of producing sugar from the cane \ 

Governor Towner, Entirely so. 

Senator BatarD. Better mechanical operation? 

Governor Towner. Our sugar centrales are the best centrales in 
the world. I think there is no ouestion about that. I was asking 
some sugar experts here in Washington that know conditions every- 
where and they say that the method of Porto Ri^> * s the be ^- 

Senator Bayard. Does that large production of sugar reflect in 
any way in the employment of more laborers or by better mechanical 
operation? , • ; 

Governor Towner. I don't think that it touches the labor situa- 
tion. In my last report I say so. I don't think that it does. Ufi 
combination in the larger areas of land taken from the small people 
that hold ten or twenty or thirty or forty acres of land which was 
sugar land is verv great. They are being tempted to sell. The largo 
centrales come to them and say* MVo will give you $500 an aero 



AJJDITOB FOB PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 63 



for your land. You can take this money and you can go to town 
ami live on the interest of it and you won't have to do anything. 
You can send your children to school" and all that sort of thing. 
It is a great temptation and unfortunately it is too often accepted. 
It would be a great deal better if the colonos stayed on their little 
farms instead of having them joined up with the larger aggrega- 
tions of capital. So, I do not know what we may be able to do, if 
anything, regarding that matter. But I do not think that it goes 
to the labor situation. 

This is the way that we can help the labor situation with regard to 
sugar transactions: When I came to Porto Rico three years ago they 
had just been through some very disastrous strikes in the sugar sec- 
tions, owing to small payments for wages, sometimes 50 or 60 or 70 
Gents a day during the very busy period. Xo\\\ I found out that 
one at least of these centrales adopted with satisfactory results a 
method of paying wages according to the price of sugar, based 
upon the price of sugar. That is, for illustration, if the price of 
sugar was 4 cents a pound, which is considered as a sort of basic 
price, then they would pay a dollar a day wages, and when it rose to 
5 cents a pound, they would pay $liJ5; and when it got- up to 6 cents 
a pound they would pay SI. 50, and so on. That seemed to me to 
be a very advantageous system, so [ urged very strongly upon the 
colonos the adoption of that sort of policy. It has been very gen- 
erally adopted in the island and since then we have had no particu- 
lar trouble with the laboring people. 

In some instances we pay too small wages. The trouble is, of 
course, that the labor, while it exists so far as the cultivation of the. 
ground is concerned, the preparation of the ground, the large devel- 
opment, that requires two or three or four times as many laborers as 
usual, is only during the cutting and grinding season, which lasts 
only four or five or six months. 

Senator Bayard. In other words, it is a seasonal operation? 

Governor Towxkk. Yes. 

Senator Bayakd. And when they get through in the seasonal cen- 
trales, then they go to somebody else for occupation i 

Governor Towni:k. Yes: or sometimes it is scattered around and 
they are given jobs on the farms. Many of them are given work on 
the farms. 

Senator Bayakd. So that when these smaller planters who own lit- 
tle plantations of a few acres sell out to the centrales, they, in turn, 
have to come back as laborers and add to the number of laborers 
on relatively the same amount of ground? 

Governor Townkr. I could hardly sav that, because I am inclined 
to think— these people are pretty thrifty and thev don't require very 
much. If a man had three or four acres of land and he could sell 
them for $500 an acre, he could go to town and live on the interest 
of that very well in Porto Rico lor the rest of his life and educate 
his family and help his children along. 

Senator Bayard. Does he invest it as a rule? 

Governor Towxek. I think that he does. I am not sure about it. 
I never heard that it was riotously disposed of. I don't think the. 
people are that way. These colonos, I think, are a pretty thrift v lot 
ol People and they try to take very good care of it If thev can. 

The C hairman. Senator Nye, do you have any questions to ask? 



64 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE CSLAKDS 



Senator Xye. Xo. 

The Ghaikman. I have heard during the pasl year very serious 
criticisms of conditions in Porto Rico. 
Governor Towner. Yes. 

The Chairman. One of them relates to the financial condition. 
That you have already discussed. The second relates to the labor 
conditions. That you have discussed perhaps as fully as you care 
to. The third was a reference to the elections. There have been 
some statements made that the election- were not pure, that the eleo^ 
tioh laws were not well enforced. What have^you to sav about 
that? 

Governor Towner. Well, it is a long story, to go into that. Every- 
thing that could possibly be done, in fact, everything that was 
really asked for as a guarantee for such election at the last election 
was given. The election, in my judgment, was as fair as elections 
generally are through the States of the Union. There was very 
little difficulty. There was anticipated difficulty and sonic effort was 
made to create difficulties but we had matters so carefully guarded 
against that we had a very fair and effective election. 

The Chairman. We have been urged at different limes that there 
were such conditions as to warrant a congressional investigation of 
Porto Rico. Do you think that there are such conditions? 

Governor Townek. Xo, I do not, Mr. Senator. Of course, that 
implies that conditions are serious. Of course, the people of 
Porto Rico would deeply resent such an implication. We should be 
very glad indeed to have any of you, all of you, at any time to visit 
Porto Rico and see for yourselves the conditions. In fact, nothing 
would please the people of Porto Rico more than to have you do 
that. But to go down there as an investigating committee would be 
an implication upon them that I do not think would be justified. 

The Chairman. I just wanted to understand your view. My own 
view, as I have repeatedly said, is that inasmuch as Porto Rico is 
practically self-governing, there is no more reason for a committee 
of Congress to investigate Porto Rico than there is for one to in- 
v< v-tigate Ohio or Kentucky. 

Governor Towner. I think we could find conditions upon almost 
every ground in some of the States that would be worse than they 
are in Porto Rico. 

Senator Harris. You have seen the statement about extravagance 
and waste in Porto Rico ? 

Governor Towner. Yes. 

Senator Harris. Has that been brought to your attention? 

Governor Towner. The charges, Senator, that have been made are 
so very vague that they are almost impossible to answer. If you 
can think of any individual instance or any case in which you think 
extravagance has been practiced, I would be glad to have you call 
iny attention to it. 

'Senator Harris. I don't remember any instance. I have confi- 
dence in you, Governor, but sometimes subordinates in authority 
are extravagant. 

Governor Towner. Yes. 

Senator Harris, And I was wondering whether you had approved 
all the 



♦ 



AUDITOR FOR LMRTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



65 



Governor Towner. You see. Senator, we have a budget system. 
A charge of Extravagance — and I am very glad that you called my 
attention to that — the charges oif extravagance against the adminis- 
tration and against the government, I think, are very far from being 
well-founded. Let me tell you. When I went down to Porto Rico 
the estimates that had been made by the heads of departments and 
by the previous administration and sent to the legislature were for a 
budget of over twelve millions of dollars. Now, after I came there 
I had the budget reconsidered by the heads of the departments, 
saying that if it was possible to make any reductions they should 
do so. They reduced the budget to eleven million and some seven 
hundred thousand from over twelve million. 

We operated during the next three years upon that sort of budget; 
hut I sent a special letter to the heads of departments saying that 
they must not feel justified because a budgetary appropriation had 
been made for them in expending that unless they found it abso- 
lutely necessary to do so, and that saving should be made in other 
departments, it' possible, below the budgetary estimates. Now, as a 
result, the total amount of the expenses, payments actually made 
on the budgetary expenses, have been reduced during the year to 
nearly, or somewhat over, either something over or something less 
t han, $500,000, a very considerable reduction. 

Senator Bayard. Where have the principal reductions been made ? 
In what expenses, would you say? 

Governor Towner. In various items of expenses. For instance, 
I asked them to do this. Senator: I said, "If you have a resigna- 
tion or a death in any office in the government, if it is possible in 
the first place to fill that place by promotion, do so, and by succes- 
sive promotions, so that the person to fill the vacancy will not be 
the high-priced person at the top but the low-priced person at the 
bottom of the list. That system was adopted. We used every means 
that we could. 

Now, when it came to this last fixing of the budget, the resources 
were still less than they have been. So, after making the most 
careful preparations and appointing a special committee for the 
purpose of reducing the estimates that had been sent by the heads 
of departments, I sent to the legislature a budget of $10,283,000. 
I he legislature increased that sum to $11,300,000. But the legis- 
lature at the same time increased the revenues by proposing a sales 
tax. They increased their revenues so that they would have plenty 
of money to pay. In fact, they have paid. 

Senator Bayard. What is the population now, Governor? 

Governor Towner. About 1,300,000; something like that. 

Senator Hakims. I was just comparing it with my State. We 
have 3,000,000 people and our Stale budget is aboiit $12,000,000; 
bo, you have about three times as much expense per capita as the 
State of Georgia has. 

Governor Towner. No. It should be remembered, Senator, that 
that is only your State expenditures. In Porto Rico our budget hsi 
to include everything. 

Senator Bayard. The Federal expenses, too? 
. Governor Towner. Yes. As a matter' of fact, our expenses are 
very much less than they are in the States. The per capita taxa- 
tion was about $70 per capita in the United States, S27 of it being 



66 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



national luxation and $43 per capita being State, county, city, and 
municipal taxation. In Porto Rico our Federal taxation, municipal 
and otherwise, amounts to only slightly over sin per capita as 

against $f0. ; 

Senator Bayard: The new-paper.- charged extravagance m con* 
tracts Did these contracts meet with your approvals 

Governor Towner Oh. yes. There has not been a charge pf 
that kind made that I know of, Senator. 

Senator Bayabdi Then you have not seen the Baltimore Sun? 

Governor Towner Yes: I saw it. T gUnced«over them. 1 no- 
ticed this man saying that another man says that these things are 
true. Of course, I knew that they were nofe 

Senator Harris. So. these contracts met with your approval and 

there was. not waste! 

Governor Towner. 1 think so. Of course, now, benator, a con- 
tract, for instance 

Senator Harris. Senator A\ llhs. we were just discussing the 
charges before you came in. I was just asking him if they met with 
his approval. 

The Chairman. Yes. 

(iovernor Townkr. Of course. Senator, for instance, the Secretary 
of the Interior has the approval of the letting of all these contracts, 
and the letting of the contracts does not come to my knowledge. 
But no payments can be made upon it except it is dispursed with 
the approval of the auditor and then with my approval. There has 
been no contest. 

Senator Harris. The expenditures met with your approval? 
Governor Townkr. Oh. yes: and with the approval of the auditor 
as well. 

The Chairman. Have vou anv other questions? All righfcj 
Go vernor. 

Governor Townkr. Now, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Guerra will take 
Up the subject. 

The Chairman. I am requested to place in the record at this 
point a statement by Senator Mena and Representative Mendez; 
I will just hand them to the stenographer and he will place them in 
the record. 

Statement of Senator Enkiqte Gonzalez .Mena and Representative J. H. 
Garcia Mendez, or the Porto Kuan Legislature 

Mr. Chairman, we are both members of the Porto Riean Legislature rep 
resenting the two preal political parties which now are forming the Porto 
Rican Alliance, whose Immediate goal Is t<> obtain for the people of Porto 
ki<-<» the right t<> elect thier own governor, Leaving the final status or Porto 
Rico to he decided by future generations ;i s thev may deem best for tho 
interest of Porto Rico and the Qnlted States. 

We are here as members bf the Porfo Rlcan delegation which is to strive 
r<, r the achievement of such reforms In our organic act as are expressed in 
the resolution of the Legislature ot POrtO Rico, Introduced by Mr. Tons 
Soto, which was placed on record yesterday. Thus, gentlemen, we wish to 
Wake dear that, in our opinion, the bonds between the Federal Government 
and Porto RicO hy granting us the power to elect our governor will be us 

Htm as they are at present; and still Congress and the President will have a 
check on the Porto Rlcan Government, among others, for the following 
reasons : 

Plrst, the (iovernor of Porto Rico could be removed by the President, 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



67 



Second, Congress would ha\e power to annul all laws of Porto Rico. 

Third, our organic act is an act of Congress, and as such could be repealed, 
amended, or changed by Congress at any time. 

Wo earnestly believe, as citizens o£ the United states, that it will be very 
beneficial for both peoples, that of this continent and that of our island, that 
the governor be chosen by the residents of Porto Kim. 

I mr gratitude- -gratitude begets loyalty — would be great. Your action in so 
treating us with consideration and justice will show our people that the 
principles upheld by America's great Were not formulated in vain. 

A governor elected by the governed will ever he a man familiar with affairs 
and with the needs and problems of the people. 

Lincoln's immota^ phrase, a "government of the people, for the people, and 
by the people/ 1 was not for one single nation but for all the peoples of The 
world. 

Considering the Kiess resolution of the House, which corresponds to the 
Willis resolution of the Senate, we must say. first of all. that we do not see 
any necessity for such a resolution. We wish to urge the committee to 
favorably report II. R. 11010 of Mr. Davila. which, among other particulars, 
amends section 20 of the organic act Which provides for the appointment of 
an auditor, and assistant auditors, and such other necessary assistants and 
employees as may be prescribed by law, and which, besides/ makes clear the 
right Of the auditor to eompel witnesses to produce books, letters, documents, 
papers, records, and other articles deemed essential to a full understanding of 
the matter under Investigation! 

We insist pa the convenience of the proposed amendments of sections 3 ? 3x, 
33, and 3S of the act of March 2, 1!>17. entitled "An act to provide a civil 
government for Porto Hico, and for other purposes.*' as amended on June 7, 
1924, inasmuch as such measures are within the scope of the resolution of 
the Porto EUcan Legislature that created this delegation; 

Mr. Barcelo, president of the senate, and Mr. Tons Soto, speaker of The 
. house, have already addressed themselves to this committee: anil Mr. Guerro, 
speaker pro tempore of the house, has been designated by the delegation, to 
speak in detail as to the merits of the Kiess resolution and H. R. 11010, so 
we will not #o any further and will leave the matter to him. 

Thank you, gentlemen. 

The Chaiijman. The committee will now hear the statement of 
Mr. Giiemi-Moiulragon, of Porto Eico. 

STATEMENT OF MIGUEL GUERRA-MONDRAGON, VICE PRESIDENT 
OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES AND CHAIRMAN OF THE 
WAYS AND MEANS COMMITTEE, PORTO RICO 

Mr. Gri;iU{A-Moxi)KA<;oN. I shall start mv remarks bv takinir tip 
Senate bill 3847, introduced in the Senate by the distinguished 
chairman of this committee, entitled "A bill to amend and clarify 
existing laws relating to the powers and duties of the auditor for 
Porto Rico and the auditor for the Philippine Islands. 

The delegation of which I have the honor to be a member thinks, 
with due deference and respfcet to Senator Willis, that the bfll * n 
question, so far as Porte Rico is concerned, L s not necessary, because 
the powers and duties that our auditor has and perforins flOW are 
pretty nearly the same as provided for in this Senate bill (hat X 
nave just referred to. 

The bill is aimed undoubted] y, according to What I b^ vr heard 
yesterday before this honorable committee, at the Philippine CslandS. 
The whole question has arisen because of a certain claim by a mer- 
chant by the name of Ynchausti, in which case (he collector 01 
customs at Manila charged duties on a steamer, I think. ^ hc > 
appealed to a board in Manila and then the auditor wanted to 



68 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



reverse the decision of thai board and found himself helpless to so 
act; and this bill was drafted to give him all the aid and all the 
powers necessary to carry out his duly. 

In the first place, in Porto Rico the auditor does not pass upoii 
customhouse duties. We are. as Professor Snow says, in your 
Customs Union, Claims Arising out of customhouse affairs are 
appealed directly to Washington, to the Court of Customs Appeals, 
in the last Instance. 

Our auditor has nothing to do with our customhouse claims, just 
as the auditors of the States of the Union have nothing to do with 
customhouses! If an importer should bring through the port of 
New York a cargo that is dutiable, tiie auditor of the State of New 
York will have nothing to do with that: the Federal authorities 
will take charge of the matter. It is the same way in Porto Pico. 
So Ear as revenues from the customhouse are concerned, that auditor 
of ours, no matter whether this bill is approved or not. will have no 
power over such revenues. 

If you read sections 20 and 21 of the present organic act of Porto 
Rico, von will readily see that no additional powers are needed. 
In the Philippine Islands the decisions of the auditor are only final 
and conclusive upon executive departments. In Porto Rico they are 
final and conclusive as to every executive department and as to 
every private claim. I will say with pride that I do not know — -ana 
my law practice extends over almost the whole period of American 
occupancy — of a single appeal taken to the courts from the auditor's 
decision. 

To put it in a nutshell, what we need in Porto Rico is not bigger 
powers for the man. but a bigger man for the powers. And now we 
have a big man. We have been really honored by the appointment 
of Mr. Holcomb as auditor of Porto Rico. I think he conies from 
Massachusetts. His capacity is well known and his integrity is 
sterling. 

In the past we have never had any trouble with the auditors. 
Everybody abides by the auditors decision. There is an appeal 
to the governor, and that last pari of section 21 of our organic act 
says that parties can have recourse from the governor's decision 
to the ordinary courts of law. 

Another provision of the bill in question makes it compulsory to 
appeal to the Comptroller of the United States. That will be 
rather harsh on Porto Rican claims. The claims over there are not 
like the ones here, numerous; they are few and for small amounts 
usually. To oblige our men to come up here to attend to claims and 
engage the seryi.ee of a lawyer would entail too much expenditure 
and too much delay. The policy of the Congress of the United States 
has been otherwise; it has been just the opposite. Two years ago yon 
gentlemen passed a bill, which we thank you very much for, provid- 
ing that the Circuit Court of Appeals, which comprehends most of 
the Xew England States, should go down to Porto Rico and hold 
court t here . Why? For the accommodation of Porto Rican liti- 
gants. When the amount involved in the cases did not justify 
the expenditures necessary to carry an appeal to Boston, we had to 
give up those case-. In cases involving not more than $5,000, when 
they had to be taken to Boston for appeal, we had to spend as much 
money as the amount that was involved. That is why Congress in 



DITOi; K) VXD PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 69 



ii- wisdom passed thai law two years ago; providing for the couri to 
hold sessions in Porto Rico at such times as the court might deem lit. 

[f you compart' the language of our present, organic act with 
Senate lull 3847, you will hud that there is almost no difference at 
all in the powers of ami duties imposed on the auditor. 

Now, in regard to the expenditures — if I might be allowed to di- 
gress somewhat in answer to a question propounded to our governor 
by the distinguished Senator from Georgia, Mr. Harris — I will say 
that our insular expenditures, what you might eall our State 
(expenditures, are not too big, when you bear in mind that our 
government is centralized. Most of the -activities which in America 
arc carried out by the municipalities have been centralized in the 
insular government. For instance, take sanitation. The money 
-pen! for sanitation is not given out by the municipalities or counties. 
We have municipalities and we have the insular government. 
Sanitation is carried on by the insular government: no mu- 
nicipality pays a cent. The officials are appointed by the in- 
sular government and the money is given by the insular gov- 
ernment. Education in the States is carried on bv the munici- 
palities or by the counties, We do it by the central <rovern- 
ment. Public works also and all the activities of the departments of 
agriculture and labor are carried on by the insular government. 

So. when you compare our general* expenditures' with what you 
might call your State expenditures, ours might seem extravagant. 
The State of New York does not disburse the expenditure for educa- 
tion for the city of New York. It is the city of New York that pays 
all its expenses for education and also for sanitation and for its 
police system. 

Our police force is also under the insular government. In other 
words, everything is centralized. 

We have, in all directions, wonderful roads. In the old times, 
when the road system was not as perfect as it is to-day, municipal 
political subdivisions were needed. People had to travel on horse- 
back or in small buggies. To go from San Juan to Ponce meant 
as much travel as it does now to travel from San Juan to Santo 
Domingo. Everything was decentralized. But not so now. 

So, if you bear all these points in mind, you will see that we are 
spending almost nothing as compared With our progress: For in- 
stance, in .1900 we only had 18,000 bovs and girls in school. Now 
we have 243,000 boys and girls in school. 

Egotism is against progress. Porto Kico was near to your doors. 
It was quite a fertile Held for investment. Millions and millions 
went down there. We needed money to develop our beautiful island. 
But, again, asks a prominent writer, what is Porto llico for? What 
are colonies for? Are we to be interested in their welfare or simply 
m the dividends we can get out of them I In dividends; that is 
mercant ilism's a nswer. 

Governor Towner, and in that we follow him. is simply interested 
in the people of Porto Rico, first of all. We are not interested in 
dividends at all. We want the moneyed interests to make as much 
profit out of Porto Rico as possible,' but not at the expense of the 
progress and the happiness of the Porto Riean people. 

Our budget in Porto Rico is about $10,000,000. It ought to be 
£20,000,000, and it will be so some day. Every good-hearted Porto 



70 AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 

Rican will tell you so. W^e need that money to carry on the great 
advance we have made in education and other fields of endeavor. 
We still have over a hundred thousand hoys and girls out of school. 
Why? Because we laek the money. 

Our whole road system ought to be completed. Why is it not 
completed ' Because we do not have the money. 

So. also, about sanitation. One of the great problems of Porto 
Rico is that of sanitation. We have been the prey of that disease 
called the hookworm. We have made wonderful progress in the 
control of that disease, but we need money to do it. So. it is a 
question of going ahead and fulfilling our duty imposing the burden 
on those that ought to support it. In Porto Rico only 8 per ceni 
of the population pay taxes. Ninety-two per cent have not a single 
piece of property to pay taxes on. If property was more equally 
divided, as it is 'in this country, then the burden of taxation would 
fall less heavily on the shoulders of the taxpayers. 

So, we are. as you Say in American slang. " between the devil and 
the deep blue sea." We want to advance: we want to progress. We 
have come to the conclusion that the only way to attain our salvation 
is in education. Our future lies at the door of our schools. We 
are now -pending for education alone more than the total budget 
of the island in 1017. 

And we need more money. The man who went down there with 
a purpose, thinking that the whole Spanish- American War was 
fought out for his own petty interests, has come now to realize he 
was mistaken: that the han&of Uncle Sam is not a hand that strikes, 
but that it is a hand that helps. And it' we are to be Americans just 
as you are in this country, the only way to accomplish that is by 
bringing our people up to the level of every civilized, progressive 
American community. 

Who are going to pay for this? Those that now criticize; those 
that are now finding fault? 

We do not need investigating expeditions. We want you to say 
to us. " (to ahead," and have the manhood and the patriotism to help 
Porto Rico be a power for good in our national life. 

I think you have the same habit here in the States. More money 
sometimes is spent for investigating a thing than the investigation 
really is worth. But we are, open and ready for investigation. We 
will gladly welcome any investigation, because we know that the 
results will be very favorable to Porto Kico. 

Now, there is another matter on which I would like to speak, with 
your kind permission. In Porto llico the same condition has pre- 
vailed which you gentlemen met some time ago, when Congress 
enacted your Judicial Code, section 206, is a remedy for just such 
a condition. It reads: May I put in the whole section? 

The Chairman. Certainly. You may put in the whole section. 

Mr. (it KRRA-MoNDRAGON (reading) : 

No Interlocutory injunction suspending or restraining the enforcement, oper- 
ation, or execution of any Statute of a State by restraining the action of any 
officer of such State in the enforcement or execution of such statute, or in the 
enforcement or execution of an order made by an administrative board or 
commission acting under and pursuant to the statutes of such State, shall be 
issued or granted by any justice of the Supreme Court, or by any district 
court of the United states, or by any judge thereof, or by any circuit judge 
acting as district judge, upon the ground of the unconstitutionality of such 



A.TTDLTOB FOB PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 71 



statute, unless the application for the tome shall be presented to a justice of 
the Supremo Court of the United States, or to a circuit or district judge, and 
shall be heard and determined hy three Judges, Ol whom at least one shall he 
a justice 01 the Supremo Court or a circuit judge, and the other two may be 
either circuit or district judges, and unless a majority of said three judges 
shall concur in granting such application. Whenever such application as 

aforesaid is presented to a justice of the Supreme Court, or to a judge, he 

Shall immediately call to his assistance to hoar and determine the application 
two .other judges: Provided, however, That one of such three judges shall he 
a justice of the Supreme Court, or a circuit judge. Said application shall not 
be heard or determined before at least live days 1 notice of the hearing has been 
given to the governor and to the attorney genera] of the State, and to such 
other persons as may he defendants in the suit: Provided, That if of opinion 
that Irreparable loss or damage would result to the complainant unless a 
temporary restraining order is granted, any justice of the Supreme Court, or 
any circuit <>r district judge-, may grant such temporary restraining 1 order at any 
time before such hearing and determination of the application for an inter- 
locutory injunction, hut such temporary restraining order shall remain in 
force only until the hearing and determination of the application for an inter- 
locutory injunction upon notice as aforesaid. 

The hearing upon such application for an interlocutory injunction shall 
he given precedence and shall he in every way expediated and he assigned 
for a hearing at the earliest practicable day after the expiration of the 
notice hereinbefore provided for. An appeal may he taken direct to the 
Supreme Court of the United States from the order granting or denying, after 
notice and hearing, an interlocutory injunction in such case. It is further 
provided that if before the Qnal hearing of such application a suit shall have 
been brought in a court of the state having jurisdiction thereof under the 
laws of such State, to enforce such statute or order, accompanied hy a stay 
in such State court of proceedings under such statute or order pending the 
determination of such suit hy such State court, all proceedings in any court 
Of the United States to restrain the execution of such statute or order shall 
he stayed pending the final determination of such suit in the courts of the 
State. Such stay may he vacated Upon proof made after hearing, and notice 
Of 10 days served upon the attorney general of the State, that the suit in the 
State courts is not being prosecuted with diligence and good faith. The re- 
quirement respecting the presence of three judges shall also apply to the final 
hearing in such suit in the District Court: and a direct appeal to the 
Supremo Court may he taken from a final decree granting or denying a perma- 
nent injunction in such suit. 

Attorneys for our Government raised the question that as the 
Judicial Code is in full force in jPorto Ricd, in Tact, all of the laws 
of the United States not locally applicable are in full force ami 
effect in Porto Ricp, therefore our district judge could not entertain 
a petition for tin interlocutory injunction, under said section. The 
court decided against the Government and the ease was taken up 
to Boston, to the circuit court of appeals. That court decided that 
as it was physically impossible to carry out this provision down in 
Porto Rico, our Federal court was therefore fully empowered to 
grant injunctions by itself. 

Our legislature, in a resolution recently approved, asking for sev- 
eral amendments to our organic act, put 'in this amendment, which I 
introduced in the lower house. The principle is this : As the members 
of our Supreme Court are Federal appointees— our Supreme Court 
is made up of five judges, two of them being continental Americans 
and three Porto Rican Americans— as they are appointed by the 
President of the United States by and with the ad vice and consent 
of your Senate, and as they also, by law of Congress, act in the 
absence or in case of inability of Our Federal judge, the same 
principles of this section should apply but with this difference: 
That our Federal judge can not grant* an interlocutory injunction 



72 



AUDITOR FOR P()RT( HIi (J AND PI1IMPPINI-: INLANDS 



unless it he with the concurrence of two judges of the Supreme 
Court of Porto Rico. 

This did not mean any criticism of any of the judges of the Fed- 
eral Court of Porto Rico. We have had many distinguished men on 
that bench down there. But it is a very peculiar coincidence that 
almost every law imposing taxes in Porto Rico has been declared 
unconstitutional by our Federal court. A similar condition pre- 
vailed here in the States. I do not mean to say that it happened in 
the past because of any antagonism to the insular government. It 
merely happened. Take the workingincn's relief commission tax. 
We have a workingmen's compensation act that covers even agri- 
cultural occupations. It is a compulsory law: it is not optional. 
Just as soon as that law T was to apply injunctions were presented in 
the Federal court. I brought myself one of the cases on behalf of 
our Government up to Boston to the circuit court of appeals. But 
in the meantime 12,000 laborers working on the docks and steamers 
were without relief. YVe were successful. 

Why was it that Congress injected this principle into the laws 
of the United States? So that one judge would not have the right or 
power to personally issue these in junctions, but would be obliged to 
concur with two more judges, you having passed under the same state 
of affairs. We want you to extend the application of this sect ion 
to Porto Rico. This, of course, is not said with any spirit of criti- 
cism of either the present incumbent on our Federal court or his 
predecessors. Every tax law is systematically assailed. 

Our sales tax law as soon as we had enacted it and put it into 
effect was challenged in the courts, with the result that the Govern: 
ment's money is tied up there until that case is finished. So far our 
Government has won the case. 

We had similar suits in the insular courts. The tax on sugar 
was delayed for almost three years. They have paid it this year. 
Our income tax law, which is but a copy of your Federal income 
tax law of last year, was also attacked because of its retroactive 
effect. It has been sustained by our courts. 

We passed a law, following progressive leaders in America, for 
the purpose of developing the water power of our island. That is 
a great issue now in New York State, as you know. Porto Rico has 
no coal and no oil. Porto Rico is a great agricultural community. 

We want Porto Rico to be developed into an industrial community 
as fast as we can. In order to accomplish this end we need water 
power. 

Xo sooner was this law approved by the legislature providing for 
a tax than in comes a petition for an injunction. I respect a judge's 
decision. I always do. \ never criticize them. I merely appeal. 
Why should not three judges pass upon measures that mean the 
whole policy of the government, that mean the whole life of the 
conmmnnv^ To-day we have $5,000,000; gentlemen of the com- 
mittee, just the amount of our deficit, tied up in the courts. 

You gentlemen are big. financially speaking, as well as morally 
speaking. You can have $0,000,000. tied up without ever noticing 
such an amount 6f money. But in Porto Rico a single million 
dollars tied up means one-tenth of the whole budget of the island, 

I say this: Are we to run a government for the benefit of the 
few men that want to contesl every law that we pass? Or do we 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 73 



want a government for everybody, for all? The application of this 
section, providing for the concurrence of three judges, would give 
these men their day in court and at the same time would allow a 
more thorough study of these matters, because, as w T e say ifl Spanish, 
"Four eyes see better than two eyes." 

As to the auditor: The word c *cfaim >5 is used in the bill. Senator 
Willis's bill, and is also used, as you will notice, in our present organic 
act. The taxes will not go through that channel, of course: we have 
a system for that purpose very similar to the one prevailing in 
Washington. We have our board of review and equalization, 

According to our income tax law the taxpayer is his own assessor. 
He presents his return and gives his own figures under oath and 
then on those figures the treasurer imposes the (ax, but reserves the 
right under the law to have live years to investigate and examine that 
person's books. If within that period of five years it is found that 
in that taxpayer's return he has hidden something he is assessed for 
the additional amount. The taxpayer then has the right to appeal 
to the board of equalization and review and from that board to the 
courts. 

Now, Mr. Chairman and gentlemen of the committee, I don't want 
to take ii]) any more of your time and I thank vou very much for 
your courtesy in listening to me. But there are three points that I 
would like to bring out. 

The Chairman, I would likei to hear vou, but the committee is 
very desirous of closing these hearings as soon as possible. We do 
not want to foreclose anybody. If you have some other matters 
which you desire to present, we will let vou do so to-morrow morning 
at 10.30. 6 

Mr. GuERRA-MoNDRAGON, Thank you. 

The Chairman, The committee will stand adjourned until 10.30 
o'clock to-morrow morning. 

If we can. we would like to close these hearings this week. It is 
impossible for the committee to make a report on these bills while 
the hearings are going on. We are going to go right straight ahead 
with the hearings and get through. We will meet again at 10.30 to- 
morrow. Mr. Iglesias has wired me from Xew York saving that he 
desires to make a statement. We will hear from him uext. Judge 
Malmin, of Chicago, has been desirous of making a statement on the 
Virgin Islands to the committee. We will hear him as soon as we 
get the Porto Rican matter out of the way. 

(Thereupon, at 12 o'clock noon, the committee adjourned until 
Thursday, April 29, at 10.30 a. m.) 



\ 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



THURSDAY, APRIL 29, 1926 

United States Senate 
Committee on Territories and Insular Possessions, 

Wdshington^ D. C. 

The commit (oo met. pursuant to adjournment, at 10.30 a. m. in the 
Committee Room. Capitol, Senator Frank B. Willis presiding. 

Present: Senators Willis (chairman), Bayard, Butler, Harris, and 
Nye. 

The Chairman. The committee will he in order. 
I place in the record a cablegram which has just come to me, as 
follows. It is directed to the chairman of the committee: 

Porto Kican organizations affiliated American Federation of Labor and 5G,00C 
votes request Legislation against landlordism and absenteeism. Chief problems 
absorbing vitality of our island disastrous economic and social conditions. 
Urge investigation by Conixross before amendment our organic act. Legislative 
Commission now Washington represent only a part of our people. Elected in 
fraudulent election, corrupting American institutions of liberty and justice. 

RAFAEL AlONSO; Representative at Large. 

AYe are very desirous of concluding these meetings. Judge Malmin 
is here from Chicago and wishes to speak on the Virgin Islands. 
We want, if possible, to bring this hearing to a close. Mr. Iglesias, 
are you ready to proceed ! 

STATEMENT OF SENATOR SANTIAGO IGLESIAS 

The Chairman. Make your statement as brief as you can, because 
the committee has been in session for many days and wants to finish. 

Mr. Iglesias. Mr. Chairman, to establish the character of my 
representation to talk before this hearing I desire to say that I ana 
a senator representing the minority party in the Legislature of Porto 
Rico. The gentlemen who have been introduced by Governor 
Towner and have been talking already for two days have presented 
their views to the committee on one side, representing the majority 
party of the Legislature of Porto Rico. At the same time I want to 
say to this committee that my appearance at this hearing is in behalf 
of the greatest bulk of the workers of the country and the cities. So, 
what I have to tell to this committee will be as representing th e 
greatest majority of the people of Porto Rico. * 

Senator Bayard. May I interrupt you? You say you represent 
the minority? 

Mr. Iglesias. Yes. 

Senator Bayard. The view which you present is a different view 
from that presented by the other party? 

75 



76 AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLAXDS 



Mr. Iglesias. Absolutely. 

Senator Bayabd. But you don't disagree in regard to the general 
facts as stated by the proponents of the majority? 
Mr. Iglesias. Yes. 

Senator Bayard. You generally agree with the facts, but you 
have a different remedy? 

Mr. Iglesias. I have several views different to what they pro- 
posed here. But I have to say this, because I am in a way unfortu- 
nate. A part of the people want to be heard before the Congress 
of the United States, but they are only represented by the minority 
of the people and they have no time to talk. 

Xow, permit me to present for the record a copy of a memorial 
addressed to the Presiclent of the United States and Congress. This 
memorial was signed by 13,000 Porto Ricans, citizens of the United 
States, and was handed to the President at the White House. This 
memorial, without describing it in detail, practically supports the 
concurrent resolution No. 11, introduced by Senator Pittman, to 
investigate conditions in Porto Rico. I desire that this memorial, 
with the resolution, can be inserted in the record. 

The Chairman. Without objection, it will be entered in the 
record at this point. 

(The papers referred to are as follows:) 

(Copy of a memorial handed to the President and Congress of United Staie< 
authorized by the signatures of 13,000 Porto Ricans, citizens of the United 
States, i 

Kbbb Federation of Woukinumen, of Porto Rico — Affiliated with the 
American Federation of Labor. Founded July 14, 1899. 

San Juan, I*. K. September .](). 
The President of the United States of America, 
The Congress of the United States of America, 

Washington, D. C. 

Sirs: We, the undersigned, citizens Qf the United Stales of America, born 
and residents in the island of Porto Rico, respectfully appear and state to your 
consideration — as you are the genuine represents Lves of the people of the 
United States— the evils that suffer the whole community of Porto Rico, and 
specially its countrymen and labor classes, with the purposes to obtain ade- 
quate remedies from the only authorities that can remedy them all. 

Porto Rico is suffering such a social and economic condition that the re- 
sults are misery and poverty. Of this condition the Government of the United 
States is charged by those who are interested to break the good relations 
between both countries despite the fact that they are receiving the greatest 
benefits of such relations. 

The resources of our land are absorbed and controlled in such a form that 
the Porto Rican people are practically organized and constituted just like a 
factory worked by industrial slaves. 

Although Porto Rico produces each year wealth to the amount of many 
millions of dollars, 70 per cent of each year's earnings go to the outside in 
the form of dividends and interests to the stockholders and bond-holders who 
reside in the great European and American cities. For that reason our 
money in circulation hardly reaches to $4,000,000, making impossible the cre- 
ation of new industries and means of life, affecting, therefore, the structure of 
our government. 

The total public debt of the insular amounts to $20,000,000 and of the 
municipal amounts to .$15,000,000, which totally amounts to $41,000,000. At 
5 per cent annual interest the country will have to pay in 10 years about 
$60,000,000. Bond issues at present extend to the year 1954. We are, there- 
fore, in a complete bankruptcy. 



AUDITOR POB PORTO MOO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



•77 



An Invisible power represented by the great accumulation of capital resident 
and oon resident intervene and determine by their contributive action as to 
wiiiii extent our insular budget can reach, as well as the proportion of public 
services that can be attended. 

In challenging before the courts all the contributive means of the govern- 
ment of l»orto Uieo. it. by those powerful Interests disrupts the public treasury 
to the extent of a deficit amounting to about So. 000,000. and to cover it. 
tbe public budget has been reduced to the detriment of the public services, 
instruction, and civilization of the people of Porto Rico. 

Owing to the lack of money the public health does not receive the neces- 
sary attention. Anemia, tuberculosis, malaria, and other diseases kill an- 
nually thousands of children ami make of our population a graveyard of 
living beings. 

Considering a population of 1,400,000 inhabitants, the average of illiterates 
is still high. The nation which discovered Porto Rico left us an average of 
To per cent illiterates, which has been reduced to an average of till per cenr, 
40 per cent of the population of Porto Rico are horn and die illiterate. At 
this time the great interests of horhonic typo are trying to hinder the course 
of culture and civilization commended by the law of progress and the doino- 
cratic institutions that the people of the Tinted states have established in 
Porto Rico, reducing, moreover, our school budget $400,000; thus reducing 
the number of elementary schools by 200 and depriving 50, 000 children of 
an education and a great deal of the school instruction that gives special 
knowledge to prepare them for life's struggle. 

All the valuable services concerning the public welfare have been cut off 

to please all tin >so who refuse to pay the taxes, and they also have restrained 
our public treasury, challenging before the courts the tax laws, reducing 
therefore, the activities of the government just at the same level of misery 
of the people of Porto Rico. 

Although our land has means and resources to promote all classes of in- 
dustrial enterprises, three-fifths of the laboring population of Porto Rico 
lack permanent employment. Their wages are very low. as a result of which 
their food and Shelter do not give them the adequate means to develop a 
type of sound and vigorous citizen. Although there exists a principle that 
the law protects all as equal, it is true that in the Pacific industrial Struggles 
that have been conducted in Porto Etico to better the conditions of. work and 
life of the wage earners, horrible tragedies have been caused by the exploiters 
of the laborers. Tbe prisons opened their doors to lock in hundreds of work 
ingmen; judges have imposed the maximum of the sentence upon laborers" 
peoples and towns have been frightened by the public forces shooting their 
rifles, and some agricultural workers, heads of families, have been murders i 
while tbe great industrial and agricultural concerns are developing enormouxlv 
rich. * 

We have no safety laws on the holds, factories, and shops. Great deal of 
the legislation to protect labor is ignored or is amended so as to make them 
impracticable. 1 

The health department doesn't carry its assis anee and its knowledge over 
the sick peasant population, which lives unprotected upon the peaks of our 

mountains. 

While the working people earn meager wageSi they have to hear now a neu- 
burden in the sale tax law. which will be ;<aid by them, increasing their cost 
of living over 25 per cent. Already living expenses in Porto Rico are nearlv 
20 per cent higher than in the Tinted States. Still industrial laborers recei™ 
an average of $1.50 per day. and held laborers receive an average Of 60 cent f 

These meager wages will be the principal means of income that the Dublin 
treasury of Porto Rico will have, as the laborers -men, women, and cnildren - 
do not even own homes nor receive sufficient salaries by which they can dj 
property tax or income tax. and because the rich people refuse to pay the 52? 
essary amount for supporting the government administration, it falls ther^" 

lore, on the shoulders of the laborers Ot Portb Kieo. who number moo.- ' * 
mutely 800,000. »PProxi- 

Corigress of the United states has granted to Porto Rico an insular ,K^n 
My elected by the people and a bill of rights similar to that enjoyed bv t 
people of the United States of America; nevertheless, few constitutional ri"ht 
are enjoyed by the people of our island, as if we were second-class citizens 



78* AUDITOR FOR PORTO KllO AND PHII-IPPINK ISLANDS 



And about the rights of suffrage, the people of Porto Rico have had thg 
bitter experience on the last election thai has created o doubt in their minds— 
if it is possible to use it freely to elect their genuine representatives to make 
the necessary changes in behalf of the welfare of the whole people of Porto 
Rico. 

Great outrages, abuses, crimes, ami Illegalities mark the last election held 
in Porto Rico on November 4. 1924. The right of suffrage was practically 
denied to the people. The polls were Controlled by only one political party. 
The popular sovereignty could not exercise its rights and franchise, and 
there emerged from the ballot boxes a new legislature which is not the true 
expression of the popular will. 

The law to challenge elections before the courts of Porto Rico has been re- 
pealed, bv means of which the people have been deprived of any legal remedy. 

In such conditions, therefore, we have an organized despotism; a tyranny. 
It constitutes a monopoly in its essence and form because thai which they 
could not obtain as a true expression of the ballot boxes they have obta ned by 
Using the legislation to deprive the rights of the minority from having a 
lair and just representation in the commissions of the government of Port.. 

V When pnly one political party controls and speaks for the whole community, 
it is Impossible that democracy could survive. 

With the purpose to maintain and impose the domain over the whole people" 
Of Porto Rico that political oligarchy is trying now to obtain from Congress of 
the United states the right to elect the governor of the island— now appointed 
by the President Of the Tinted States— to obtain power to impose tariff duties 
upon tli" importations: to change the Federal court in order to Influence or 
control its decisions: that is, to get absolute domain upon institutions, life, 
and property of the Porto Rican community. 

Such idea became a new form to sever Porto Rico from the national life, 
and occasionally creates the theory to divide the citizenship in two classes- 
citizens enjoying all the constitutional rights, ahd colonial citizens without due 
constitutional rights. 

The people of Porto Rico do not like to he considered either a colony or a 
possession. We wish to be considered a part of the United States with the 
full rights and duties within the national life. 

P( rtO Rico has suffered four centuries of colonial system which has bur- 
dened us with bitter experience and Bufferings. 

All colonial systems are hateful to the human conscience, and the people Of 
the Pnited States of America that have written such bright pages in its history 
to free itself from the colonial system, and has given its valuable support to 
many foreign countries to conquer and enjoy their natural rights and liberties, 
Could not Support ik.w such a colonial system in Porto Rico uinjer the American 
flag. 

Porto Rico should be under the protection and administration of the Depart- 
ment of the [UteHOr of the United States, but Porto Rico continues as a military 
possession under the War Department. 

We furthermore declare that the economic social and political conditions of 
the people of Porto Rico are intolerable and they urge a fundamental change in 
behalf of the welfare of the inhabitants of the island of Porto Rico. 

We appeal to the high spirit of justice and love of mankind of which so 
many proofs have been given the people of the United states of America, and 
respectfully request the President and Congress of the United States: 

To appoint a joint Commission to come to Porto Rico, to hold public hearings, 
look over and ascertain facts and conditions in all parts of the island, and 
after a careful examination and study of all the facts, submit to the President 
and Congress of the rnited states whatever recommendations it thinks conven- 
ient to insure the economic, social, and political welfare of the people of Porto 
Rico. 

We speak in the name of thousands who work — those who make and use 
tools — those who furnish the human power necessary for commerce and in- 
dustry. Wo speak us part of the nation and of those things of which we have 
s] fecial knowledge. 

Our welfare and interest are inseparably bound up with the well-being of the 
nation. We are an integral part of the American people, and we are organized 
to work out the welfare of all. 



AUDITOtt FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 79 



With cur l>e<t good faith and hoping to obtain justice from you. we sign this 
resolution in S:m Juan, Porto Rico, Tinted States of America, at the 7th clay of 
September, 1D2.">. 

Respectfully yours. 

Executive Council or Tin-: Free Federation 

or Work i no men of Porto Rico. 
Emilio FariSA, Preside)} te pro ton pore. 
Rafael Alonzo Torres, Seereiary -Treasurer. 
F. Paz Gkanfjla, 
Sandalto H. Alonso. 
Lino Padron Rivera, 
Sixto A. Pacheco, 
F. Jose Febreb y Ferrer, 

Vice Presidents* 



[Senate- Concurront Resolution 11, Sixty-ninth Congress, first session] 

Whereas it lias been reported to the President and the Congress of the 
United States, through memorials signed by many citizens and organizations 
of PortO Rieo, testifying to facts as to the intolerable conditions which exist 
among the people of the island of Porto Rico, and conditions which reflect dis- 
credit upon the Government of the United States; and 

Whereas it has been urged upon the past and present administration, time 
and again, that the Congress of the United States shall make a full and com- 
plete investigation into the economic, industrial, and social conditions existing 
in the island: Therefore he it 

Resolved by the Semite (the iifnt.se of Representatives concurring), That 
a joint, committee of the Senate and the House he directed to investigate the 
political, industrial, economic, and social conditions in Porto Rico, and report 
their findings and recommendations to the Senate and House as speedily as 
practicable; and he it further 

Resolved, That said joint committee of the Senate and the House be com- 
posed of three Members of the Senate and three Members of the House, 
who shall have authority to hold hearings and to take testimony in the city 
of Washington, and in San Juan. Ponce. Mayaguez. and elsewhere in Porto 
Rico, and to such end such committee is authorized and empowered to sit 
during the sessions of Congress, or when Congress is in recess or vacation, 
and to issue supoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production 
of evidence. 

Mr. Iolesias. Without disagreeing, Mr. Chairman and Senators, 
with many of the views expressed by the delegation representing the 
majority party in Porto Rico, especially in regard to the election of 
the governor in 1932 or 1940 or when Congress will see lit for it, 
I have some other points of view to present to this committee, espe- 
cially in regard to the conditions that rail for a thorough investi- 
gation of the conditions of the island. 

I have no intention to oppose political gains, or the spirit of 
democracy, or progressive reforms in that island. Thai sounds 
very good for the island of Porto Kieo. This investigation that we 
are asking, Mr. Chairman and Senators; does not reflect humiliation 
of any sort or any reflection against the men in our administration. 
We arc asking for an investigation for the first time after "27 years. 

We come to the Congress of the United States to show them 
what was the result of the last 27 years of progressive, 
wonderful progress in the island of Porto Rico; but, at the same 
time, what was the result, and where was such progress, such a 
wonderful wealth, obtained? 1 want to say that we have at least 
half a million people practically starving to deatHi We have a half 
million people naked and barefoot, practically without homes. We 
have a situation whereby there is a single job for every five people. 



80 



AUDITOH FOR PORTO HICD AND PHlLTPMNE ISLANDS 



Senator Bayard. May I interrupt you there? You mean by that 
that those people are practically homeless on account <>1' the seasonal 
occupation? Do you mean that during the period of seasonal occu- 
pation they are afforded places to live in by their employers and 
when the seasonal occupation is over they are without homes? \< 
that what you mean. Senator? 

Mr. IoLi:sr \s. Yes. sir. The States do not grant any kind of in- 
vestigation, because they are sovereign and at the same time they 
have plenty of representation in the Congress, in the Senate and 
House. Porto Rico has only a Resident Commissioner whose voice 
in Congress, because it has been agreed to grant it. is heard. The 
minority party has not even a right to speak before Congress. 

Before going further, in order to inform you that I have some 
authority to talk about Porto Rico, I will tell you that I have been 
for 29 years working hard for what I thought was the welfare 
of the working people and especially of the people in general. 
I was prompted to telegraph you asking and requesting to be heard 
before this committee because I received this telegram: 

New York city, April JO, t926. 

Senator Santiago. Iglesias, 

Care American Federation of Labor, 

Washington, D. C: 

Please wire whether you accept appointment made. by me in your lnvm- 
which was sent von some time ago from 'Porto Ricp as member Legislative 
commission ask Congress amendments our organic act according last legis- 
lative resolution. Greetings. 

I '» ARCELO. 

To which telegram I answered : 

Senator Antonio Bakcelo, 

Hotel Ansonin, Xctr York City: 
Sorrv have not received any not I fica t ion of my appointment as member of 
the legislative commission, but I will cooperate in anything that may bring 
about better conditions to the welfare of Porto Rico. Greetings. 

Santiago Iglesias. 

I ask that this be put in the record. 

The Chairman. It will be in the record. You read it. It will 
go in the record. # . 

Mr. Iglesias. Now, reviewing briefly the conflict and tragedy that 
causes ever-increasing bitterness industrially, economically, and po- 
litically in Porto Rico, let me say that the economic and political 
conflicts in Porto Rico are neither temporary nor sporadic. There 
will be a never-ending, bitter struggle for life and justice unless the 
Congress of the United States wants to go to the bottom of the 
problems and do its duty. The ills of Porto Rico are deep-rooted 
and go down to the fundamental system of its economic structure, 
government and citizenship. In fact, it is neither a question of 
appointing any particular individual to the governorship of the 
island nor of getting the domination of some particular political 
boss or party. Even the abuses and crimes committeed in the 
last election to rob the workers of votes do not constitute the most 
important question involved in the social tragedy that is going on 
in Porto Rico. 

The big issue of that island may be clearly stated as follows : 
Shall Porto Rico be developed in the interest of the natives and 
resident American producers of the island, paying a fair return on 



ATDiroK I'OK POUTO WHO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 81 



invested capital, or shall the resources of Porto Rico be exhausted 
for the benefit of the profiteers, bankers, and bond clippers of the 
rnited States, Spain, and other European countries to an extent 
that means for Porto Ricans in general poverty, hunger, and 
degradation i 

The words in which the great leader, Samuel Gompers, described 
the island of Porto Rico after his last trip there were as follows: 

That such poverty and misery, with their essential Immorality and degrada- 
tion, ran exist under the authority of the Republic of the United states Is a 
stigma upon the recorg, the history, and the honor of our country, it is 
appalling to think that sudlj conditions prevail in Tort*. Rico, 

Almost the same conditions prevail to-day in the island. 

The infant morijality 6i Porto Rico, by reason of lack of milk and 
excessive poverty, is about three times more than that prevailing in 
the l T nited Stales. Thousands of children are (lying of actual 
hunger. 

The sit tint ion we have tolerated in Porto Rico — I am talking as 
a citizen of the United States — whether igrifciranfly or carelessly, is 
a crime. If we profess to have any conception oHhe sacredness of 
human life, any regard for human rights, how can we. stand re- 
sponsible for what is going on in Porto Rico? 

The President of the United States knows the facts through a 
memorial that was handed to him recently, supported by over 13.000 
citizens of that island. The subject of the memorial involved the 
principles of elementary justice and humanity for the people of 
Porto Rico, according to American ideals. A copy of this memorial 
is attached to this statement. 

The people of Porto Rico are suffering the colonial consequences 
of a chaotic and most terrible economic organization of absentee 
landlordsllip and financial powers. The main fact? are as follows: 

(1) The rapid development of illegal monopoly of lands and 
wealth in the island, by powerful resident and absentee individuals 
and corporal ions. 

(2) The violation of the organic act and the laws of the island. 

(3) The refusal by powerful corporations and individuals, resi- 
dent and absentee, to pay taxes proportionate to the increase in 
wealth produced to support necessary public services. 

(4) The steady emigration of 60 per cent of the profits produced 
in the island, representing an appalling amount of underpaid labor 
and initiative that goes to enrich other communities at the expense 
of the misery and wretchedness of the people of Porto Rico. 

(5) The impossibility of developing industries in the island while 
the interest on money is 12 to 24 per cent. 

Considering a population of 1,400,000 inhabitants, the average of 
illiterates is still high. The nation which discovered Porto Rico left 
an average of 80 per cent illiterates, which has been reduced to an 
average of GO per cent. Many thousands of the population of Porto 
Rico, nevertheless, aire born and die illiterate. 

Living expenses in Porto Rico are nearly 20 per cent higher than 
in the United States. Yet industrial laborers receive an average of 
$1.50 per day and field laborers, unskilled, receive an average of (50 
cents. Children and women work for 30 cents a day. Although the 
island has means and resources to promote industrial enterprises 



82 AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



three-fifths of the laboring population of Porto Rico lack permanent 
employment. . _ ^ 

By checking reports from doctors and the civil registry, Dr. I.e. 
Townsend, of the United States Public Health Service said: 

V careful scrutinv of reports from various sources, together with personal 
field observation, places the! number of clinical tuberculosis cases on the 
island at about 14,0U0\ 8,000 of whom have consulted the doctor or have been 
under treatment, while the remaining 0,000 are going their ways with their 
conditions in all probability unknown to themselves and the medical pro- 
fession. - „ %i _ 

The factors causing tuberculosis in Porto Rico are obvious: 

v survey of ever 1,000 houses among the laboring classes hi seven oi the 
larger cities of the island reveals an average of six people living in a two- 
room house with one window to each room averaging 95 square feet and all 
doors and windows closed at night to keep out the life-giving substance, 
which is so dreaded— the night air. Result, tuberculosis. 

The average diet among the people most heavily infected with tuberculosis 
i< the kind of diet you would select if it were desired to take steps to propa- 
gate the disease. For breakfast, black coffee: dinner, rice and beans, always: 
sometimes bananas, plantains, and bread. Supper (if any) the same. 

That is the diet of hundreds of thousands of citizens of the 
United States in the island of Porto Rico. 

General Frank Mclntvre. Chief of the Bureau of Insular Allans, 
reported to the Secretary of War in 1024 in a very intelligent 
report — • 

That the people of Porto Rico were i>oor beyond anything which has come 
within the experience of the United States and bordered at all times on a 
condition of famine. 

Even education is a bad thing for the Porto Kicans. 
A great deal has been done in the way of education — 
Said General Mclntyre — 

•but it is doubtful if education under the conditions can do much more than 
create dissatisfaction with a condition which becomes the more intolerable 
as it is the more intelligently viewed. 

In Porto Rico for the first time, the United States is brought face to face 
with the conditions arising from a population too dense to be supported by the 
territory inhabited. In other words the only solution for- the difficulty existing 
in Porto Rico at all within reasonable i>ossibility of attainment is to transfer, 
in some way a great part of the population to some other district. 

And then General Mclntyre says : 

The evidence on every hand of prosperity and progress in Porto Rico and the 
prosperity and progress shown by the commercial statistics and by the in- 
creased revenues by the government may easily mislead otfe into the heller 
that progress in all directions has been satisfactory. This is not the case. 
It has been impossible to distribute this progress in Porto Rico in such a 
wav that the verv larfce extremely poor element of Porto Rico could participate 
fairly in it. These people, because of their relative helplessness, must for 
some years receive special governmental consideration. 

In a report just a few days ago the Department of Commerce 
expressed frankly the same conception arid the same views that 
General Mclntyre lias expressed. If you pay attention also to the 
reports taken in Washington, not ^oing there, from the Department 
of Labor and the Child Labor Bureau, you will find what the con- 
ditions of Porto Rico, of the masses of the people, not of the lew. 
of course, the masses of the people are. 



Arnrmn von porto rico and Philippine islands 



83 



Official statistics also show that in the last 25 years, imports from 
the United States into Porto Rico amounted to 'over '$1,125,481,1 74, 
nearly a billion and a quarter, and that the exports from Porto Rico 
into the United States amounted to $1,350,666,929. Two-thirds of 
the profits accruing from agriculture, commerce, and industry have 
been sent out of Porto Rico as rents, dividends, commissions, and 
interest on borrowed money, which were distributed and reinvested 
outside of the island. 

That is one of the colonial situations. In Porto Rico, with only 
one-third of the wealth created by (he people of Porto Rico remain- 
ing there, the progress that is wonderful has gone to a few, but the 
great masses remain just the same as they were 80 years ago. This 
colonial condition has created a most distressing state of affairs for 
more than half of the Porto Rico population and has caused an 
enormous oversupply of labor which has resulted in thousands of 
women, children, and men slowly starving to death. I really think 
that Congress has something to investigate in Porto Rico to cause 
a change of conditions, a reconstruction of the economic body of 
Porto Rico. 

At this point I want to impress on your minds, Mr. Chairman and 
Senators, that the same condition, that new economical and indus- 
trial trouble in Porto, Rico, is just the same as the trouble 70 years 
ago was in the colonies of England, such as Newfoundland and, Aus- 
tralia, for instance. If you study how those people ever became 
happy with economical independence, you will see. I think the 
United States is a Nation with so great institutions that it can more 
easily do much more for this colony, that is the only one that comes 
from the Spanish regime and the Spanish history of 400 years. The 
result of it will be reflected on all sides in Central America and 
Mexico. They will see what the institutions of the United States 
can do for the little, beautiful, wonderful island, as it is. 

The joint resolution approved by Congress March 1, 1900, with 
regard to the buying, selling, and holding of real estate in Porto 
Rico says : 

No corporation shall be authorized to conduct the business <>r buying and 

setting real estate or to be permitted to hold any real estate except such as 
may be reasonably necessary to enable it to carry out the object for which 
it was created, and every corporation hereafter organized to engage in agri- 
culture shall by its charter he restricted to the ownership and control of not 
to exceed 500 acres of laud, and this provision shall he held to prevent any 
member of the corporation engaged in agriculture from being in any wise 
interested in any of the corporations engaged in agriculture. 

That is a law of Congress, intended to protect the island of Porto 
Rico, intended to protect the people against monopolization an J 
control of the island. 

This law^ of Congress has been grossly violated in order tip enslave 
the people. We have a monopolistic holding of land in the island 
of Porto Rico. Holdings of land by corporations, associations, and 
partnerships are controlling from 10,000 up to 125,000 acres of the 
best land of Porto Rico; no matter if the law does not permit the 
holding of more than 500 acres. The result is that the great part 
of the east, the- south, and the north of the island is controlled by a 
few absentee landowners and consequently thousands of working 
men and women in these sections of the island are practically slaves 
95508 — 26 — ft 2 3 



84 AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 

of these corporations. Furthermore, these corporations, alter grab- 
bing all this land, are destroying the villages and towns and cities 
They are taking the commerce and their industry. The people have 
not a piece of land where to live. They have to Live in the premises 
of the centrales, where they lose even their freedom as citizens, 

Bv virtue of our coastwise trade the people of Porto Rico are 
obliged to consume the domestic articles of the United States, whose 
cost°is increased bv tariffs; and the superior status of the standards 
of livin^ conditions and wages of the United States control, oi 
course the price of the merchandise sent to Porto Rico. While the 
working people earn meager wages they have to hear now a new 
burden in the sale tax law. increasing their cost of living over 20 

^The^orporations have challenged hefore the courts the contribu- 
fcive means of the Government of Porto Rico, causing the disrup- 
tion of the public treasury to the extent of forcing a deficit amount - 
in" to about $5,000,000 in the current expenses. 

It is also estimated that a dozen powerful corporations and in- 
dividuals altogether have managed not to pay the Government of 
Porto Rico in the few last years for taxes amounting to over $10,- 

000 000 that never has been collected and never will be paid. 
Something ought to be done to investigate these coin lit ions in 

Porto Rico, not to reflect on anybody or any administration, but 
maybe because the tremendous powers there are against even the 
Hws that are approved by the Congress of the United States and 
our organic act. The laws of the Legislature of Porto Rico there 
are absolutely disregarded. 

Several remedies for a change ot the situation have been sug- 
gested as follows : . . . 

Congress and the President have been requested to appoint a 
inint commission to hold public hearings in Porto Rico, look over 
rul ascertain facts and conditions in all parts of the island, and 
fnV a careful examination and study of all the facts, submit to 
fhT President and Congress of the United States constructive recom- 
mendations to insure the economic, industrial, social, and political 
11 a1 fare of the people. This commission should be one that will 
not be satisfied with official and private courtesies, and impressed 
! rJp1v with the scenic and natural beauties of the island, but a 
Emission that will go to the heart of things and learn of the 
Annie's sufferings and wrongs, so that it may bring back to the 
}\>vernni<nt of the United States information that will aid in 
Winnin" out the distress and misery prevailing upon the island 
the calamity that threatens not only the well-being but the 
1111 v lives of the people of Porto Rico may be averted. 

lb this time, Mr. Chairman and Senators, the taxpayers ot the 

1 • + ^nroorations are already raised up in arms against what they 
bl ~ S an extravagant budget for the island. If 1,400,000 people 
^il ftU 300,000 for proper service from the Insular Government di- 

rtW could not do much for their country, I agree with Mr. Guerra 
V ?»t we want a budget of $20,000,000. Sure we want it. 

r-m Porto Rico pay the expenses of such a budget? Sure it can, 
^vided that these corporations, provided that these great enter- 
pl es pay in J ust t,le SJime wa Y with the saroc willingness as the 



AI M I OK FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



85 



poor peasants and the poor industrial people are paying in the island. 

But everything had better be seen by Congress. Congress has 
never done any investigating there. We do not ask an investigation 
to sec what ( iovernor Towner has done or what his predecessors have 
done. No. What we want is to create factories and work for the 
people. 

Mr. Chairman and Senators, 1 am not thinking liberally of the 
conditions of the people, nor in a spiritual way. I do not want to 
he here as a hypocrite telling that the contentment will come only 
with the election of a governor, that the solution is in that alone. If 
we will s ay that alone, we are just misleading the Congress of the 
I nited States. It is not only a political question. It is not. because 
the majority party have gone for the next election. No. 

The people of Porto Rico at this time are protesting against the 
misery and the horrible conditions that they do not know how to 
remedy of these masses of people. They are looking to the United 
States as a protector, as the savior. Are you <roing to say that you 
have nothing to do with this? 

When we complain of conditions over there they saw "America 
has the responsibility.' 3 Instead of tryifcg to adjust everything there 
m their action.- and have their mistakes and errors corrected, they 
wdl say, "Oh, the Americans are responsible. Let us go to Con- 
gress and see Congress." When they persecute even the most poor 
worker they will say, It is Congress; it is the Tnited States: 'it is 
the American Hag that is responsible/ , 

No matter if we have under our jurisdiction the people of Porto 
Rico, no matter if we have a central government and rights in the 
legislature; we have not the means to make happy the workers and 
the masses of the people pi Porto Rico. 

Wc want to see Cdngress lining l() p or t 0 Rico and seeking from 
I once m the south to San Juan in the north and from Mayaguez in 
the west to Humacas in the east. They will know everything. 
JLhey will know all that is going on to help; to aid the island of 
Porto Rico. 

Has Congress a means to save the conditions through the proposi- 
tion of OYneral Mclntyre, of taking out from the island 300,000 
families, ll possible, to other districts? The proposition lias been 
going on as a remedy; but now, Mr. Chairman and Senators, is this 
a remedy, to say to the natives of Porto Rico, "Why don't you leave 
your country? " when they know that thousands and thousands of 
acres of land are producing richness and wealth in their country? 
lhey wotdd rather live in their homes in their humble way. That 
is not to me a remedy. Maybe it is a remedy for industry to open 
its doors and nobody has the right to stop anybody from going any- 
where to work. Well, in that way, all right. Hut as a remedy 
from Congress, trom the United States, from the representation of 
tlie JuHieral Government, to their poor island it is not a remedv at all. 

\\ hat I want to impress upon you is about something that has 
been said, Mr. C hairman, about the three questions of finance, Labor 
and elections. 

In the financial situation there are several points, several questions 
that have been raised in Porto Rico. You will have to study those 
because I am confident that you will think us a poor people. Thev 
ask something as an agricultural people. 



86 AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 

The majority parties come here to express their views. ( rovernox 
Towner is the authority of Porto Rico. Wry good in general 
Everybody knows Mr. Towner has been good. But I do not agree 
with him myself in the point of elections. 

The elections, it seems to me, have been sinister to the people of 
Porto Rico, not because of what we have lost, but because of the 
principle; because of the education, because of the belief, the belief of 
the people of Porto Rico in the American flag and in the American 
institutions to take care of their rights. They think that it is the 
United States' responsibility for everything that is being done m 

P °Xo°w Another remedy should be that the provisions of the joint 
resolution approved by Congress on May 1, 1900, should be enforced. 
You should grant the legislature of Porto Rico authority to impose 
additional and progressive taxes on all property owned and con- 
trolled in excess of 500 acres by corporations, partnerships, Associa- 
tions and individuals, and to tax the real properly and income of the 
nonresidents of the island in excess of the property and income of 

C ^A^fcher^remedy would be for the Congress of the United States 
to loan tq the government of Porto Rico sr,0 ? 000,000 through ade- 
quate legislation approved by Congress, for the following purposes: 
T\ F or promoting to the fullest extent American life and support- 
mg'the agricultural and industrial pursuits; (b) to foster the physi- 
cal and permanent industrial development of the resources and the 
soil of the island, and the financial credit ; (c) to transfer the con- 
trol to the people of Porto Rico of all lands and franchises illegally 
h 1 1 bv absentee or resident landlordship and corporations; (d) 
for the consolidation and cancellation at any time of the public 

^ 6 T^p° Congress of ' the United States run do much for us. You 
t done it for all the countries of Europe. You are doing; it 
C So I believe that the same thing can be done for Porto Rico. 

v' V ' ; nouni of explanation can persuade the people of Spanish 

a rica that our professions and idealism have any value if we 
m'iii indifferent or blind to the sufferings of Porto llico. 

venKl 7)ea l to you in the interest of humanity to help us to investi- 
! wrongs of the people of Porto Rico. 

£*JS Cuairmax. Have you completed your statement? 
\\r Igi BSIAS. Ves. I have finished. 

; ' CuMiiMAX. Now, Mr. Guerra-Mpndragon could not quite 
, -/'jn^ statement vesterdav. We will hear from him now. and 
,1IH if there is anv time left, we will hear from Judge Mal- 

^of/dHcago. 

STATEMENT OF MIGUEL GUERRA-MONDRAGON— Resumed 

M . (JtTEjEfflA-MONDRAGON. Mr. Chairman and gentlemen of the 
littee, I heard with a great deal of attention the remarks just 
con in bv Senator Iglesias on behalf of the minority party of the 
made should be borne in mind that when our distinguished 

islaiK- i f or t h e American Federation of Labor he does it, 



];in , C n speaks for the American Federation of Labor he 
~ ei fheless, for an American Federation of Labor which, contrary 



it, 

"fhelcps, tor an .viaoncan Federation 01 uuuur wmun, w»iwdrjf 
n cV ^' ( , ( , )0( ]s prevailing in this continent, is in full, deep politics tn 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO BIOO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



87 



Porto Rico. It is not so in the United States. In our island thev 
have a party of their own. They are the minority party. 

A line must be drawn, therefore, between politics and facts when 
you come to consider our problems as presented by Senator Iglesias. 
Humanity is not all he has in his mind. That might sound very 
noble and lofty; but the politics of his own party— the Socialist 
Party — of which he is the recognized leader — enter a good deal, as 
I will soon show, into his campaigns and statements. To bring a 
purely local political issue to the Senate of the United States is, 
to say the least, an improper thing to do. 

Senator Iglesias starts by saying that conditions in Porto Rico 
have not been investigated during the last "27 years. He is horrified 
at the idea that such an investigation has not yet taken place in so 
long a time. Hut why— we say — such an investigation? What has 
happened? What is happening? 

Nothing but good things are happening in Porto Rico. In all 
this long period of time, why, did not the distinguished Socialist 
senator ask for this same investigation 10 years ago, or 15 years ago y 
or 20 years ago. when the children at school only reached the figure 
of 18.000, as compared with t lie 250,000 children we now have at- 
tending our free public schools? Why did lie not ask for an investi- 
gation when our road system only numbered 280 kilometers as com- 
pared with the 1,700 kilometers of fine, first class roads we now have? 
W by did he not ask for an investigation of conditions when infant 
mortality was :>() f)er thousand as compared with the 18 per thousand 
rate we now have? Why did he not ask for an investigation 15 years 
ago when we did not have a workingmeirs compensation act. as the 
one we have now, covering every activity whether agricultural or 
industrial ? Why did he not ask for an investigation 10 years ago 
when we did not have the " minimum- wage " laws we now have in 
lull force and eileet in Porto Rico? Why? Because then the So- 
cialist Party was not in existence and because now a political issue 
of this nature would be a very handv and convenient material to 
serve party ends. 

It is true, of course, that conditions generally ought to be improved 
in Porto Rico. That is what we are doing every day. The same 
thing holds true with you. among yourselves, hen-. You. also, have 
poverty in the State-. You have your ills and your social problems 
in the different communities making up this wonderful Nation, but 
you do not solve them by appointing congressional committees to 
investigate local matters; you let each State work its own salvations 
And that is all we ask you to let us do. You gave us the power and 
we will solve our future problems as we have done in the past. 

In 1917, by the Jones Act, you gave us the power to elect both 
houses of our legislature. Since then— and we point at this with u 
certain pride — we have doubled our governmental activities and our 
public services. We are serving the public, the very people Senator 
Iglesias claims to represent. In 1916 the whole budgetary expendi- 
tures of our island amounted to some $6,000*000. This year, for 
educational purposes alone, we are spending that sum of 'money. 

Who has done this? Who is doing this' Our party, the majority 
party of the island. Our party is made up, in great numbers, of 
laboring people. It is not made up solely of rich people, as Mr. 
Iglesias would like you to believe. If lie really represented all 

L 



88 



AUDITOR FOB PORTO BICO A X \> RHU/IPPINE ISLANDS 



the Laboring people, his party should be the majority party of Por$o 
Ilico. The majority of our population is composed of laborers, and 
they look to us and thank us for what we have done for them and 
for what we arc doinjr for them. 

To prove this contention I submit for its insertion in the record 
the following statement given by a high official of the American 
Federation of Labor not Long ago. The statement follows: 

STATEMENT BY EDWARD V. m'GRADY, LEGISLATIVE RKPttl SENTATIVE, A M ERICA > 

FEDERATION OF LAfcOR 

1 desire to inform the Committee on Insular Affairs of the House of Repre- 
sentatives that the American Federation of Labor gives Us whole-hearted sup- 
port to II. R. 6583, which provides that the people of Port.. Rieo shall have 
the right to elect their own governor and vice governor, ami .i is our sincere 
wish that this bill will pass the Congress al this session, tor we believe that 
the privilege of choosing their own governor has already been withheld t<"> 
Ion*;. There is no logical reason why the people of Porto Rieo should not 
enjoy this privilege. They are law-abiding and hard-working people. Their 
leaders are men of great capacity, ability, and intelligence. 

It may he said that there is considerable illiteracy on the island, and this 
is true, but it is fast being overcome, and nOwhere even in the United States 
are the children more eager to learn or more capable of learning than they 
are in Porto Rico. All of the schools are Overcrowded and most of them have 
the double-enrollment system. At the close of the present year there are 
about 2,000 rural schools in operation. The number of buildings in which 
schools are conducted in Porto Rico are 2,322. 

In addition to the above there are 1.171 parent-teachers' associations. They 

also have the University of Porto Rico, which consists of the college of liberal 
arts, college of law, college of pharmacy, normal school (high-school division),, 
normal school (rural teachers' course), high school, practice school, and college 
of agriculture and mechanic arts. 

The above facts in themselves prove beyond I he shadow of doubt that the 
people of PortO Rico will take their place, as far as learning is concerned, with 
the States of the Union in a short time. 

I do not intend to discuss the industrial situation, but I would like briefly ro 
point out to the committee the many progressive laws that have passed the 
Porto Rlcan Legislature within recent years: Law amending the homestead act. 
the mortira^e law. the income tax law. the election and registration law, Ebe 
civil code, the excise tax law. the banking law. a retirement law for the aged 
officials and employees of the people of Porto Rico, the appointment of a rural 
improvements commission, an act creating the puericulture and maternity in- 
stitute, a general employment agency and labor exchange for the purpose of 
reducing unemployment, a minimum wage act for working women, an act regllj 
lating the employment of women and children, and a law for the protection and 
for sanitary appliances for working men and women in factories. 

[The above clearly demonstrates that the chosen representatives of the people 
have capacity and ability, and that they are keeping abreast with the progres- 
sive ideas of the present day. So much so that they should be allowed the 

privilege of choosing their own governor and vice governor. Trusting them 
with this responsibility will not only make them more self-reliant, but I believe 
it. will more closely Cement the bonds of friendship between these people and 
the T/nited States. 

This act. if passed, will not take effect until the year 1028, so the change 
will not be sudden. Conditions will not he upset, for by that time the people 
will have amply prepared themselves for this new order. 

In conclusion I want to offer my tribute of respect to the very able, just ice- 
loving American gentleman who is now presiding over the destinies of Porto 
lii<;o as its governor, the Hon, Horace M. Towner. He has always stood for 
tli « rigW and has been ever alert and keenly sympathetic for the welfare of 
the people. Cinder his administration the people of Porto Ilico are assured 
of an lamest and just administration of the law. 

As you will readily see, we are placed between radicalism — those 
friends of ours who would want us to do in one single year a work 



A I'D] T(>I» I'OK PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



89 



that, under the circumstances, will take a long period of endeavor — 
and ultraconservatism — the few men who still seem to think that 
Columbus discovered our island, that Spain colonized it, and that 
the Spanish-American war was fought out simply for the purpose 
of giving dividends to capital invested. To illustrate present con- 
ditions no more appropriate quotation than the following one from 
the pen of Mr. Henry L. Norton, who, in the January issue of 
"World's Work," describing Porto Rican affairs, wrote as follows: 

* * » Porto Rico has its problems, aside from the economic and social 
burden of overpopulation. As an American colony, close to our shore's, it has 
offered a tempting field for American capita) and enterprise. Millions upon 
millions of dollars have been Invested In the island since 1000. The mrn who 
have invested this money In many cases Looked for returns much higher than 
those usually obtainable at homo, is dot that what a colony is for? Mer- 
cantilism's answer to this question has always been in the affirmative. Their 

chief interest has been in dividends, ttOt in the people of Porto Kico. Hence 

there has arisen a conflict of interest, particularly over tax legislation, between 
the continentals who direct the big business of the island and the Porto Ricans 
Who make its laws. 

This conflict bears the seeds of sorions trouble. Grave situations have 
arisen. That the present is a time of comparative quiet is due largely to 
the vision and taqt of Governor Horace M. Towner. For many year Chair- 
man of the House Committee on Insular Affairs. Governor Towner went to 
Porto Rico with a wide knowledge of its problems and a deep sympathy 
for its people. Appreciating the value of capital, he has been just to its 
claims, without any tendency to indulge. If business is not enthusiastic 
in his support. Governor Towner has won the regard of the Porto Ricans, 
and if they were to elect a governor tO-morrOW and he were to run. lie 
WOUld probably be elected. 

Placed as we are between these two extremes, we will say to you 
that no investigation is needed in Porto Rico. The reports from 
various heads of our executive departments will demonstrate the 
progress we have attained, a progress thai can not be counted by 
figures, a progress unsurpassed bv anv other community in the 
United States/ 

The Chairman. I want to ask one question. 

Mr. GuERRA-MgNDRAGON. Yes. 

The Chairman. I understood Mr. Iglesias to make the statement 
that at the present time there were 500,000 people starving to death, 
naked, without homes. Is that so? 

Mr. Gtjbrra^MonpragoK'. If that condition, as described by the 
distinguished Senator existed, you would have known of it not 
through Mr. Iglesias; a thirig like that would have been already 
known all over the world. 

They are not starving. Of course, they ought to have a better 
salary; but I say to you. Mr. Chairman and gentlemen of the com- 
mittee, this, that 25,000 men have got employment thai they didn't 
have a year before, and that the wages they are getting at the 
present t ime are higher than they were ever before. I am not hold- 
ing a brief for the economic conditions that we have inherited from 
tlx' past. 

We have not limited the amount of land that ought to be held by 
corporations, it is claimed. It is not illegal, to a certain extent, for 
certain entities — legal persons, not natural ones — to hold and 
own more than 500 acres of land. Partnerships come under this 
category. The limitation was placed upon corporations only — 



90 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



not upon partnerships, and these have got around the law enacted 
by Congress. 

'The majority of the land-holding entities are partnerships, a thing 
that was not covered by the law. AH the great, big, land-holding in- 
stitutions are partnerships: they are not corporations. Congress did 
not prohibit partnerships from holding any amount of land: so they 
are legally constituted. 

Give us the power to solve our problems instead of you legislating 
on a subject rather hard to know unless you Live down there and 
study them for years and years. Give us the power to regulate land- 
holding corporations. You have limited them to 500 acres, but you 
did not impose any penal sanction. If Congress should give us the 
power we would solve that problem aright. It is in that resolution. 
We have asked for it in the resolution that Senator Butler lias now 
before him. One of the things we ask is an amendment to OUT 
organic act to enable the legislature to solve this important matter. 

The principles of a sales tax have been an old political problem 
in the island. This tax of ours does not cover necessaries of life: 
so we have not taxed the poor man's tabic at all. We may have taxed 
his clothing and his shoes. We think that capital in Porto RicQ 
should bear the largest amount of the tax burden, but we also think 
that the consumer ought to contribute in proportion to the general 
expenses of the government. Therefore, we have our property tax, 
and our income tax, which was modeled after the one you approved 
in the last session of Congress. 

Consumers are generally willing to pay these taxes in exchange 
for schools, roads, and all the things that mean real progress and 
civilization. 

I was talking not very long ago to a very high official of a 
country near Porto Rico. We spoke of emigration. That/ gen- 
tleman referred to the convenience and wisdom of Inn ing Porto 
Ricans emigrate to that country. But I said to him, " What will 
my countryman gain when he leaves our island to go to yours? He 
will leave behind good roads: he will leave a free public school in 
every town; he will leave graded schools; he will leave high schools 
in ome 30 cities; he will leave a telegraph system, radio, and a tele- 
phone system: lie will leave behind a minimum-wage law, and Tree 
hospitals." Then that official replied to me: "You people in Porto 
Rico are too civilized." 

Now. I spoke to you yesterday about taxes being tied up in our 
courts by taxpayers. Of course, they have the right to do so, 
although I know how disastrous it is to the island to have any large 
amount of our income tied up in court. I can not but admit that 
these taxpayers have a right to do so. Recently our courts have 
started to uphold the validity of our taxes. According to the last 
report, to official records, monthly income exceeds monthly ex- 
penditures. 

Mr. Iglesias does not suggest the slightest remedy or cure for the 
evils he speaks of and which he describes with such black colors. 
Perhaps he has in his mind a scheme, some pet measure of his. Per- 
haps he is going to ask for a $50,000,000 loan from the Congress of 
the United States for the purpose ox buying sugar mills and other 
purposes. He has not presented a single remedy for the situation. 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



91 



It is an economical problem. The taxpayers of Porto Rico consti- 
tute only 8 per cent of the total population; 92 per cent of the inhabi- 
tants do not pay taxes because they have no property. This condi- 
tion is not political. It is a historical condition. The number of 
property owners is increasing, however. 

Of course, j'ou may sa}' that the wages ought to be higher. The 
wages will be increased with the price of the article produced. We 
can not control prices in Porto Rico: we depend on your own Ameri- 
can prices. You sometimes have to depend on Europe for fixing 
your prices. 

At the close, Mr, Chairman, I would like to ask the committee 
for the privilege of inserting reports from heads of departments of 
our island showing the progress accomplished, as well as an explana- 
tion of local conditions. They will show what has been accomplished 
din ing the last 10 years in the different lines of endeavor. 

Senator Butlkk. Is that an official report? 

Mr. Guerra-Moxdragox. Yes. 

Senator Butler. That will be very helpful. 

The Chairman. We will be very glad to insert that. 

(The papers referred to are as follows:) 

San Juan, April 5\ 1926. 

Statement Relative to she Condition of the Insl-lar Treasury During 

the Fiscal Year 1025-2G 

The treasurer of Porto Rico In his annual rei>ort to the governor for the fiscal 
year 1924-25, dated October 0, 1925, stated as follows: 

*' PROSPECT8 OF THE FINANCIAL FUTURE OF TIIK INSULAR TRKASURY 

" Due to the great number of suits filed in the courts during the previous 
year and the year under review, the actual receipts of the government did 
not come up to the estimates made; otherwise the budgetary expenditures for 
the biennial period ended June 30. 1925, would have been more than sufficiently 
covered. 

* 4 Because of said contingency and acting upon the economy plan placed 
by you before our Legislature, the general budget of expenses for the period 
of 1025-20-27 was reduced by you on September 1, 1925. to an amount below 
ten and one-half million dollars. With this readjustment the insular treasury 
has entered into a period of sound economic improvement. 

"With a budget not exceeding i> 10. .100.000 ; with the income tax act made 
retroactive to January 1, 1024; and with the new excise tax law providing the 
very productive 2 per cent sales tax. there will be sufficient revenues to meet 
not only all of our budgetary requirements for the next two years but there 
will also bo an available cash balance to wipe off our floating indebtedness, 
perhaps within a period of two years, and to avoid future deficits, 

" In short, the reduction of our budget to tho prese nt figures and the approval 
Of the new tax laws will restore the financial situation of the insular treasury 
to normalcy and thus we will be in a better position to hold out through the 
litigation now pending and such as may hereafter be instituted against said 
laws/' And the prediction has been fulfilled up to this day in so much as all 
expenses for the ensuing fiscal year have been covered, and not only that, but 
during the period of time elapsed, that is. during the first nine months of the 
fiscal year 1025-2G, the amount of $440,000 has been reimbursed to the trust 
funds, thus reducing the last year's deficit in this amount. 

It seems as if the troubles and protests between the taxpayers and the insular 
government are disappearing, and this is mostly due to the strenuous efforts 
made by the department of finance to collect and put in force the new tax 
laws, which functions are being successfully accomplished and many difficulties 
overcome in the most satisfactory manner. 

95508 — 2G — pt 2 i 



92 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



However, we do not feel so optimistic for the fiscal year 1926-27. due to 
the unexpected reductions in some of the sources of income, among these, the 
United States internal revenues, which will compel us to reduce further the 
government expenses in order to balance them with the income. 

.Titan G. Gaixabdo, 
Treasurer of Porto Rico. 



Value of the principal agricultural products exported from Porto Rico {period 

of 1911-1925, inclusive) 



Fiscal year 


Sugar 


Coffee 


Tobacco 


Oranges 


Pine- 
apples 


Coconuts 


Grape- 
fruits 


Total 

$or«, o(», 974 
71,939,097 
136,840.580 
103. 2S5. 317 
03, r>2, 214 
70. 732, 950 
75,411.430 
si. 732.520 


1917- 18 

1918- 19 

1919- 20 

1920- 21 

1921- 22 

1922- 23---..-- 

1923- 24----..- 

1924- 25 


$41,362,229 
48, 132, 419 
98. 923, 750 
72, 440, 924 
40,784,886 
46, 176, 202 
47, 792, 602 
53, 240, 480 


$5 505, 316 
6, 065, 573 
9, 034. 028 
5,352,924 
4, 316, 859 
3, 1SS002 

6, 579, 567 


$16, 116,236 
14,867,410 
25,001, 110 
21, 659, 701 
15,306,014 
16, 379, 467 
18, 666, 754 
17,038,636 


$1,231,551 
770, 209 
833. 575 
447, 420 
923,912 
1, 749, 378 
471,416 
B38, 062 


$692,712 
607, 337 
57s, 633 
073, ss7 
671,721 
800. 690 
974.418 

1, 199.523 
• 


$572, 600 
757, 019 

l. 142. 112 

BOO, 805 
478, 095 
667,061 
605. 129 
709,853 


$1, 12 0,330 
739. 100 

1, 332; 743 

2, 019. 557 
1, 100, 727 

1, 803, 150 

2, 305, 298 
2, 120,399 



Department of Agriculture and Labor — General summary of appropriations 

and personnel 



Fiscal year 


Number 
of em- 
ployees 


Salary ap- 
propriation 


Contingent 
expenses 


Amount ap- 
propriated 


1917-18 


42 
57 
90 
90 
141 
141 
176 
176 
153 


$55, 740. 00 
70, 820. 00 
130, 791.00 
136, 701. 00 
203, 740. 50 
169, 761. 75 
281, 737. 00 
281, 737. 00 
254, 874. 00 


$20. 810. 00 
19,810.00 
02, 720. 00 
62, 720. 00 
77, 180. 00 
07, 180. 00 
216, 070. 00 
209, 320. 00 
145, 120. 00 


$70, 550. 00 
96, 630. 00 
199,511.00 
199,511.00 
280, 920. 50 
236,941. 75 
497, 807. 00 
491.057.00 
399, 967. 00 


1918-19 


1919-20 


1920-21 


1921-22 


1922-23 


1923-24 


1924-25. 


1925-26 


Note.— Savings made in the different appropriations for fiscal year 1924-25, $53,444.58. 

Department of Agriculture and Labor, office of the commissioner — General 
nummary of the appropriation* and personnel Of said office 


Fiscal year 


Number 
of em- 
ployees 

0 
9 
11 
11 
12 
12 
23 
23 
36 


Salary ap- 
propriation 


Contingent 
expc uses 


Total of ap- 
propriations 


1917-18 


$14,080.00 
15, 040. 00 
18, 235. 00 
18, 235. 00 
21,960.75 
19, 384. 90 
42, 583. 50 
42, 583. 50 
66, 555. 00 


$910. 00 
910.00 
1, 020. 00 
1, 020. 00 
1,320.00 
1,320.00 
12, 300. 00 
9, 000.00 
16, 060. 00 


$15, 89a 00 
15, 950.00 
29, 255. 00 

19, 255. 00 
23, 2S0. 75 

20, 701. 90 
54,913.50 
51,043.50 
82, 615. 00 


1918-19 


1919-20 


1920-21 


1921-22 


1922-23 


1923-24 


1924-25. _ 







AUDITOR FOR PORTO HICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



93 



Department of Agriculture and Labor, Bureau of Agriculture — General $ 
man/ of the appropriations and personnel of said bureau 



Fiscal year 


Number 
of em- 
ployees 


Salary ap- 
propriation 


Contingent 
excuses 


Totel of ap- 
propriations 


1917 18 


6 
18 
25 
25 

71 

2 
2 


$7,820.00 
21,820.00 
34. 744. 00 
34. 744. 00 
87,421.00 
71.298.25 
4. 459. 00 
4. 459. 00 


$2. 000.00 
2, 000.00 
10. 950. 00 
10.950.00 
33,060.00 
23, 060.00 
24, 900. 00 
24, 900. 00 


$9,820.00 
23,820.00 
45, 694. 00 
45, 694.00 
120. 481.00 
94.358. 25 
29. 359.00 
29, 359. 00 

• 


191S-UI 


1010-20 


192C-21 


1921-22 


1923-24 


1924-25... 





Department of Agriculture and Labor. Bureau of Agricultural developtne 
General summary of the appropriations and personnel of said bureau 



Fiscal year 


Number 
of em- 
ployees 


Salary ap- 
propriation 


(Contingent 
expenses 


Total of ap- 
propriations 


1923-24.... 


67 
67 
45 


$91, 162.50 
91, 162,50 
62,028.00 


$110,450.00 
107. 000. 00 
65, 000.00 


S7pl.6i2.0o 
19$. 162.50 
127.028.00 


1924-25.... 


1925-26. . . 





Department of Agriculture and Labor, plant propagation station — General si 

of the appropriations and personnel of said plant, fiscal year, 1925-26 lar ^ 

Number of employees 

Salary appropriation o 9 Q * 

Contingent expenses ~" J XjJJJ 

Amount appropriated ^ 7 200 

Department of Agriculture and Labor, experiment station — General sunima 

the appropriations and personnel of said station J °f 



Fiscal year 


Number 
of em- 
ployees 


Salary ap- 
propriations 


Contingent 
*'-MH»ns OS 


T otaUp- 
Propriat i 0ns 


1917-18... 

101&-10... 


16 
19 
29 
29 
26 
26 
27 
27 
29 


$20, 380. CO 
27,340.00 
52, 252. 00 
52, 252. 00 
47,857.00 
40, 986. 55 
54,762.00 
54. 702. 00 
58, 764. 00 


$11,600. CO 
11,600.00 
38,650.00 
3* 050.00 
21,350.00 
21,350.00 
•10.450.00 
30,450.00 
28,500.00 


$21% no 
^212.00 

8 '. 264. 00 


1919-20.. 


1920-21... 


1921-22. 


1922-23.. 


1923-24.. 


1925-26... 




Department of Agriculture and Labor, publication office — General sunu 
appropriations and personnel of said office 


nar y of the 


Fiscal year 


Number 
of em- 
ploy DCS 


Salary ap- 
propriation 


Contingent 
expenses 




1923- 24.... 

1924- 25... 


4 
4 


$9,000 
9,000 


$2,000 
2,000' 


$11,000 
11.000 





94 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



Department of Agriculture and Labor, veterinary services — General summary of thi 
appropriations and personnel of said services, fiscal year, W2 ~)-26 

Number of employees 2. 

Salary appropriation $3, 850. 00 

'Contingent expenses 5, 600. 00 

Amount appropriated __ 9, 450. 00 

Department of Agriculture and Labor, fertilizer, concentrated cattle feed, insecticide 
and fungicide office — General summary of the appropriations and personnel of 
said office 



Fiscal year 

• 


Number of 
emplos • i 


Salnry 
appro- 
turn 


Amount 
appro* 
print- »1 


1023-34 + 

1924-25 


$8, 350 
8, 350 


$8,350 
8, 350 




Department of Agriculture and Labor, plant inspection and quarantine service — 
General summary of the appropriations and personnel of said scrtricc 


Fiscal year 


Number of 
«-mployces 


Salnry 
appro- 
priation 


Amount 
appro- 
priated 


1023-24. 


0 
6 


$5, 925 
5, 925 


$5,925 
5, 925 


1924-25. 





Department of Agriculture and Labor, Division of Forestry — General summary 
Of the appropriations and personnel of said division 



Fiscal year 


Number 
of em- 
ployees 


Salary ap- 
propriation 


( Sontingent 
expen lefl 


Amount ap- 
propriated 


1919-20 


oo 


$13, 100. 00 
13, 100. 00 

19, 115.00 
15, 9C9. "iO 

20, 795. 00 
20,795.00 
20. 750. 00 


$5, 300. 00 
5, 300. 00 
10, 150.00 
10, 150.00 
17. 910.00 
17.910.00 
15,410.00 


$18, 400. 00 
18, 400.00 
29. 565. 00 
20, 119. 30 
38, 705. 00 
38, 705. 00 
36, 1C0. 00 


1920-21 


1921-22 


14 
14 

16 
16 
16 


1922-23 


1923-24 


1924-25 


1925-2G . 





Department of Agriculture and Labor, Bureau of Labor — General summary of 
the appropriations and personnel of said bureau 



Fiscal year 



Number 
of em- 
ployees 



Salary ap- 
propriations 



1917- 18... 11 

1918- 19 I 11 

1919- 20 1 15 

1920- 21 15 I 

1921- 22 | IS 

1922- 23 18 I 

1923- 24 26 I 

1924- 25 , I 26 

1925- 20 _ 23 



12, 620. 00 
18, 460. 00 
18.400.00 
27, 092. 75 
22. 122. 75 
44, 700. 00 
44,700. 00 
40, 000. 00 



< oTitingent 
expenses 



• $6. 300. 00 
5, 300. 00 
6, 800. 00 
6, 800. 00 
1 1 , 300. 00 
11,300. 00 
18, 000. 00 
1 8, 0C0. 00 
10, 250. 00 



Total appro- 
priations 



$18, 800. 00 
17,920.00 
26, '200. 00 
25, 260. 00 
38, 392. 75 
33, 422. 75 
62, 700.00 
62, 700. 00 
50, 250. 00 



AUDITOB FOB PORTO RICO \XD PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



95 



Department of Agriculture ami Labor, development of tin Bureau of Lah* 

Labor legislation <*«©r-— 



Title 



An act to establish a bureau of labor, and for other purposes *. 

An act regulating the work of women and children, and pro- 
tecting them against dangerous occupations. 1 

An act to provide for the construction Of scaffolds, the pro- 
tection of the public, and for other purposes > 

An act t<> amend section 553 of the Penal Code of Porto Rico «. 

An art to regulate t lu hours of labor on public works, and 

for other purposes. 
An act providing for the f certain lands of 

the people of Porto R Ico, and for other pur|>oscs. 
An act providing for the r.-lii f of Mich workmen BS may be 

Injured, or of the dependent families oi those who maj 
lose their lives while engaged in trades or occnp.it li 
for other purposes. 1 
An act to amend seet ion 170 of the Penal ( 'ode of Porto Rico 

An act to determine certain duties of employers in case of 
strikes. 

An act regulating the load or weight thai laborers may carry, 

and for other purposes. 4 
An ad to determine the procedure in cases of ela 

wages by farm laborers against their employers.' 
An art to amend sections 11S7, 1 }v>, uyj, ami 1190 of the 

Revised Ci\ il Code of Porto Kico. 
An act tO authorize the Issuing of bonds for the purpose of 

constructing houses for artisans and laborers, provide for 

the leasing of the same, with a certain right to the owner- 
ship thereof, improve the sanitary conditions of certain 
lands of the people of Porto Rico, promote the creation of 
farms to be leased to faun laborers and to grant them title 

thereto, and for other purposes. 

An act to provide for a dispensary and minor surgeon in 
sugar factories, workshops, electric and hydraulic plants, 
and for other purposes. 

An ad to protect laborers In their right to be members of 
labor organizations. 

An act to promote the welfare of the Inhabitants' of Porto 
Rico in regard to accidents causing death or Injuries to 
workmen while engaged in their work; establishing the 
duty of employers to compensate their employees or heirs, 
as denned in this act, for injuries or death urospectii e of 
negligence, and to provide ways and means for the enforce- 
ment of this duty; c reating an insurance fund to secure em- 
ployers against such liability and providing for the man- 
agement ami such insurance: creating a workmen's relief 
commission and determining its power and duties; estab- 
lishing the liability of the people of Porto Rico with regard 
to their laborers for injuries or death or such laborers in 
works performed bv administration, and for other pur- 
poses.' * 

An act of labor contracts 



Date of 
enactment 



Mar. 14. 1012 
Mar. 13, 1913 

.-.do 

Aug. 9,1913 
Aug. 19.1913 
Mar. 11, 1915 
Apr. 13.1916 

Apr. 13. 191H 
Apr. 12,1917 

..-.do 

Nov. 14, 1917 

....do 

Nov. 27. 1917 



Nov. HO, 1917 

.....do 

Feb. 25,1918 



Purpose of the law 



Mar. 31,1919 
May 29, 1919 
June 5,1919 

....do 



An act to regulate emigration from Porto Rico, and for other 
purposes. 

An act to prevent, and aid in the settlement of, strikes and 
lockout^. 

An act providing that in making purchases of furniture, 

articles and supplies for the departments and offices of the 

insular government, as well as for municipalities, school 

boards or any other public body, preference shall be given 

to furniture, articles and supplies manufactured or pro- 
duced in the country, and further providing that notice 

snail be given certain manufacturers of such articles and 

for other purposes. 
An act establishing minimum wages for working women, June 9,1919 

and for other purposes.* 

1921 AniCndCd ° n Mar ' 13 ' 1913 ftIld ropealotl by act "Reorganizing the bureau of labor," approved Jury f&U 
2 Amended on Aug. 19, 1913 and on June 21, 1918. 

• Amended on Dec. I, 1917 and on July 7, 1023, 

4 Amended on X oV . 23, 1917, on Feb. 18, 1918. and on Mav 20, 1S25. 

1 Repealed by act approved on Feb. 25. 1918 (workmen compensation act). 

• Amended on Feb. 21, 1918. 

7 Sees. 1 and l-a amended by ac t No. 12 of July, 1923. 

i Amended on June 19. 191S, May rt, 1920. July n. 1921, and Sept. 1, 192'. 

• Declared unconstitutional and void in virtue of a dec ision bv the Supreme Court In Feb 25 192* 



'dnKren^ ™* 
TO protect the life of la- 
borer. 

To protect the health of 
the workers. 
Do. 

T laC"rl 0 . te th ° WOlfarc °< 
To Insure" the life of work- 
men. . 



To safeguard the rights of 
workmen. 
Do. 

To protect the health of 

workers. 

-ts of 

workmen. 1 
Do. 

To promote the welfare or 
laborers. 



To protect the life of work- 
men. 

To protect the rights of 
workmen. 

To promote the welfare of 
workmen and their de- 
pendents in cases of acci- 
dents. 



To protect the rights of 

laborers. 
To promote the welfare of 
workmen. 
Do. 

To protect the native in- 
dustries. 



To promote the wertire e»r 
working women. 



96 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



Department of Af/rieulture and Labor, development of the Bureau of Labor?? 
Labor legislation — Continued 



Title 



Dftto of 
enactment 



An net to authorize the Issuing of bonds for the purpose of 
urbanizing certain lands belonging to the people of Porto 
Rico In the municipality of San Juan, for the purchase of 
more land if necessary, for the construction thereon of 
sewerage) water works and lighting systems, for the paying 
of streets and for the building of houses for artisans and 
laborers, and for other purposes. 

An ad appropriating the sum of $125,000 to carry out the con- 
struction of additional houses in the Barrio Obrero at -Mar- 
tin Pefia, of the city of Ban Juan, to furnish temporary 
shelter to the inhabitants of the barrios "Salsipuedcs" and 
"Hoyofrio" of said city, and for other purposes. 

An act establishing special proceedings in the municipal 
courts of Porto Rico, and for other purposes. 

An act to create a homestead commission; to authorize the 
construction of houses for attia ins and I iborers with fi i 
the people of Porto Rico; provide for the leasing of the same* 
with a right to the ownership thereof; to improve the con- 
ditions Of BUCh lands of the people of Porto Rico BS may be 
selected for the construction of said houses and for the 
formation of farms; promote the creation of farms to be 
leased to farm laborers and to grant them title thereto, and 
for other purposes. 

An act to regulate the employment of minors and to provide 
for compulsory school attendance of children in Porto Rico, 
and for other purposes. 10 

An act to compel employers to fulfill certain duties and to 
protect laborers in their homes. 

An act prescribing minimum wages to be paid the laborers 
and workingmen of Porto Rico in insular and municipal , 
works." 

An act to regulate the operation and handling of cinemato- 
graph machines, and for other purposes. i 

An act creating a general employment agency of the people of 
Porto Rico to be under the direction of the department of 
agriculture and labor, and for other purposes. 

An act to authorize the commissioner of the interior to sell to 
poor families the mangrove lands situated in the southern 
portion of the town of e'utafto between the road leading to 
San Juan and the first culvert on the road leading to Baya- 
mon, and for other purposes. 



May 


13, 1920 


A pr. 


11, 1021 


Apr. 


20, 1021 


July 


11, 1021 


July 


20, 1921 


July 


2»», 1921 


June 


30, 1923 


July 


3, 1923 


July 


11, 1'iL'; 


July 


18. 1923 



Purpose of the law 



To promote the welfare of 
laborers. 



To provide homes for la- 
borers. 



To protect tho rights of 

workmen. 
To provide fnr the welfare 

of workmen. 



To protect .children. 

To protect the health of 

workmen. 
To improve the economic 
conditions of laborers. 

To protect the life of work- 
men 

. employment for. 
unemployed laborers. 

To promote the well ire of 
laborers. 



»° Amended on July 31, 1925. 
H Amended on July 23, 1925. 



Memorandum in re total enrollment in the public schools of Porto Rico during 
the past tO year$ % and total expenditures from insular and municipal funds 



Total enrollment, 1915-16 151,568 

KxiK-nrtitun s : 

From insular funds $1, 348, 306. 00 

From municipal funds 491, 710. 00 



Total 1, 840, 010. 00 

Total enrollment^ 1010-17 152, 00l* 

Expenditures : 

From Insular funds *l,r>18. 321. OS 

From municipal funds 5SS, 007. ;j0 



Total 2, 100. 389. 18 



Total enrollment, 1917-1S 142,840 

Expenditures : 

From insular funds $1, 594, 855. 43 

From municipal funds 730, 947. 00 



Total 



2. 325, 802. 43 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



97 



Total enrollment, 1918-19 160,704 

Expenditures : 

From insular funds $1,626,039.23 

From municipal funds 679.431.50 



Total 2,305, 470. 73 



Total enrollment, L919-20 184,991 

Expenditures : 

From insular funds $2,275,434.23 

From municipal funds 6S6. 443. 15 



Total «. 2, 961, S77. 38 



Total enrollment, 1920-21 193, 269 

Expenditures : 

From insular funds $2,929,944.14 

From municipal funds 906, 6S9. IS 

Total 3, S36, 633: 32 



Total enrollment, 1921-22.- 226,171 

Expenditures : 

From insular funds $3,729,991.93 

From municipal funds 1, 161, 4S7. SO 

Total 4,S91,479. 73 



Total enrollment, 1922-23 225,600 

Expenditures : 

From insular funds $3. 35S, 319. 74 

From municipal funds 1, 569, S96. 15 

Total 4, 92S. 215. S9 



Total enrollment, 1923-24 .227,267 

Expenditures : 

From insular funds $4,580,516.25 

From municipal funds 2, 0S0, 769. 15 

Total 6, 661, 2S5. 40 

Total enrollment 1924-25 230, 120 

Expenditures : 

From insular funds * $4. 052, 771). 53 

From municipal funds 2,163,179.39 

Total 6, S15, 95S. 92 



A substantial increase appears in the budgets corresponding to the fiscal 
years 1923-24 and 1924-25, and apparently the increase in the enrollment for 
those years as compared to that of previous years does not justify the differ- 
ence in the total expenses. Such an increase \v;is chiefly due to the fad 
that the double enrollment plan in 300 rural schools was eliminated, said 
school being converted into consolidated rural schools in single enrollment, 
in charge of English graded teachers. This organization has proven of great 
benefit to the rural school work and at the same time it has contributed to 
help the functioning of the urban schools, since many of the children of the 
rural zone continue their studies in the urban schools after reaching the 
higher grade of instruction offered in their respective localities. 

Mr. Guerra-Moxdragon. Now, Mr. Chairman and gentlemen of 
the committee, there is another thing that I would like to talk to 
you about, just to finish my remarks, with your kind indulgence, 
and th.it is the Davila bill. House bill 11610. 



98 



AUDITOR FOK PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



The Chairman. That is not officially here, hut you may discuss 
it. Do you understand. Senator Butler f 
Senator Butler. Xo. 

The Chairman. It is a House bill and so it is not officially before 
us, but you may express your views on it. 

Mr. Glkiuja-Moxdijacox. A public service commission was created 
in 1017 in the organic act. It was composed of the heads of de- 
partments plus two elective members, making a total of nine men. 
These heads of departments are men with not very much time at 
their disposal, not only because they have to attend to the regular 
activities of their respective departments, but because they belong 
to boards created by the legislature. So, sometimes, it is very ditli- 
cult to get a quorum in the membership of the commission not 
because of any lack of sense of duty, but because- (hey have to look 
after too many things*, because they haven't the time. They have 
official meetings of these various boards almost every day. 

Our idea is to have a commission composed of five members — one 
the presiding officer, to be appointed by the governor of Porto Rico, 
by and with the consent of our senate, who shall preside over the com- 
mission, and two more associate members, the two present elective 
members to continue in office for the remainder of their term. The 
commission shall devote their whole time to the decision of these 
important matters as are presented to them. 

There is another very important amendment that we would like to 
make to the organic act. The organic act as a section to regulate 
the operation, rates, and service of all public carriers, but it refers 
solely to carriers by rail, and we desire to extend that same provision 
to all carriers whether by rail or otherwise. 

That- is all, gentlemen. I thank the committee for your kind 
attention. 

Senator Butler. May I ask the gentleman a question? 
The Chairman. Certainly, Senator Butler. 

Senator Butler. Referring to this report, which you may be 
familiar with, on page 4: Have you a copy of it? I want to ask 
with reference to a paragraph here which lias to do with the issuing 
of bonds and obligations, simply to clear up something in my mind. 
Perhaps I had better read it. 

Mr. Guerra-Mondraoon. With pleasure, Senator Butler. This 
measure has been before the Legislature of Porto Rico for the last 
five or six years. The members from the districts where these irri- 
gation projects are located are asking that in computing the indebted- 
ness of the people of Porto Rico irrigation bonds be excluded. The 
reason is this: The income from these irrigation districts is immense. 
It is a perfect system, paid for by the taxpayers. They do not have 
their own officer's; they have the insular government, the central 
government, managing the whole thing. The treasurer of Porto 
Rico yearly gets an estimate from the chief engineer of the irrigation 
system as to the capital to be amortized and the interest to be paid. 
Then the treasurer divides that amount among the 40,000 or 50,000 
acres within the irrigation district so that each acre will have to pay 
just enough to cover the bare cost of maintaining the plant, plus 
capital and interest. 

These irrigation districts have their own revenue, which they gladly 
pay, because when they did not have irrigation they used vast pumps 



AUDITOR pofl I'oimo BIGO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 99 

to bring up the water, sometimes subterranean waters. They would 
spend on an average ot $25 or $30 an acre to irrigate, and v,, v poorly 
a that. Now, they have their water in these great big reservoirs, 
and they gel i scientificalL yi So they are very glad to pay their 
taxes, because (his system multiplies by three the production of sugar 
cane. & 

Senator Butler. There was a statement made here that there is a 
limitation to the amount of the bonds which may he issued by the 
government. 

Mr. Guerra-Mondragon. That is lo per cent of the total value of 
our property. 

Senator Butler. Do 1 understand thai another LO per cent may 
be issued li ,. is secured by the obligation of the municipalities? " 
AU\ Ijuerra-Mondraqon. Yes. indeed. That is the state of affairs 

Senator Butler. So the central government can not at any time 

oe required to issue bonds in excess of 20 per cent ' 
Mr. G UERRA-Mondr AGON. Of 10 per cent, vou mean' 
Senator Butler. Ten per cenl of its own bonds ami 10 per cent 

ol the bonds represented by the municipalities 

• Mr. uuERRA-MoNDRAGON. Certainly 
Senator Butler. That is the extent ' 

Mr. GUERRA-MoNDRAGON. That is ihe law to-dav 

senator Butler. How much does that involve to-day! 
•Mr. Uuerra-Mondragon, That involves $23,000,000.' 
Senator Harris. Is that on the munidpalities? 

(,, ' l : : !ir A - M, . ,x 1 ,,I:A,i,,N - x,,: * e indebtedness l of the insular gov- 
ernment. J hat ot the municipalities is something like 

(rovernor Towxk.r. I think it is about $16,000,000. 
,,(,;"' ^^bba-Mondraoon. All of that is in schools, roads, bridges, 

Senator Harris. What is the value of the property of the munici- 
palities as eompared with the property in the whole" island? 

• ,o( counH u^V X |' >I:A<: '; N - ? fi Wh ? le isIi,n<1 is i,b01,t $815,000,000, 
not counting the value ot public works. 

Senator Harris. What part of that is in the municipalities? 

mi li,';,, I ,:,:KA " , , V x,> !' A(;nN - f bout seventeen million: twenty-three 
f ? J . S ? wi "? d ^ in *f'" government. There are six million 

mmSn , 10,1 Sy f em ° f - tlu " south - Tiiei» is also about three 

million more for another project for irrigation 

d.,^,™!» BinX "; K - ^TJ; m s.long paragraph that I read intro- 
duced as an amendment to the existing law? 
Mr. Guerra-Monuragon. Yes, sir 

I readt 01, BxmJER ' And k (loesn,t ^ m.x this amendment that 

Mr. Guerra-Mondragon. No. 

Senator Butler. The assessment which has already been made 
has been made under existing laws? 

Mr. GuERRA-MONDHAdON'. Ves. sir. 

Senator Butler. This involves some amendment to the exist inc 
law. .\ow, what do the amendments provide for '. 



100 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



Mr. Gtjerra-Mondragox. The only difference between the section 
as read In the Senator and the existing law is that the amendment 
clarifies the existing law. 

Senator Butler. That is, there has been some question as to the 
present issue ? 

Mr. Glekra-Moxdraoox. Yes, sir. 

Senator Butler. And this is intended to clarify it? 

Mr. GtJERRA-Mondragon. Yes: to clarify it. because the present law- 
says positively in express, clear terms that in computing the insular 
indebtedness the debts of the municipalities are not to be counted: 
but this clarifies it in such a way as to leave no room for doubt. 
The only real innovation introduced is to add to the present law the 
feature about the irrigation bonds. 

Senator Butler. Do I understand that in the operation of this 
section that you have recommended or suggested the municipalities 
themselves would negotiate any of their own bonds, or obligations 
or would they place them in the hands of the central government i 

Mr. GuERRA-MoNDRAGON. And through the War Department. 

Senator Butler. And the government negotiates the bonds? 

Mr. GUERRA-MONDRAGON. Yes. 

Senator Bi tler. And returns the proceeds to the municipalities. 
Is that the operation t 

Mr. GlEIIRA-MoXOKAOOX. Yes. 

Governor Towner. Just one moment, if the Senator will allow me. 
The difficulty has arisen. Senator, about that very proposition — 
that of creating two sets of obligations for one bond. In effect, 
the insular government is only guaranteeing the bonds for the 
municipalities. Of course only to the extent of less than 10 per cent 
of the indebtedness of the municipalities. Xow, it was thought best 
that in order to solve the difficulties we should issue two sets of 
bonds for one debt, that the municipality should issue its bond and 
then upon their approval by the insuhir government, be taken up 
by the insular government and that the insular government would 
pledge its faith and credit for the payment of those bonds, so that 
there will be only one issue of bonds. 

Senator Bi tei:k. That is. to guarantee them? 

Governor Towner, dust to guarantee them. 

Senator Butler. That is what I wanted to clear up. 

Governor Towner. Let me say this: That is not very important; 
as the Attorney General of the United States time and time again 
has stated that this was a perfectly legal and proper thing to do. 
It amounted to the same thing as the language of the organic act. 
It says : 

J ii computing rhe indebtedness of the people of Porto Rico bonds issued by 
the people of Porto Rico secured by bonds of municipalities or school boards 
of Porto Rico, shall not he counted. 

If you have the slightest doubt about the wisdom of it — let me 
say that it is just merely to clarify that proposition. 

Mr. Guekra-Mondrag< >x. We have found that on account of this 
doubt as to Whether these bonds should be issued through the agency 
of the insular government that condition caused the market in New 
York to be a little dull: so if you clarify this language it will he 
much better for the bond holders. 



AUDITOR FOB PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 101 



Senator Harris. You can sell them at a lower rate of interest if 
you rlari fy t he laniruaire i 

Mr. Guerra-Mondraqon. Certainly. In the past we have sold 
bonds. Senator Harris, at the same rate of interest as United States 
bonds and got better premiums on them. 

Governor Towner dust a couple of months ago there were sold 
bonds of Porto Rico amounting to two and a half million dollars. 
They sold under these provisions that have been spoken about and 
brought in between 3 and 4 per cent premium. 

Senator Harris. Have you issued bonds up to the total amount 
that you can under the law. both of the municipalities and insular 
government I 

Mr. G uerr a-Mon dragon . No. sir. We have an ample margin, a 
very ample margin left. 

The Ciiaikm w. Is there any other question? 

Senator Bi tler. In the statements which you are going to file for 
the record is there included a statement of finances outlining the 
number of bonds that have been issued ? 

Mr. Guerra-Mondragon. Yes, sir. 

The Chairman. A telegram has just come to me from Mr. Mar- 
tinez Nadal, of San Juan. I shall have it inserted in the record. 
(The telegram referred to is as follows:) 

April 28, 102G. 

Regular Republican party, representing 35.000 voters, oppose legislation 
favoring landlordism and absenteeism which is responsible for present disas- 
trous economical conditions island. Party favors and requests congressional 
investigation of economic social and political situation prior to amending 
organic act. so that Congress may act accordingly. We also oppose any 
iiin.'iKlnicn! organic act tending to limit right of appeal to our supreme court 
against decisions insular auditor. Legislative commission at Washington rep- 
resents only Unionist party and split Republicans composing the so-called 
Alliance party patronized by insular administration and controlling island by 
reason of fraudulent election aided by local election law that is undemocratic 
tyrranical, oppressive, and prevents free suffrage of the people. 

Martinez Nadal, Chairman. 

The Chairman. It is "the understanding of the Chair that this 
completes the hearing upon the Porto Rican matters. 

Governor Toyvxkr. There is a man here who represents the Farm- 
ers 5 Association of Porto Rico. I wonder if he might use live 
minutes now. 

The Chairman. We ran sit here until 12 o'clock. We will have 
to <ro then. If he. can utilize five minutes, he is welcome to it. 

STATEMENT OF ENRIQUE LANDR0N, REPRESENTING THE FARM- 
ERS' ASSOCIATION OF PORTO RICO 

Mr. Landron. Mr. Chairman. T want to state that I represent the 
General Fanners' Association of Porto Rico here, which is composed 
of sugar producers. I just want to make a few remarks about the 
efforts that taxpayers there are making to keep out of such condi- 
tions as these. We are only producing over there about $58 per cap- 
ita. Out of that we are paying about s ( .) per capita taxes. In other 
words, our total income there is about $75,000,000 for 1,400,000 
people. If you compare this figure with the United States for the 
national income per capita — $500 — you will find that the Porto 



■ 



102 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



Rican figure is higher relating it to the national wealth. Ours i> 
only $240 per capita. That shows that whatever is said about our 
budget being low is said without taking into consideration these 
figures. The ratio of our public expenditures to wealth is about :i' L . 
per cent more than in the United States. That is. we are paying 24 
per cent of our national income into the treasury for )>ubli<- ex- 
penditurcs. while in the States it is only a little over 11 per cent. 
That shows that instead of trying to increase our public budget 
there, or our public debt, our Legislation ought to tend to lower ii. 
In fact, I believe if we had a little more efficient administration, 
practically all the services can he rendered for less money. 
I won't take any more of your time. 

The Chairman. What Legislation are you recommending, then? 
This committee is trying to legislate properly. What recommenda- 
tion have you to make to it? 

Mr. Laxdkox. In this matter, that the limit for our borrowing 
capacity — something should he done to determine really what should 
be our borrowing capacity, because when you say L0 per cent of the 
assessed valuation of the island, it doesn't Limit the borrowing cri 
pacity. because that valuation can he raised. 

Senator Butler. That i- the very point. 

Mr. LANDRON. AVe have now. for instance, s:; I .",,< )()().<)<)< ). but i \ 
the property is reassessed it can he made £500.000,000. Then our 
borrowing capacity will go up to $50,000,000. 

The Chairman. What you want. then, is legislation that more 
closely restricts the fyon'owing capacity of the insular government I 

Mr. Laxdrox. Legislation that: will SO relate to our income or to 
our general budget or something like that that will not be so liable 
to he increased at the will of somebody there. 

The Chairman*. All right. Is there anything further? 

Mr. Laxdkox. If any of my time is left— — 

The Chairman. Your time is <rone. If you want to file any- 
thing or if these gentlemen desire to file with the committee any 
further statements, we will be glad to have them. You have 
traveled a good way and if any of you want to make a brief per- 
sonal statement we will be glad to hear you if you wait until the 
hearing on the Virgin Islands is over. If yoii gentlemen desire 
to wait, we will hear you Friday at 10.30. 

Thereupon, at 12 o'clock noon, the committee adjourned until 
Friday, April 30, 1926. at 10.30 o'clock a. m.) 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



FRIDAY, APRIL 30, 1926 

United Status Senate, 
Committee on Territories and Insular Possessions, 

Washington* D. O. 
The committee met. pursuant to adjournment, at 10.30 a. m., in 
the committee room. Capitol, Senator Frank B. Willis presiding. 

Present: Senators Willis (chairman). Bayard. Butler. Harris, 
and Nye. 

The Chairman. The committee will be in order. 

Mr. GlJERRA-MoNDkAGON. I just want to ask that in ease the Farm- 
ers' Association of Porto Rico desires to present an original state- 
ment, we he allowed an opportunity to answer it in ease we think it 
necessary to answer it. 

The Chairman. That is all right. You have that privilege. 

Mr. Guerra-Mondragon. Dealing with taxation matters in the 
island. 

The Chairman. If you desire to file anv additional statements 
we would like to have them because we are going to have these 
hearings printed. 

Mr. GUERRA-MONDRAGON. Yes, sir. 

The Chairman. Then, this concludes the hearings upon these 
various Porto Rican and Philippine measures and upon the Virgin 
Islands question. The committee will take all these matters under 
advisement. We hope to make some report on them. 

(Whereupon, at 12 o'clock noon, the committee adjourned.) 

103 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND THE PHILIPPINE 

ISLANDS 



THUKSDAY, MAY 13, 1926 

United States Senate, 
Committee on Territories and Insular Possessions, 

Washington, D. C. 

The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10.30 o'clock a. m., in the 
committee room. Capitol, Senator Frank B. Willis presiding. 

Present: Senators Willis (chairman), Bingham, Nye, Harris. 
Bayard, and Brat-ton. 

The Chairman. The committee will come to order. It was 
thought that we had closed our hearings definitely and finally, but 
subsequent to the last meeting representatives of the Philippine 
delegation came to me and asked permission for Dr. Jose S. Reyes 
to be heard briefly on the Philippine auditor's bill, and the com- 
mittee felt they wanted to give everybody their day in court. So 
I promised them a brief hearing this morning. We hope the speaker 
will hold himself to the lowest possible limit, because we have 
several bills which we want to dispose of this morning. 

Therefore, at this time we will hear Dr. Jose S. Reyes of the 
Philippine delegation relative to the Philippine auditor's bill. 

STATEMENT OF JOSE S. REYES ON BEHALF OF PHILIPPINE 

DELEGATION 

Mr. Reyes. Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, for the 
assurance of the committee members, I wish to say that we intend 
this to be the last of our testimony. We are sincerely convinced 
that this bill contains very important provisions; it contains pro- 
visions that will alter and modify very radically existing laws re- 
garding the auditor's ofKce in the Philippines. 

I intend this morning to examine the reasons that have been 
advanced in favor of enacting this particular piece of legislation. 

As far as one can gather, the reasons for the pending bill may 
be summarized as follows: 

As a result of decisions of the Philippine Supreme Court in two 
cases, the Ynchausti and the Metropolitan water district cases, the 
the insular auditor has been deprived of powers which undoubtedly 
belong to his office. 

I might remark in passing that if the members of the committee 
desire to interrupt me with questions for information, it will be 
perfectly agreeable to me. 



105 



106 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



Second, these decisions of the Philippine Supreme Court are at 
variance with decisions made by the Federal Courts in the United 
States. 

Third, that the decisions, especially in the Ynchausti case, arc in 
conflict with a previous decision of the court in an analogous case, 
that of Lamb v. Phipps. ■ 

Fourth, that in issuing a mandamus against the auditor, the 
court took a step unprecedented either in the Philippines or in the 
United States. 

Fiftli, that regardless of these question of law, it is desirable to 
establish in the Philippines an accounting office with such powers 
as are provided in this bill and a system of deciding claims against 
the government such as is found in its provisions because: 

First, while the bill does not increase the powers of the auditor, 
it serves to clarify them. 

Second, the bill would safeguard the Philippine treasury. 

Third, the bill would place the auditor on the same level as the 
Comptroller General of the United States and would give to the 
Philippines a system the same as that in the United States. 

Let us examine these points one by one. 

First, the Ynchausti and the Metropolitan water district cases. 

The Ynchausti case arose out of the claim filed last year by the 
Ynchausti Co., a commercial partnership, for the refund of customs 
duties paid under protest on the repairs done to one of its steamers 
at Hongkong, a foreign port. The insular collector of customs, 
after a hearing, granted the claim and signed a warrant, for the 
refund of the duty paid under protest. This action of the collector 
was based on paragraph 348 of section 11 of the Philippine tariff 
law passed by the Congress of the United States in 1901) authorizing 
the admission free of duty to the Philippines -of vessels repaired in 
foreign countries " upon proof satisfactory to the collector of cus- 
toms that adequate facilities for such repairs are not afforded in the 
Philippine Islands." This discretionary authority of (lie collector 
of customs was broadened further by Act 2S72 of the Philippine 
Legislature enacted in 1919, under the authority of section L0 of the 
organic law of 1916, and approved by the President of the United 
States, which provided that vessels repaired in foreign ports should 
be admitted free of duty — 

upon proof satisfactory to the collector of customs that adequate facilities 
aft not afforded in the Philippine Islands for such repairs, so that the work 
can not be done there reasonably, economically, and within reasonable time in 
tin- judgment of said collector * * *. 

Two other sets of legal provisions are "worth noting tit this point. 
The Philippine Legislature by Act *2711, known as the Adminis- 
trative Code, and passed in 1917, provided in sections 1388^-1386 
for a review by the court of first instance of the city of Manila of 
the decisions of the collector of customs in cases Involving the 
refund of money erroneously or illegally collected at the instance 
either of the protesting party or the secretary of finance of the 
Philippine government. The Philippine Commission, by Act &57, 
passed in 1902. as amended by Act 1515, passed in 1906, made a 
permanent annual appropriation to cover, among other subjects, 
refunds of customs duties erroneously received. 



AUDITOB FOB PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



On the part of the insular auditor it was contended that the 
decision of the collector of customs was not final and conclusive 
upon him; thai under section 24 of the organic act of 1916 he is 
given authority to "examine, audit, and settle all accounts pertain- 
ing to the revenues and receipts * * * of the Philippine gov- 
ernment"; that his administrative jurisdiction over accounts is 
exclusive; that his decisions are tinal and conclusive upon the 
executive departments; and that, moreover, the aggrieved party had 
another - plain, speedy, nnd adequate remedy" by the administra- 
tive appeal authorized in the organic law. Acting upon these 
grounds the insular auditor failed to countersign the warrant tor 
the refund of the duties paid under protest and the case was Left 
to the court for adjudication. . . , , fl 

This recital of facts and of the ar-ument< relied upon by hOth 
sides is sufficient for anv impartial mind to be convinced tliat tne 
position of the insular auditor in this particular case is by no means 
as unassailablv correct as the testimony presented in ftjor oi iae 
hill would seem to indicate or as the passage of .this bill at \vm 
time would necessarilv imply. And it is worth notmg at s p o nt 
that Mr. O. R. MeGuire, who has testified in favor of this h IK WroW 
in the Illinois Law Review, volume 20, page 462; for January, i.~ . 
as follows: 

- , * * * in customs 

* * * while tfie Tniicd states could not be sin a. fcbe ( . oll(Vlor 

cases, it was held that there was a common-law rem^aj i is* n0 tifled the 
for refund of duties illegally collected provided the liiii ^ ^ Goneral 
collector of liis intention to sue and not to pay tne niouej 
Treasury. (BUiOt P. Swartout. 188ft Ifl MM* 137.) 

The judgment of the Philippine Sn^^.^^^ wi(h 
Which is after all a matter of but minor liiipoitani i ^ ^ 
the larger problems connected with the PhilipP 1Iies » j, - ^ linl>i( , 
is just as reasonable to assume that a single IIUll V| ^ mvn author- 
to be mistaken in the interpretation of the e^VjJw court in the 
ity under the law as six learned members ol tne n | re . ults 
Philippines are, was productive of very astounding ^ American 

It was published broadcast in the IU>N \ s l )il|) Vtback.'* this from 
control in the Philippines had received a - sharpy | t)>v {]yx{ fche 
the Transcript of Huston. Mass., September { Q f { \ uv |)() ,k 

u Filipino politicians'* were jubilant over the v ^ Xcw York 
and plenty oi it/' which expression is from |) K \ 




...imples oi news items and editor ^ page 
papers throughout the United States. On i ' ( ■ , heading "War 
United States Daily for Mav 11. L926, uJjeU* 1 (ho following 

Department favors bill to aid Philippine r^xjedritob before the 
report was made of the testimony of 

House Committee on Insular Affairs [reading- ^ ^ ^ 

MmJ. Lawrence H. ilcdrick. of The Judge AdVacatj* OeJ e Supr eme Omrt 
in Charge for the War Department of two sails hOW WjfgJ^ 

of the United States, said that those sails had 1( j lipl >ine Supreme (<>un. 
situation has grown up in the last few years. T ,lC 1 



108 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPJXK ISLANDS 



he said, had in effect held the present accounting laws of the islands invalid, 
and this legislation is needed In order to assure the orderly conducting of the 
government . 

Who are these persons who by their decision in the i r nchausti 
case, according to the Americ an press, had struck a blow al American 
prestige and authority, paved the way for unlimited " pork," en- 
dangered Genera] Wood's efforts to rehabilitate the Philippines, 
brought on a crisis likely to result in bankruptcy for the Philippine 
Government, and nullifie d the accounting laws of the islands, thereby 
making impossible the orderly conducting of the government I They 
are members of the Philippine Supreme Court, appointed for life 
by the President of the United States with the consent of the Ameri- 
can Senate. Of the nine members of the court, five are American/5 
and four Filipinos. Of the eight justices who sat in the Ynchausti 
case, six decided against the contention of the auditor and two sus- 
tained him. Of the six justices who signed the majority decision, 
three are Americans and the other three Filipinos. The decision 
itself was written by an American. Mr. Justice Johns. 

And what of the effect of the decision on the government of the 
Philippine Islands and its finances? In a signed dispatch published 
in the New York Herald-Tribune of September lC>, 1025, Col. R. A. 
Duckworth-Ford, one of the assistants to the Governor General, 
wrote [reading] : 

The ruling of the Supreme Court of the Philippines * * * on being 
further studied to-day was found to bear on the particular case in question, 
from the equity standpoint, rather than on the genera] matter of jurisdic- 
tion. * * * The alarm first felt hits, therefore, been allayed * * ' *. 

In view of the arguments which have been presented in favor of 
this bill, apparently the peace of mind found among some members 
of the staff of the governor general did not spread to the insular 
auditor of the Philippines. For. as Was developed in the testimony 
of Major Hedrick before the House Committee on Insular Affairs, 
the idea of presenting the present law originated with the insular 
auditor himself. And it must not be overlooked— and this is said 
with the greatest respect and with no thought of criticism — that the 
two experts, one of ' whom admitted Unit he drafted the bill, who 
have testified in favor of the measure before the committees of the 
House and Senate are the counsel for the auditor in the t wo cases 
pending before the Supreme Court of the United States. 

With regard to the charge that after the decision in the Ynchausti 
case, raids on the public treasury would be in order and financial 
bankruptcy would be in sight, "it is sufficient to say that to-day, 
about eight months after the Philippine Supreme Court handed 
down its decision, no case that we know of similar to this one has 
been filed in Philippine courts. And the auditor himself in making 
his report for the fiscal year 1925 disclosed a surplus for the year 
itself lat&er than in previous years. 

I shall turn now to the other case, the Metropolitan Water District 
case 1 . This cast 1 , being different from the Ynchausti case and not. as 
important from the point of view of its relevancy to the pending 
bill, does not need any lengthy discussion. It will be taken up here 
only to show that in this instance as in others on the questions of 
law involved, the possibility of mistake on one side is just as great 
as it is on the other. It arose out of a dispute over an account be- 



AUDITOR FOB PORTO RIGO AM) PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 109 



tween the city of Manila, a municipal corporation, and the Metro- 
politan Water District, a public corporation, created by the Philip- 
pine Legislature by act as amended by act 3109, to 'supply water 
to the city of Manila and neighboring municipalities; The Water- 
works system, previously owned and operated by the city of Manila, 
was transferred to the Metropolitan Water District by the above- 
mentioned acts of the Philippine Legislature. The city claimed 
exemption from the payment of the water which it used for certain 
purposes, on the ground that, as owner of the waterworks system 
previously, it did not have to pay for water used for such pur- 
poses. The disputed account was brought to the attention of the 
auditor who decided in favor of the Metropolitan Water District. 
In order to enforce his decision, the auditor ordered the collector of 
internal revenue to withhold the share of the internal revenue taxes 
which had been collected and which was allotted, by law, to the city 
of Manila. Further, he drew a warrant on these funds, in the 
absence of any appropriation authorized by the municipal board of 
the city of Manila, payable to the Metropolitan District as payment 
or pari payment on the account in dispute, 

There is no need to outline here the laws and arguments relied on 
by both sides. In passing Upon the question of the soundness of the 
leiral principles upheld by the Philippine Supreme Court and with- 
out pronouncing judgment as to the accuracy of their application in 
this particular instance, it is sufficient to notice the grounds upon 
which the decision is based. 

The decision of the court said, in part, as follows: 

la the final analysis we have this situation. An attempt was made to rake 
money out of the government treasury, which belongs to the city of Manila, a 
municipal corporation, and apply it to the payment of a debt which a public 
corporation claims to have against the city. That proceeding was in conflict 
witii three of the express provisions of the section 3 Of the .tones law. 

First, it violates that portion of the section which says that no law shall he 
enacted 11 which shall deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without 
due process of law." 

Second, it violated that portion of the section which says: "That no money 
shall be paid out of the treasury except in pursuance of an appropriation by 
law." 

The Chairman, Will you permit an interruption there? 
Mr. Reyes. Certainly. 

The Chairman, Here is the point thai is troubling me and 1 think 
is a matter of some difficulty in the minds of the committee: Either 
in respect of this case or the other case, undoubtedly here was an act 
of the legislative body. But the theory of the accounting system of 
the Tinted States is that there must be reposed in somebody final 
authority to settle and determine these accounts. Xow, then, if a 
person that is aggrieved by the decisions of the head of a department 
can <ro into court and ^ret a mandamus to compel the payment of 
money, is it not perfectly apparent that in effect as this case stands 
unreversed or the law is not changed, this decision of the Supreme 
Court of the Philippines makes it possible for the Philippine govorn- 



ls not that the effect of it? 

Air. Reyes. Mr. Chairman, I imagine that you are referring to the 
Ynchausti case rather than the case of the Metropolitan Water 
District? 



nient 




anybody who wants to sue it. 



110 AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO ANI» PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



The Chairman. Yes. As 1 get it. thai is really the point ! 

Mr. Reyes. Yes. As I shall later state in my • testimony — I may 
anticipate it now — the brief filed on behalf of the •insular auditor 
himself before the Supreme Court of the United States admits thai 
in this particular case— of course, the committee, I suppose, is fully 
informed of that in this case— in the following language [reading]': 

The major question in the case is whether the duties of rlie auditor of this 
Philippine islands in connection with this claim were ministerial or discretion- 
ary If ministerial, the court had jurisdiction and should have lssue<l the wrril 
of mandamus, not because \h<> conn decided the claim was n jusl claim, but 
because the insular coUector of customs bad decided if was u jusl 
claim. * * * 

* It is a special class of claims which is treated by special arrange 
ment in the Philippines and with regard to legislation which is in 
effect. 

In this cass of claims the brief filed by the attorney for the insulAr 
auditor himself says the major question and issue in the case was 
whether the duty of the insular auditor in the refund of this money 
was ministerial or discretionary. If ministerial, then a mandamus 
would lie against the auditor*: if discretionary, of course, the courts 
would not assume to control by mandamus discretionary authority 
reposed in an administrative official. 

Senator Brat-ton. Does the general ride prevail that if the duty 
being performed by the officers is purely ministerial and does noi 
involve any discretion on the part of the officer that mandamus will 
lie to compel such officer to perforin a purely ministerial duty i < >n 
the other hand, if the officer possesses any discretionary power con- 
cerning the action, the courts will not "review that imd will not 
undertake to control the exercise of a discretionary power * 

Mr. Reyes. Yes. 

Senator Bratton. That is the point thai is interesting to me in the 
Ynchausti case. If the action of the officer there was purely mil 
terial and involved no discretion whatever, I think the court would 
be clearly right in granting the writ of mandamus to compel the 
performance of the ministerial duty: if it involved an act which was 
discretionary in the slightest degree, the court should not undertake 
to control that officer in the exercise of that discretion. 

Mr. 1vi:yi s. The point I wish to make 

Senator Bratton. Which was it— was the act ministerial or was 
u discretionary i 

Mr. It eves. Here are the facts in the case: The court found by a 
0 to 2 decision that it was ministerial. 
Senator Bratton. Purely ministerial % 

Mr. Rexes; The insular auditor contends it was discretionary and 
the case is before the Supreme Court of the United States. 
Senator Bratton. Upon that question? 

Mr. Reyes. Upon that question. It seems to me, then, the case 
being still unadjudicated by the Supreme Court of the United States 
—and I suppose the members of the committee would have full con- 
fidence in the learning of the members of the Supreme Court of the 
United States— that there is not sufficient justification for decision 
at this time by this committee on this debatable question with respect 
to this particular case. 



ATJDITOB FOB POBTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 111 



Senator Brattost. Is that the point on which the court decided, 
six holding ii was purely .ministerial and two of them holding it 
flras discret iona ry i 

Mr. Reyes. The six held it was ministerial and the two held that 
;he powers of the auditor of the Philippine Islands would not be 
controlled by the courts. 

Senator Hkattox. Upon the theory that this involved discre- 
tionary power i 

Mr. KBYES. T suppose upon the assumption that it involved dis- 
crel iona ry power. 

Senator Bayard. May I interrupt there a moment? 
Mr. Reyes, Yes, sir. 

Senator Bayard; As a matter of fact, in this particular case, 
coughly speaking, the matter canie before the auditor to approve 
the taking of certain moneys out of (he Treasury? 

Mr. Reyes. I do not know whether you would be exact about 
t in I hat Language, Senator. It is provided by law in the Philip- 
pine- thai no money can be drawn out of the treasury without 
countersignature by the auditor himself. 

Senator Bayard, Yes; and an attempt was made by some other 
official to draw money out of the treasury that had to come under 
the auditor*.- supervision, was it not? 

Mr. Reyes. \ es. 

Senator Bayard. And when lie attempted to draw that money 
< iu of the treasury the auditor said. "No; the monev can not be 
drawn out "; is not that a fact? 

Mr. Reyes, Yes. 

Senator Bayard. In this particular case? 
I fr. Reyes. Yes. 

Senator Bayard. In other words, he used his authority as auditor 
to exercise discretion as to whether that money should go out 
in accordance with that warrant that had been drawn; is not that 
the fact i 

Mr. Reyes. Yes. 

Senator Bayard. So that when the case came up, as Senator 
Bratton Suggested, touching on the discretionary power and not 
the ministerial power of the auditor, because everything that 
comes to the auditor under the terms of his office mu>t be passed 
upon. He can not neglect his duty; he must say yes or no. Hut 
in this case if he said no it must be presumed he exercised discre- 
tionary power. The courts did not hold he had discretionary 
power i 

Mr. Reyes. No. It simply held in this particular ease the power 
granted to him was not of a discretionary kind. 

Senator Bratton. In other words, Suppose the otlicers should say 
when the voucher drawn to cover the monthly pay of the governor 
was presented — and the law is plain in fixing the\imount of salary 
and how it is to be paid — suppose at the end of the month the 
auditor should say, "I do not think that voucher should be paid." 
The mere fact that he calls it discretionary does not make it so. 

The act might be purely ministerial and be his plain duty to ap- 
prove and Countersign the voucher and. J take it— while 1* am not 
familiar with the Ynchausti case — in this case the court decided that 
regardless of what the auditor called it, the act was ministerial 1 



112 AtTDITOB FOB PO$0.'O RICO AND PHILIPPINE islands 



MY. Rl>YES. In this particular case. 

Senator Hkattox. That is what I am talking about— and was 
not discretionary ? 
Mr. Reyes. Yes. 

Senator Brattox. And consequently thai mandamus was t In- 
proper method to tell him to perform a purely ministerial duty. 
Two held that the act was discretionary, involving the exercise of 
discretion, and that the court would not control the officer in that; 
and that is the question now for the Supreme Court to decide: 

Mri Betes. For the Supreme Court of the United States 

Senator Brattox. For the Supreme Court of the United States 
to decide I 

Mr. Reyes. Yes. And thai is the question which in my opinion 
this bill would attempt to decide at this particular time in favor 
of the contention of the auditor, notwithstanding the fact that it 
is admitted the duties of an administrative official are of two kinds — 
ministerial and discretionary; and notwithstanding the fact that 
six of the eight members of the Supreme Court of the Philippine 
Islands, who passed on the case, said that this duty in this case 
was ministerial. That is the point in issue at this time*. 

Senator Havahd. Do you mean to contend. Mr. Reyes, thai the 
auditor has no discretion ! 

Mr. Reyes. Xo. In other cases lie has discretionary authoMly; 
but T maintain that not all of his duties are discretionary, and thai 
is the point in duspute. 

If you wil] peruse the statement I made at the beginning regarding 
the Ynchuasti case, the recital of the facts and the law in the case, 
there will be some illumination on that point, whether discretic/1 
in this case was decided in favor of the collector of customs or til 
favor of the insular auditor. 

I suppose it wquld not be maintained by anj^body that the auditor 
has the right to approve or disapprove in his discretion any act of 
any other official involving the expenditure of public money. Cer- 
tainly that would create confusion in the administrative system 
of any government. 

This majority decision was penned by Mr. Justice Johns, an 
Vmerican, and was signed by four other justices, one American and 
three Filipinos. In addition, Mr. Justice Street, an American, 
filed a separate concurring opinion and said, in part, as follows: 

* * * It seem to inc. however — and upon this decisive point 1 concur 
with tin* majority— that the power to enforce flic set i lenient of accounts 

does not include the power to diven funds from the city treasury in the 
mamier now threatened. The insulin- auditor certainly (iocs not have the 
power to put his hands into the city treasury and take out money t<> pay 
it> debts, however meritorious the obligation; and if he does not have this 
power, he can nor intercept and divert in course or transmission to tin 
(£ageg sr. 88, transcript of record.) 

One member of the court filed a dissenting opinion. Two justices 
did not take part in the consideration of the case. The court thus 
decided six to one against the contention of the insular auditor. 

Under ordinary circumstances the findings of law of the highest 
tribunal of justice in any country are considered to be the most 
authoritative exposition of what the law is. The weight of such 
judicial conclusions is increased when such a majority as was true 



AUDITOR KOR PORTO RICO AXH PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 113 



of these two cases is found to be in favor of a certain interpretation 
of the law. And yet the underlyim: reason for the presentation 
of this bill, inspired by the insular auditor himself, is the assumption 
that the auditor has been deprived of powers which unquestionably 
belong to him and thai the Philippine Supreme Court undoubtedly 
was in error. The judgment of a single layman not learned in the 
law has more authority that than of six men who have devoted their 
lives to its s1 udy. 

Xor is this the only case when apparently the insular auditor 
is to he taken, in fact, as the final authority on the measure of his 
own powers. 

At this point I wish to make a few passing remarks as regards the 
character of some of the legal contentions advanced by the insular 
auditor himself. Amonir other instances may be mentioned the veto 
by the Governor General on objections from the auditor's office of 
an amendment passed by the Philippine Legislature to the act, sec- 
lion 3083, %; Denning the conditions under which the government of 
the Philippine Islands may be sued." Provision for permitting suits 
against tne Government on moneyed claims involving liability aris- 
ing from contract had been recommended by the American Chamber 
of Commerce in Manila. The original draft of this act was made 
by Mr. F. C. Fisher, a former member of the Philippine supreme 
court. It had been passed by the Philippine Legislature but in the 
course of passage changes crept in which defeated its purpose. The 
bill became a law after signature by the Governor General. When 
the defect was noted later, the Governor General again requested 
Mr. Fisher to prepare an amendment. This was complied with. The 
measure was recommended by the irovernor. It was approved by the 
legislature without any change. No objection regarding its con- 
stitutionality came from tliQ oflice of the attorney general. But the 
auditor's oflice held that it was unconstitutional and the Governor 
General vetoed a bill which he himself had recommended previously. 

( I pass now to the other point : It is contended that these two de- 
cisions of the Philippine supreme court are at variance with 
decisions made by the Federal courts in the United States. To 
this a sufficienl reply is that the cases now pending before the Su- 
preme Court of the United States and from that quarter alone may 
we expect a final and authoritative decision on what the law is in 
t lie United States. 

Then T pass to another point : It has been said that the decisions, 
especially in the Vnchausti case, in 1925, are in conflict with a 
previous decision of the Philippine supreme court in an analogous 
case, that of Lamb v. Phipps, L912 (22 Phil. Reports, 456). In 
other words, the argument is that the decision in the earlier case was 
good law and that the precedent which it established has been broken 
in the Ynchausti case. The Lamh-Phipps case, it is alleged, was 
the correct interpretation and the Ynchausti case the wrong one with 
respect to the powers of the auditor. Inferentially it is assumed 
that the two cases are completely analogous, and it was stated before 
this committee that the supreme court of the Philippine Islands in 
makitig this decision in the Ynchausti case did not even try to make 
a distinction between this and the former one. However, on this 
matter, the supreme court of the Philippines said: and this is Erom 
the transcript of the record in the Vnchausti case [reading] : 



114 AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AXD PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 

"** V 

The defendant cites and relics t,n the case of Lamh r. l'hipps. * * lint, 
that case was one in which Hie auditor was clearly authorized and empowered 
to exercise discretionary and quasi judicial povter. It involved an ex a muni- 
tion and settlement of an account, tie balancing items of debit and credit 
to ascertain if a balance was or was not due from Lamb to the Government; 
and no other Government official was empowered to settle and decide those 
questions. 

There is a marked difference between that and the instant case on both the 
law and the facts. 

That is what the Supreme Court decision said about the distinction 
between the Lamb and Phipps case and the Ynchausti case. 

Then it is further said that in issuing a writ of mandamus against 
the auditor the Philippine Supreme Court took a step unprecedented 
either in the Philippines or the United States. But the records show 
that the Philippine Supreme Court in 1918 granted by a unanimous 
decision a writ of mandamus against the auditor and purchasing 
agent of the Philippine Islands in the case of Compania General do 
Tabacos v. French and Unson (39 Phil. Eepts. 34). The insular 
auditor accepted the decision of the court, no cry of judicial interfer- 
ence with his jurisdiction was raised, and the Philippine government 
continued to function normally; and here is the point which I have 
already mentioned. Mr. Chairman, that is, with regard to the practice 
in the United States. The counsel for the insular auditor in their 
brief supporting the petition filed in the Supreme Court of the United 
States for a writ of certiorari said [reading] : 

The major question in the ease is whether the duties Of the auditor of the 
Philippine Islands in connection with this claim were ministerial or discretion- 
ary. It ministerial, the court had jurisdiction and should have issued the writ 
of mandamus, not because the court decided the claim was a just claim but 
because the insular collector of customs laid decided it was a just claim. * * * 
(P. 9.) 

The court in the Ynchausti case having held the duty of the auditor 
to be ministerial, it is difficult to understand the allegation that the 
issuance of the writ of mandamus has no basis in accepted practice. 
And that the payment of claims which have been adjudicated and for 
which an appropriation is available is merely a ministerial duty is 
admitted by Mr. Mc( Juire, one of the attorneys for the insular auditor, 
when lie stated in an ai ticlcvfor the Illinois Law lieview that settle- 
ments made by accounting officers on judgments by the Court of 
Claims or the district courts when appropriations are available arc 
merely ministerial. 

It is generally conceded even by the counsel for the insular auditor 
in this case that the writ of mandamus would lie against any officer 
if the duty to be performed is ministerial. 

The Chairman. Just review that a little further along the line 
of tin; question asked by Senator Burton. You agree, then, that if 
wc had a case in which there is no doubt about it being discretionary 
authority that in that sort of a case their mandamus would lie? 

Mi\ Reyes. I agree, with this modification, Senator, that proper 
body which finally passes upon whether his duty is discretionary or 
ministerial it is not the officer himself w T ho is affected, but the courts 
as a last resort. In case there is a dispute as to the interpretation 
of the law between one administrative official and another, cer- 
tainly it would not be contended that one of the parties to the case 
should himself be the judge. 



A.UDITOE FOB POBTO BICO and PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



115 



Senator BmoHAft. If I understand the bill. Mr. Chairman, the 
Auditor is not the judge, of last resort! 
The Chairman, Appeal is provided for. 

Senator P.inoham. To the Governor General and from the Gov- 
ornor General to the Comptroller General. 
Mr. Reyes. In connection with that point of view. Senator. I 

iiiiltI 1 1 soy that as far as I understand this matter, the final interpre- 
tation ot the laws can not ultimately be Lodged in any administra- 
tive official; there would have to be some provision for some kind 
<d determination or adjudication by the courts, whose peculiar 
function it is to interpret the laws regarding the powers of public 
officials under the law. # 

Senator B INGHAM. The appeal should lie from the Governor Gen- 
eral to the Court of Claims in this country: would not that meet 
your objections { 

Mr. Rbyes, I should prefer not to answer that question categori- 
cally, because in my opinion this bill is such a complicated one that 
any answer to a particular portion may be misconstrued with re- 
gard to the advisability of tlx 1 passage of the bill itself. If this 
were a simple matter on that question of yours. Senator, and if 
there were no other provisions of the bill, then it would be easy to 
taswer that. 

Senator Bratton, Just to get your general view, there is nothing 
so new and so novel about the Ynehausti ease — the decision there — 
as to call for urgent legislation of this kind. 

M r. Ki;yi:<. Xot at all. 

Senator Bratton, You contend that the law declared there is in 
harmony with the general weigKt of authority in the Tinted States; 
that is. that, assuming that the court was correct in determining that 
the act involved ministerial duty, it necessarily follows that the 
court was also correct in saying that mandamus was the correct 
remedy ( 

Mr. Hr.vi:s. If the premise i> correct, then the conclusion must be 
correct , 

Senator BRATTON. And. as I gather it. your contention is that the 
Ynehausti case is sound? 

Mr. Rkvks. Well, Senator. I am not taking sides in this maiter: 
I am not giving any judgment, because I do not assume that my 
judgment would be better than the judgment of the Supreme Court 
of the Philippines or the judgment of tin' Supreme Court of the 

1 tiited States, which will undoubtedly decide this ca-e. What 1 am 
trying to point out is that in this particular case there are two sides 
to the question, and for the Congress of the United States at this 
time to pass this Legislation is to assume that the Insular Auditor 
is correct and thai the Supreme Court is wrong. 

The Chairman*. I was wondering what becomes of the general 
theory of our accounting system, if it shall be determined that the 
court may in any case decide whether a given act is ministerial or 
discretionary* Docs not that, in effect, then provide that this Gov- 
ernment can .be sued without having to establish anything in the 
Court of Claims? Does not that overthrow the whole idea of our 
accounting system? 

nnr.os— 2G-^i>t 2 5 



116 



AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINK ISLANDS 



We have made the Comptroller General pretty nearly a supreme 
court in himself: he is a judicial officer. If you are going to hold 
that a plaintiff may come in ami raise this question and the court 
on any matters decides that it is a ministerial duty, it would seem 
that there is some danger that the foundation of your accounting 
system is absolutely gone; in other words, that anybody can bring 
in a claim against the Government and if it is decided that it is a 
ministerial act that then you can take money out of the Treasury 
without authority of law. That is the danger of the situation. 

Mr. Rkyks. Senator, I wish to make these observations regarding 
one point: We realize 1 as much as the others dp that the Public Treas- 
ury should be protected. But in passing Legislation of this character 
we must bear the following facts in mind: First, this is a decision 
limited to a particular class of claims. It does not at all affect the 
other classes of claims against the Government: second, that the 
practice in the United States itself with regard to refund of cus- 
toms duties which the collector of customs thinks have been errone- 
ously imposed is the same as the practice in the Philippine Islands. 
Under the customs regulations of 1923 the collector of customs re- 
views the decisions protested by the consignee and if he thinks that 
the duty imposed has been excessive he shall refund the money with- 
out the 1 ' need of anybody having the authority to check hi-> refunds. 
That is in the United States customs cases. 

In this particular case we think that the practice under existing 
laws in' the Philippines is more nearly in harmony with the practice 
in the United States than the system that would be imposed under 
this bill. 

And then the other point that I wish to make is that we come 
to protecting the Public Treasury by the proper interpretation of 
the duties of public officials under the law, I think there can be no 
question that the courts are better guardians than a single admin- 
istrative official. 

The Chairman. That brings out the whole thing. Then, really 
in your thinking you believe it safer to leave the matter to the courts 
than to depend upon an accounting system? 

Mr. Reyes. No; I do not. 

The Chairman. I understood you to say that you thought the 
court would be safer than an individual at the head of an account- 
ing system. 

Mr. Reyes. Xo. 

The Chairman. Of course, we proceed on the other theory that 
there would be an accounting officer with very large powers, prac- 
tically exercising judicial functions, and that the courts would have 
no right to mandamus him. You take the other view, as I gather? 

Mr. Reyes. Xo. I shall explain my point, Senator: The argu- 
ment that if the courts are allowed to pass upon questions of finis 
character there will be danger to the Treasury is predicated upon the 
thought that the supreme court would abuse its authority and inter- 
pret the law wrongly. If that is the basis of that argument, then 
why can not we reverse the principle and say, Is not the insular 
auditor himself liable to abuse his discretion, especially on matters 
regarding his own jurisdiction and the extent of his own authority? 
It seems: to me if vou are to choose between those two there would 



A.UDITOB FOB POBJTO RIO) AND PIIIMl'I'IN K ISLANDS 117 



be no question about the choice* I shall come to the substantial pro- 
visions of the bill. I shall lay aside these Legal questions. 

Putting these Legal questions aside, it is contended that the ac- 
counting establishment and the system of deciding claims which is 
found in its provisions is desirable. I shall now discuss this first 
point. The Contention is that while the bill does not increase the 
powers of the auditor, it clarifies them. 

A comparison of the provisions of the proposed law with those of 
the Jones law will show that there is provided a vast increase in the 
powers of that official of the Government because of the following 
facts : 

First, with regard to the revenues and receipts of the Government, 
the Jones law gives him power to ••examine, audit, and settle all 
accounts. * * *" The proposed law adds the words "adjust'' 
and " decide." Here the contention of those in favor of the bill has 
been that the power to settle includes the power to decide, and that 
therefore there is no increase of power. Hut it is hard to under- 
stand why, if thai is the settled and undoubted interpretation, it 
fras found necessary to insert the word at all. 

Second, in the Jones law no mention is made of the jurisdiction 
of the auditor over claims. Under the pending bill not only is his 
jurisdiction made to include specifically the subject of claims, but it 
is also true that in (his matter the additional words "adjust" and 
"decide" are made equally applicable. But it is certain that 
"claims" differ greatly in meaning from "accounts." Settling an 
account is essentially an auditing process. Deciding a "claim ,? is a 
judicial process; and if the accounting officer of the Government is 
to be given authority in the matter at all, it ought to be one that is 
final and conclusive upon any one of the other two departments of 
the Government J — the judicial and legislative. 

Third, the bill further increases the powers of the auditor in this 
respect : In the Jones law the auditor is given power merely to 
"audit in accordance with law and administrative regulations" all 
expenditures of funds or property belonging to the Government. In 
the proposed law he will not only "audit r but also "examine, ad- 
just, decide, and settle" all expenditures of funds or property. 

Then, fourth and most important of all, in the Jones law the deci- 
sions of the auditor are final and conclusive upon the executive 
branches of the Government only. In the pending bill the words 
? upon the executive branches of the Government " are omitted. 
The explanation that has been offered by the attorneys for the insu- 
lar auditor is that this has been done to cure what they believe to be 
interference by the courts with the discretionary authority of the 
auditor. In other words, in order to protect the powers of that offi- 
cial his decisions are to be made binding upon the judicial and legis- 
lative departments and Ins authority is to be made unquestioned 
and unquestionable by the two other coordinate and supposedly inde- 
pendent branches of the Government. 

In the United States the decisions of the former Comptroller of 
the Treasury and of the present Comptroller General, whenever they 
are made final and conclusive by law, are made applicable only to the 
executive branches of the Government. 

In the Philippines, from the date when the accounting office under 
American rule was first established in 1899 down through the passage 



118 A I'DITOIl FOB I'oirrn RiCO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



of the accounting net by the Philippine Commission in 1 the en- 
actment of the Jones law in 1016, and up to the present time the 
dfccisi0n£ of the auditor are binding upon the executive branches 
of the Government only. 

In spite of this radical extension of the authority of the insular 
auditor, the statement lias repeatedly been made that the hill does 
nothing more than clarify existing power- of the auditor and does 
not seek to extend them. The most that can he said in favor of this 
theory of simple clarification is that this proposed measure clarifies 
the powers of that official hy granting to him every claim of power 
lie has made and transferring to his jurisdiction every inch of what 
is. after all. disputed and debatable territory. 

Does this bill really clarify existing laws relating to the auditor's 
office? My contention is that it does not: it complicates existing 
law. 

It modifies, if it does not actually repeal, the many provisions of 
law in the Philippines relating to the refund of customs duties, in- 
ternal revenue taxes, and all other monetary claims for or against the 
Philippine Government. This is done without outlining a system 
of procedure' by which the present authority of the collector of cus- 
tom- and of internal revenue over matters pertaining to the collec- 
tion of taxes is to be adjusted to this new. all-inclusive jurisdiction 
of tlie auditor's office. 

Moreover, it state., that, except as otherwise Specifically provided 
in the act. the insular auditor shall have the same powers Which 
are now or which may hereafter be conferred upon the Comptroller 
General of the Tinted States. There will thus he effected a whole- 
sale transplantation of tint laws and the precedent- governing the 
bffice of this official of the American Government. There will also 
be an automatic extension to this portion of American territory 

10,000 mile- away of every new law. decision, or precedent affecting 

the accounting establishment of the United States. And this process 
Avili. it is believed, serve to clarify existing laws in tlx 1 Philippines 
relating to the office of the auditor. 

In the amendment which hag been incorporated in the House draft 
of this measure, the court of first instance of the city of Manila is 
given the same jurisdiction as is now or as may hereafter be granted 

to the Court of Claims and the Court of Customs Appeals of the 
United States. But no attempt i- made to harmonize this jurisdic- 
tion of the court with the "final ami conclusive " decisions of the 
auditor and no solution is provided to the difficulty which must 
;< i e in casd that official refuses to settle the judgments of the courts 

when appropriations are availahle for their payment. 

In other words, we will be in the same situation as we are now, with 
the addition that laws will he more complicated. 

1 come now to another point : It is claimed, furthermore, that the 
passage of the hill is Decenary to safeguard the Philippine treasury. 
This is your point that you suggested, I helieve. Air. Chairman. 
The inference is that under the present system of handling claims 
against the Government, the treasury is not as well safeguarded as 
it ought to he and that, under the provisions of this proposed law, 
belter safeguards would he provided. In order to be on concrete 
ground, it Would be desirable to confine the discussion of this point 
to the problem involved in the Ynchausti case, namely, the refund 



AUDITOR FOB PORTO RIO0 AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



of customs duties erroneously or illegally collected. This, of ^hhh 1 . 
plight not to be understood as meaning that if defects are discerned 
in thi.s instance a complete overhauling of our system of handling 
claims against the Government such as is contemplated in this bill 
would be necessary. For the refund of customs duties in the 
Ynchausti case represents a particular class of claims governed by 
provision- id' law relating to that specific subject only. 

Our inquiry is this: What are the checks to possible abuse of 
authority on the part of the collector of customs in the matter of 
refunds of customs duties? These are the following: 

First, there is the fact that, with the exception of Manila, the 
decisions of the deputy collectors, in the other ports in the Philip- 
pines must be approved by the insular collector of customs. 

Second, the secretary of finance; to whom a copy of the decision 
of the collector is required by law to be forwarded, may remove the 
case to the court of first instance of the city of Manila. 

Third, the insular auditor must countersign the warrant for pay- 
ment, while he has no authority to override the decision of the 
collector so long as the latter acted within the law, nevetheless, he 
may ascertain whether the legal requirements have been complied 
with or call the attention of the secretary of finance in case, in his 
Opinion, serious errors have been made. 

Fourth, the collector of customs may be removed by the appointing 
authority. 

Fifth, appropriation to pay the refunds must be available and the 
collector has no power to determine whether such funds are 
available, and the collector has no power to determine whether the 
said funds are available: it is the insular auditor who determines 
in that case. 

Such are the checks which are pronounced to be woefully in- 
adequate to safeguard the Philippine treasury. In their place is 
to be instituted a plan which, supposedly, will furnish better safe- 
guards. Under the proposed law. the following system will be 
en forced : 

First, the auditor for the Philippines will decide all claims for 
or against the Philippine Government including the refund of taxes 
Alleged to have been illegally or erroneously collected. 

Second, the decision of the auditor as to whether taxes were 
erroneously or illegally collected will override the decisions of the 
tax-collecting agencies of the Government- 

Third, while, in the amendment to the House bill, it is provided 
that the court of first instance of tin 1 city of Manila shall have the 
same jurisdiction over claims as the Court of Claims and the Court 
of Customs Appeals in the Tinted States the choice as the method 
of settlement is left to the claimant. Taken in connection with the 
difficulty in the payment of the judgment of the court, there should 
not \m much doubt about the method which most of the claimants 
would choose. 

Fourth, the insular auditor, the person who will decide the claim 
and who will tints have the power to create obligations on the part 
of the Government, will also countersign the wan-ants for the pay- 
ment of those obligations. 

Fifth, Act 357, as amended by Act 1-515, being still in existence 
and it being impossible to repeal it without the consent of the Gov- 



120 AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



ernor General, who is the administrative superior of the auditor, a 
permanent and indefinite annual appropriation for the refund of all 
moneys erroneously received or covered in the treasury will con- 
tinue to he available for the payment of claims allowed by the audi- 
tor's office. The insular auditor, who will have the power to create 
obligations on the part of the Government and who will countersign 
warrants for their payment is the authority who decides whether 
funds are available for the payment of those claims. 

As the brief filed before the supreme court of the insular auditor 
said | reading] : 

The determination of the availability of a general appropriation for the pay- 
ment of any claim payable from a general appropriation is a quasi-judicial 
or discretionary matter within the exclusive jurisdiction of the auditor, sub- 
ject only to the administrative appeals provided by law I p. KM — 

It is to be presumed that persons whose claims are allowed will 
not appeal from such decisions in their favor. 

Sixth, if the decision of the person who creates the obligation, 
approves its payment, and decides on the availability of funds for 
such payment should he favorable to the claimant, then such decision 
is final upon the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of the 
Government and. according to the House bill, can " never thereafter 
be reopened or considered." 

It seems clear that if the safeguards in the. existing laws arc 
inadequate to protect the Philippine treasury, the remedy proposed 
is worse than the original disease. 

Third, as a final ahigment, it is affirmed that the aim of the meas- 
ure is nothing more than to place the auditor of the Philippines in 
the same position with respect to the Philippine government that the 
Comptroller General of the United States holds with respect to the 
American Government and to give the former powers no greater 
than those enjoyed by the latter. 

A glance at the haws and practices in the United States fails to 
bear out this conclusion. In the matter of procedure in the refund 
of customs duties, it will be found that the existing laws in the 
Philippines are much nearer to the present practice in the United 
States than the system provided for in the pending bill would be. 
1 pon receipt of a written protest from the consignee, the collector 
is obliged to review his decision and may modify it in whole or in 
part and refund any duties which he finds to have been collected in 
excess. ( Sec. 515, Oh. 356, Stat, at L. 19-22: Art. 778-779, Customs 
Regulations, Uh>3.) Although refunds in compliance with decisions 
of the Board of ( reneral Appraisers of the Court of Customs Appeals 
must be done by the Secretary of the Treasury (Art. 787, Customs 
Kegnilation<. 1923); it is open to the collector to review his own 
decisions and if he concludes that money should be refunded as a 
result of such review, the refund is made by him without check by 
any other official. And, in the matter of the finality of the decisions 
oi the Comptroller General of the United States, it has not been 
denied that it extends only to the executive department, whereas in 
this bill the Conclusiveness of the decisions of the auditor is not 
limited to the executive branches of the government. That the latter 
would have greater powers than the former is shown by the language 
of the bill itself. It provides that the auditor shall have the same 



AUDITOR I OK I'OKTO \UCO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



121 



power* which arc now or which may hereafter be conferred upon the 
Comptroller General, "except as otherwise spe'cifically provided in 
thi> act." Moreover, if the intention really is to place the auditor 
on the same level as the comptroller; that purpose could have been 
served by the presentation of a bill with brief and simple provisions. 

When the Larger aspects of the problem of a proper system for the 
Supervision of the expenditures and disbursements of Government 
are considered, the contrast between the position of the Comptroller 
General in the United States and that of the insular auditor in the 
Philippines is even more glaring. The dissimilarities may be enum- 
erated as follows : 

First, in the Tinted States, the accounting establishment is inde- 
pendent of the executive and. in some, respects, may be said to be 
responsible to the legislative power. In (he Philippines the auditor 
is and. under this bill, will continue to be under the supervision of 
the Governor General On this point of executive control, the report 
of the select committee on the national Budget system of the House 
of Representatives (Kept No. 14, p. 7, GTth Gong;, 1st. se>s.) said: 

Under the present plan the Congress has ao power or control over appro- 
priations after they have once been made, it has no knowledge us to how 
expenditures are made under these appropriations, and in as much as the 
Comptroller of the Treasury and the six auditors owe their appointment to 
the President, they could not hope to hold their positions if they criticized 
wastefulness or extravagance or Inefficiency in any of the departments. The 
Executive having the power to initiate the Budget, certainly an independent 
audit is necessary to insure at all times a businesslike execution of the B.udget, 

Second, the Comptroller General is responsible more to the legis- 
lative than to the executive power. The Philippine Legislature lias 
no control, direct or indirect, over the insular auditor. The Comp- 
troller is appointed by the President by and with the advice and 
consent of the Senate* for a term of L5 years. The auditor is ap- 
pointed by the President without the intervention of the Philippine 
Legislature. The comptroller is independent of the executive 
departments^ The auditor is under the supervision of the Governor 
General. 

Third, under the system in the United States if it he true, as 
it is. that the judiciary e;m not interfere with the discretionary 
powers of the comptroller, it is equally true that in general, his 
decisions are not binding upon the courts. The same rule that pre- 
sents the courts from interfering with the powers lawfully vested 
in the comptroller operates to prevent the latter from interfering 
with the function of the courts to interpret the law. But. under 
the proposed bill, the decisions of the auditor are made final and 
binding without any qualification. 

Fourth, in the United States, the Congress through its power to 
make appropriations and because of the constitutional provision that 
no money shall he paid except in pursuance of an appropriation 
may exercise, if it so desires; the authority to review, in effect, and 
for itself the claims allowed against the government. Under the 
proposed law, the Philippine Legislature would not have complete 
freedom of action because, first, the decisions of the auditor are to 
be final and binding, and. second, there is a law authorizing a per- 
manent and indefinite annual appropriation for the payment of 
refunds of moneys erroneously covered into the treasury. This 



122 



A (JDITOB FOB POBTO RICO AND I'll VU PP] X E ISLANDS 



law can not be repealed without the approval of the < iovernor 
General, who is the administrative superior of the insular auditor. 

Fifth, the principal underlying the organization of tin* accounting 
establishment in the United States is that the person who originates 
expenditures should not have the power final I v to pass upon their 
payment Under the proposed bill, the insular auditor would decide 
claims against the government, would authorize the disbursement 
of funds in payment of claims allowed, and would determine 
whether or not appropriations are available for the payment of such 
claim-. 

I will conclude by saying that with respect to that part of the 
argument it is our contention that under the proposed system there 
will be less safeguards for the Philippine treasury than under the 
present system. 

The system that is provided in the bill is entirely different; in 
fact, it is the opposite of the system that is in force in the United 
States: and, finally, I wish to conclude by saying that if these 
arguments tend to cast doubt on the intrinsic merits of the bill, 
it is no less true that there are other reason- equally powerful and 
even more fundamental which make its approval inadvisable. 

h would diminish very greatly the autonomy granted to thfc 
Filipinos. The powers granted to a legislature do not mean very 
much unless they assure the effectiveness of Legislative authority 
over the actual conduct of government; that is to say, unless it 
includes authority to create administ rat i ve departments, determine 
their organization and powers, provide for the manner of appoint- 
ment of the heads of those departments, and the power to control 
the purse. 

I I Congress transfers discretionary authority from various admin- 
istrative officials to the insular auditor and gives to the complete 
discretion of the latter all claims for or against the Government, as 
well as sets his decisions beyond the reach of the judiciary and the 
legislature, it will have diminished the control of the Philippine 
Legislature over those matters intrusted to the jurisdiction of loyally 
appointed officials as well as its control over the strings of the 
public treasury, and thereby will have struck a serious blow at tilft 
autonomy already granted to the Filipino people. The issue, in 
this instance, is whether the Congress will take away with one 
Ijtand what it has freely granted with the other. 

Moreover, the organization and the jurisdiction of the accounting 
establishment should be the subjed of statutory and not of constu 
tutional legislation. If this bill is approved, it would be in direct 
violation of the sound principle that the constitution ot any country 
should include only those subjects which are of a fundamental 
character. Once a step in this direction has been taken, the way 
would have been smoothed over for congressional action on Piulip- 
pine matter.- which are oi* purelv local concern and which should be 
dealt with by the local Legislature. And if this practice should be 
fully developed, there would have been established an impossible 
system of government, namely, the long-distance kind. 

Lastly, is must not be overlooked that the Philippine problem 
is at present surrounded by difficult and trying circumstances. The 
existing situation calls for processes of common counsel and policies 
of moderation and conciliation on both sides. The procedure fol- 



AUD1T0B FOB POftTO RIOO AN D PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 123 



lowed :m<l the policy implied in the pending hill, far from dispelling 
the difficulties which now exist, will aggravate them. 

The Chairman. I add for the record at this point a memoran- 
dum that was prepared for the Secretary of War by Major Hetlrick 
on this same subject. 

(The memorandum is here printed in full as follows:) 
Memorandum for the Secretary of War. by Major Lawrence II. Hedrick. 

April in, 1920. 

II. H. 10040, Sixty-ninth Congress, first session, "To amend and clarify 
exii ting laws relating to the powers ami Unties of the auditor for Porto Rico 
and the auditor tor the Philippine Islands," merely extends to the auditors the 
powers which they were supposed to have under existing laws and which the 

accounting officers of the United States, now Comptroller General, have had 
sinee the ordinance of September m 2l\. 177s. of the Continental Congress. 

The accounting system for the government of the Philippine islands is sub- 
stantially the system *tha1 has been in operation in the United States since the 
said ordinance of September 26, 177 s. The Constitution provides! in Article 
I. section 0, thai no money shalt he drawn from the Treasury save in con- 
sequence of an appropriation by law. and the organic act contains a similar 
provision with respect t<> the treasury of the Philippine Islands. At no period 

in the history of the United States could money he secured from the United 
States Treasury except after an appropriation by Congress and on warrants 
drawn by some One of tin' heads ot' the various executive departments — -now the 

Secretary of the Treasury— and countersigned by the Comptroller of the 
Treasury, now the Comptroller General of the United States. Also, at no 
lime in our history have public moneys been advanced to officers of the Govern- 
ment lor expenditure in their discretion and without being required to account 
therefor, except in a few Instances in time of war. 

In the early days when there was some dispute between the executive 
departments and the comptrollers of the United Stated Treasury as to whether 
their settlements were final and conclusive on the executive departments, but 
this dispute was settled in favor of the contentions of the comptrollers by the 
act i»f March 30, 1808 (15 Stat, 54), which provided that such settlements 
should 14 he taken and considered as final ami conclusive upon the executive 
branch of the Government." There was u recommendation before Congress 
in 1868 for repeal of this provision, but the House Committee on Revision of 
the Laws reported unfavorably thereon. The committee said that: 

* • > power in the head of the War or any other Department to set 
aside and change the findings of Cue accounting officers of the Government Lb 
at war with the whole principle upon which the system is based: that the 
allowance end settlement of the disbursement of all public funds should be 
vested wholly in a set of officers other and different from those who made the 
expenditure. If their allowances and settlements can he set aside and changed 
by the head of the department under whose direction the money was paid, 
or the claim accrued, then the whole system of checks to improper expenditures, 
which is was supposed had been established, falls to the ground." C2(i Cong. 
Rec. 4342. | 

No change has ever been made in this provision and same was carried into 
the organic act as to the effect of the settlements of the auditor for the 
Philippine islands, and it was said by the Court of Claims in Geddes t\ United 
Stairs <:;s Gt Cls. 428, at p. Ill i ; 

" The accounting officers are the guardians of the appropriations, it i- their 

business to see that no money is paid oat of the Treasury unless the payment 

is authorized by an appropriation act; it is not their business to adjudicate 
abstract questions of legal right beyond the legal right of a person to be paid 
out of a specific appropriation. An appropriation constitutes the means for 
discharging the legal debts of the Government. 

"The judgment of a court has nothing to do with the means — with the 
remedy for satisfying a judgment. It is the business of courts to render judg- 
ments, leaving to Congress and the executive olficers the duty of satisfying 
rhein * * 

There was no right to sue the United States prior to 1855, and even after 
such right to sue had )>een given Congress did not authorize the payment o 
judgments from general appropriations in the Treasury but required sue 



124 AUDITOR FOR PORTO RICO A N I > PHILIPPINE tSUtNDS 



judgments to be reported to ir for specific appropriations with which to pay 
same. (See act September 30, 1800, 'J<'» stat. :>:;7. > in other words, Congress 
remained in control over appropriated public money, through the Comptrollers 
of the Treasury, and the judgments of ihe courts had nothing to do with such 
appropriated moneys. 

Prioi to 1855, when tiie United States consented co be sued, there were 
several attempts to secure public money from the United States Treasury by 
means of extraordinary judicial process Qgttinsl public officers, but such 
attempts were uniformly abortive. 'See Brashear v. Mason, r» How. wi: De- 
catur r. Paulding, 14 Peters, 497; Reeslde v. Walker, 17 How. '27:\ ; United 
states r. Guthrie, IT How. 284.) The Supreme Court ot the United States 
said in the latter case, in denying a writ of mandamus against the Secretary 

Of the Treasury, that — 

"The only legitimate inquiry for our determination upon the case before 
us is this, whether, under the organization of t he* Federal Government, or by 
any known principle of law. there can he asserted a power in I he Circuit Coun 
of the United states for the District ot Columbia, or in this court, to com- 
mand the withdrawal of a sum or sums of money from th^ Treasury of the 
United States, to he applied in satisfaction of disputed or controverted claims 
against the United States? This is the question, the very Question presented 
for our determination: and its simple statement would seem to carry with 
it the most startling considerations — nay, its unavoidable negation, unless this 
should be prevented by some positive and controlling command: for it would 
OCCUr, a priori, to every mind that a treasury, not fenced round or shielded In- 
fixed and established modes and rules of administration, hut which could he 
subjected to any number or description of demands, asserted and sustained 
through the undefined and undeflnable discretion of the courts, would consti- 
tute a feeble and Inadequate provision for the great and Inevitable necessities 

of the Nation. The government under such a regime, or. rather, under such 
an absence of all rule, would, if practicable at all. he administered not by the 
great departments ordained by the Constitution and laws, and guided by the 

modes therein prescribed, but by the uncertain and perhaps contradictory 
action of the courts, in the enforcement of their views of private interests/' 

Even after the United states had consented to he sued, the Supreme Court of 
tne United States denied a writ of mandamus against the Comptrollers of the 
Treasury. (United States v. Lynch. 137 t\ S. 280.) And while such writs had 
been allowed in a few instances against other officers <>f the Government to 
require payment of some specific appropriation made by Congress (Houston r 
Ormes, 252 U. S. 469, and Smith r. Jackson. 241 Fed. 747. 246 U. S. 388), it 
was believed when the organic act was enacted that the incorporation in said 
act of the Language contained in laws relating to the auditors and Comp- 
trollers of the Treasury with respect to the finality of their settlements would 
give the auditor for the Philippine Islands the same immunity from control by 
extraordinary judicial process. 

However, experience has demonstrated that said language is not sufficient 
to give the auditor immunity from control hy extraordinary judicial process 
and to continue the practice existing in the United States with respect to the 
auditors and comptrollers of the Federal Treasury, for the Supreme Court of 
the Philippine Islands has recently granted two or three writs of mandamus 
against the auditor requiring him to countersign warrants drawing money from 
general appropriations and to pay certain claims. Such control does not now 
exist in the United states over the acts of the Comptroller General Ln counter-- 
Signing warrants chargeable to general appropriations ami in paying claims. 
(See United states v. Lynch, supra, and Carroll Electric Company r. McCarl, 
8 Fed. (2d) 910; Skinner & Eddy Corporation r. McCarl. S Id, 1011.) An 
exception to the Comptroller General has apparently been made in the htst few- 
months as to the pay of Army and Navy officers (McCarl ot al. r. COX, 8 F"d. 
(2d i G69). However, this exception does not apply to the auditor for the 
Philippine Islands, for he does not pay such officers. 

EThe language in H. R. 10940 that' the settlements of the auditor (page 6. 
line S) of the Philippine Islands drops the words "upon the executive hranches 
of the Government." and provides that they shall he " final and conclusive." 
except when an appeal is taken as elsewhere provided in the bill. It will be 
• s een. therefore, that, the purpose of the Change is to continue the practice which 
gas obtained in the United States since the ordinance of 177X, with respect to 
the comptrollers and auditors of the Treasury, now the Comptroller General 



AUDITOR FOR POR1 I tICO AND PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 125 



of tbo United States, and which It w;i> believed obtained with respect to the 
auditor for the Philippine Islands under the same language of the corresponding 
statutes. The bill makes no change in theory as to the Independence of the 
auditor from judicial control, imt clarifies the existing statutes so as to over- 
come the recent decisions of the Supreme Court of the Philippine islands, 
asserting a jurisdiction to control the auditor by extraordinary writs, a juris- 
diction which has never theretofore existed either as to the accounting officers 
of the United States Treasury or as to the auditor for the Philippine Islands, 
and a continuation of which -as pointed out by the Supreme Court of the 
United States in the Cluthrie case, supra — will subject the treasury of the 
Philippine islands to "the undefined and (indefinable discretion of the courts" 
and place it under " an absence of all rule." 

The Chairman. That closes the hearings and the committee will 
now go into executive session. 

(Whereupon, at 11.50 o'clock a. in., the committee proceeded to the 
consideration of executive business, and at the conclusion thereof, 
adjourned to meet at the call of the chairman.) 



