(597) 



Reception. .No-. .336 
Symbol: I/f/5/No. 13 



UIII TED NATIONS 
RELIEF AND REHABILITATION ADMINISTRATION 

REFORTS 
of the 

COMMITTEES OP THE COUNCIL 
FIRST SESSION 

4\ 




Reception No. 356 
Symbol: 1/P/5/N0. 13 



TA3L2 OP CONTENTS 

Page 

Report of Goiimittee I - Organization 

and Administration - (Reception No. 322) 1-8 

Regional Committees of the Council 9-11 

Standing Committees of the Council 12 - 17 

Facilities and Iinmunities for the 
Administration, its Council and 
Committee Members and its Staff 18 - 21 

Rules of Procedure of the Council 

and its Standing Committees 22 - 34 

Regulations v/ith Respect to Expendi- 
tures and Receipts of the Adminis- 
tration, Administrative Budget, and 
Allocation of Administrative Expenses 55 - 41 

Report of Committee II - General Policy 
(Reception Uo. 299) 

The Scope of the Activities of the 

Administration 42 - 46 

Relations with Governments 46-48 

Relations with Other Inter-Govern- 
mental Agencies 49 

Report of Committee III - Finance and 
Supplies (Reception No* 290) 

The Financial Plan 50 - .54 

Insurance 54 

Taxation of Relief and Rehabilitation - 

Supplies 54 - 55 

Procedures for Ascertaining and Meeting 
Deficits in Supplies Requiring I i- 
portation 55 - 57 

Functions of the Committee on 

Supplies 58 

Report of the Committee on Ad Hoc 

Co: nit tees 59-61 



\ 



-2- 

Page 

IVv Report of Committee IV - Relief and Re- 
habilitation Policies - (Reception No. 310) 62 - 64 

A Resolution Relating to Relief Dis- 
tribution Policies (*5 „ 66 



A Resolution Relating to Health and 
Medical Care 



£7 



A Resolution Relating to Welfare Serv- 
ices q and Voluntary Relief Agencies 68 - 69 

A Resolution Relating to Policies with 

Respect to Displaced Persons 70 - 71 

A Resolution Relating to Policies with 
Respect to Agricultural Rehabilitation 
and Other . .3 cf increasing Food 
Essential to Relief 72 - 73 

A Resolution Relating to Policies with 
Respect to the Rehabilitation of Such 
Industries, Transport and Other Serv- 
ices .• as Are Essential to Relief 74 _ 75 

A Resolution Relating to Policies with 

Respoct bo Shelter 76 - 77 

Report of Subcommittee 1 - Relief 

Distribution Policies 79 _ 31 

Report of Subcommit t se 2 - Policies 
with Respect to Health and Medical 
Car^ 82 - 91 

Report of Subcommittee 3 - Policies with 
Respect to V/elfare Services Including 
Relations with Voluntary Relief Agencies 92 - 93 

Statement of Subcommittee 3 - 

(Reception No. (217) 246) .95 -1$)© 

Report of Subcommittee 4 - Policies with 
Respect to Assistance to Displaced 
Persons 101 -1141 

Report of Subcommittee 5 - Policies Re- 
lating to Agricultural Rehabilitation 
and Other Means of Raising Food Essential 
to Relief U5 -1217 

Report of Subcommittee 6 - Policies Re- 
lating to Rehabilitation of Such 
Industries, Transport, and Other Serv- 
ices^ as are Essential to Relief 122 - .127 

V. First Report of the Committee on Ad Hoc 

Committees - (Reception Ho, 2857" 128 - 1-31 

Second Report of the Committee on Ad Hoc 

Committees - (Reception No. 331) 132 - ]L33 



-1. 



(GOO) 



COMMITTEE I 
(deception !?©-•♦ 322) 
REPORT 

OF THE COMMITTEE ON ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION 



Chairman: 
Vice-Chairman: 
Rapporteur: 
Secretary: 

Assistant Secretary: 



Paul-Henri Spaak (Belgium) 
Juan Chavez (Peru) 
Brooke Claxton (Canada) 
Huntington Gilchrist 
Allen T . Bonne] j. 



The Committee on Organization and Administration* 
having met and having considered the reports of its four 
subcommittees, recommends the adoption by the Council of 
the resolutions appended hereto on the following subjects: 

I. Regional Committees of the Council 



1-. 
2. 
3. 



Composition of the Committee of the Council 
for Europe (Appendix I) . 

Composition of the Committee of the Council 
for the Far East (Appendix II).. 
Functions of the Committees of the Council 
for Europe and the Far East (Appendix III). 



II • Standing Technical Committees of the Council 

1. Creation and Composition of Standing Technical 
Committees (Appendix IV) . 

In the resolution appended hereto the 
Committee points out that as each member 
government may name a representative on each 
of the technical committees it is likely that 
membership on these committees will be lar, : 
and may not always be confined to technicians. 
The Committee therefore deems It important to 
emphasize to the Council the desirability of 
firmly establishing the principle that the 
standing technical committees and subcommittees 
should be relatively small groups of exports, 
selected solely for their special competence 
and familiarity with the questions with which 
they are to deal. 

2. Functions of the Committee on Agriculture 
(Appendix V) . 

3. Functions of the Committee on Displaced 
Persons (Appendix VI). 

4. Functions of the Committee on Health (Appendix VII) 



-2- (601) 



5. Functions of the Committee on Industrial 
Rehabilitation (Appendix VIII). 

6. Functions of the Committee on Welfare (Appendix IX). 

III. Facilities and Immunities for the Administration , 
its Council and Committee Members and its Staff , 

1. Facilities and Immunities for the Administration, 
its Council and Committee Members and its 

Staff (Appendix X) , 

2. Official Correspondence of the Administration 
(Appendix XI) . 

3. Travel Facilities for the Staff of the 
Administration (Appendix XII). 

In Section II of each of the last three 
resolutions, the Council requests the Director 
General to initiate immediately negotiations 
with member governments to bring the arrange- 
ments mentioned in the resolution into opera- 
tion as rapidly as possible. The Committee 
hopes that the member governments will carry 
on these negotiations on their side speedily 
and that no member government will withhold 
these immunities and facilities pending 
favorable action by other governments. It is 
important, in the opinion of the Committee, 
that the member governments act In these 
matters as quickly as their executive and 
legislative procedures permit. 

IV. Rules of Procedure of the Council and its Standing 
Committees 

The Committee recommends to the Council that 
it adopt the resolution v/hich follows, bringing into 
force the Rules of Procedure of the Council and 
Annex I thereto, being the Rules of Standing 
Committees of the Council. 

With reference to Article XI of the proposed 
Rules of Procedure of the Council, the representative 
of the French Committee of National Liberation 
stated that he accepted in principle the use of 
English as the official language of the Council 
and its committees in view of the exclusively 
economic and technical character of the problems 
with which the Council has to deal, it being clearly 
understood^, however, that he did not renounce in 
any way the right to claim for French its tradi- 
tional role as the official language in the discus- 
sion and formulation of international documents of 
a diplomatic character. The representatives of 
Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands ass-ociated 
themselves with this statement of the representative 
of the French Committee of National Liberation. 



-3- 



The Committee points out that in accordance 
with Article XI, Section 2, of the Temporary Rules 
of Procedure of the Council, the attached rules, 
which arc designed to be permanent, will, as soon 
as adopted by the Council, replace the temporary 
rules . 

A Resolution Relating to the Rules of Procedure of 
the Council and the Rules of Standing Committees of the 
Council « 

RESOLVED 

That the Rules of Procedure of the Council 
attached hereto (Appendix XIII), together with 
Annex I thereto, Rules of Standing Committees of 
the Council, shall be the rules of procedure of 
the Council and the rules of Standing Committees 
of the Council o 

V* Personnel Policies of the Administration 

With regard to personnel policies of the 
Administration the Committee, after examining the 
subject, has arrived at the following conclusions 
and recommendations: 

1. The Council's function with respect to 
the problem of personnel is to formulate a 
broad general policy which v/ill result in the 
employment of a staff of highly competent offi- 
cers and employees v/ho are truly international 
civil servants • It is recognized that the 
executive authority and responsibility arc- 
vested, under the Agreement, in the Director 
General. Consequently, it is necessary that 

he act with the greatest possible liberty in 
personnel matters so that he may speedily 
establish an efficient and adequate adminis- 
trative force, composed of persons v/ho are 
selected on the basis of their Individual 
competence, integrity and technical skill* 

2, In order to attain a staff of truly inter- 
national character it is recommended that 
recruitment should be upon as wide a geographic 
basis as possible, compatible with effective 
and efficient administration. It was agreed 
that it would be a wise policy for the Director 
General, in recruiting employees* to ascertain 
in advance if any condition or circumstance 
existed with respect to a candidate which might 
minimize the utility of such candidate to the 
Administration . It was further agreed, however, 
that the Director General must 'have the widest 
possible liberty in determining the relation- 
ship between the Administration and Member 
Governments in the recruitment of their Nationals 



-4- 



(203.) 



3. The Committee recommends that member 
governments assist the Director General in 
securing a properly qualified staff by making 
available to the Administration such persons 
in their ov/n civil service as the Director 
General may invite to join the staff of the 
Administration. In such cases, proper steps 
should be taken by the Member Government to 
safeguard such persons from any loss in established 
status or rights by reason of their tcmporary 
transfcr to the service of the Administration. 

It was felt that the adoption of a similar 
policy by international agencies would be of 
great aid to the Director General and promote 
the development of common policies and a stronger 
international civil service. 

4. It was recognized that the wholly tem- 
porary character of the Administration presents 
a very special personnel problem. Salary 
standards must be established at a sufficiently 
high level to make it possible for the 
Administration to secure the services of persons 
possessing the highest degree of competence in 
their respective fields of work. On the other 
hand, it was felt that the most careful scrutiny 
must be given by the Director General to the 
special problem which will arise because _ of 

the varying salary standards prevailing in 
the different parts of the world in which the 
Administration' will operate; and that every 
precaution must be exercised by him to avoid 
inequities and eliminate friction because of 
these varying standards. 

5. Recognizing that the scope and complexity 
of the work which the Administration is under- 
taking will require the services of persons 
possessing a wide variety of skills 2nd technical 
knowledge, your subcommittee feels that it may, . 
in some instances, be essential for the 
Administration to provide special trr ining f or 
its personnel. It was agreed that the fullest 
utilization should be made by the Administration 
of the men and women now serving in the Armed 
Forces of the United Nations, and who, at the 
close of the war, will constitute a vast 
reservoir of manpower capable of making an 
extremely valuable contribution to the work of 
the Administration. 

In order to make effective these conclusions, the 
Committee recommends the adoption by the Council oL tne 
following resolution: 

A Resolution Relating to Personn el Policies 

WHEREAS, the Council desires to promote the 
concept of a truly international civil service; and, 



-5- 



WHEREAS, it recognizes that the success of the 
Administration will in large part depend upon the 
vision, competence, integrity, and loyalty of the 
men and women who will become its administrative 
officers, and comprise its technical staff; and that 
the vesting, by the Agreement , of full executive 
authority and responsibility in the Director General, 
requires that he act with the greatest possible 
freedom in the selection of personnel and the 
establishment of personnel standards; it is therefore 

R--30LVED ' 

1 t That the staff of the Administration 

should be of an international character, 
selected upon the basis of individual competence, 
character and integrity, without discrimina- 
tion on the grounds of sex, race, nationality 
or creed, and recruited upon as wide a geographic 
basis as is possible, compatible with efficient 
administration; and that salary standards be 
established at a sufficiently high level to 
make it possible for the Administration to 
secure the employment of persons possessing the 
highest qualifications within their own particular 
field of endeavor; and that due consideration 
should be given to the special problems which 
will arise because of the varying salary 
standards that will prevail. in the different 
countries in which the Administration will 
operate . 

2. That the Council recommends 

a) That all meriber governments endeavor 
to make available to the Administration 
such persons in their own civil service 
as the Director General may invite to 
join the staff of the Administration; 
and to take proper steps to ensure that 
the established rights and status of such 
persons shall be in no way adversely 
affected by their temporary employment by 
the Administration. 

b) That international agencies be urged 
to adopt the same policy with respect to 
such of their employees as may be invited 
to join the staff of the Administration. 

VI . Regulations with Respect to Expenditures an d Receipts 
of the Administration, Administra tive Bucket and 
Allocation of Administrative Expenses 

1. Regulations with Respect to Expenditures and 
Receipts of the Administration 

The Committee recommends the adoption of 
the following resolution concerning the 
attached regulations with respect to expendi- 
tures and receipts of the Administration 



(605) 



(Appendix XIV). Regulations in the financial 
field are also included in the Financial Plan 
approved by Committee III. It is recommended 
that the report of that committee be studied 
and coordinated as far as necessary with the 
report of this Committee. 



A Resolution Relating to Regulations With Respect 
to Expenditures and Receipts of the Administration : 

RESOLVED 

That the Council adopts the regulations attached 

hereto which shall be considered as Annex II, to the 

Rules of Procedure of the Council (Appendix XIII/. 

2. Administrative Budget and Allocation of 
Administrative Expenses 

The Committee, having considered the 
estimate of administrative expenses for the 
year 1944 and for the unelapsed part of the 
year 1943, submitted by the Director General 
as required by Article VI of the Agreement 
(Appendix XV), recommends the adoption by the 
Council of the resolution set forth below. 

The Committee believes tfcat it is essential for 
the purposes of Article VI of the Agreement and of 
the efficient operation of the Administration that 
a method of allocating administrative expenses among 
all member governments should bo agreed by the 
present Council T In the time available, however, 
it did not appear possible to the Committee to 
suggest a schedule of allocations that could be 
confidently taken as finally the most appropriate. 
Consequently, the Committee proposes that the 
allocation to be made at this session of the Council, 
as set forth in the following resolution, should be 
regarded as provisional, in that it should be 
reviewed by the sppropriate Committee of the Council 
before a final determination is made by the Council 
for future years. In framing this schedule the 
Committee has sought guidance from existing 
schedules of allocations used by other international 
bodies. It has recognized, however, that it would 
not be appropriate for the Administration to adopt 
the principle which obtains on many such bodies of 
limiting the maximum allocation so that no state 
pays more than a comparatively small percentage 
of the total. It hjaa further had in mind the desir- 
ability of a clear and simple schedule, and it has 
paid regard to the fact that the main object of the 
Administration is the provision of relief supplies 
and services, and that it would be undesirable to 



-7- 



(606) 



adopt a schedule of administrative expenses which 
would allocate an unduly large proportion of any 
government's general contribution to administrative 
expenses* At the same ti: v :c the Committee has been 
anxious to meet the expressed desire of the govern- 
ments of liberated areas to contribute substantially 
to the administrative expenses ♦ In accordance with 
the regulations with respect to expenditures end 
receipts of the Administration, a member government 
may treat its share of the administrative expenses 
as" included in its general contribution for 
participation in the work of the Administration. 



-8- 



(607) 



A Resolution Relating to tht Adsairxis tpativo ' Budget end the 
Allocation of Adrriihist rat ivi 1 1 \l v, . s : 

BSSQLYEDj;, * W^^SSS^^M^^ T $0^^^^^^^^ 

1. That the annual budget covering the necessary 
administrative expenses of the Administration 
for the calendar year 1944 and the unelapsed 
part of the year 1943 submitted by the Director 
Gv.neral in the amount of $ 10,000, 000. is hereby approved 

2. That the total amount of :|;10,000,000 approved in 
the preceding paragraph is allocated to the 
member governments in the following proportidns: 







Percent' • 


xi U. o 0 1 alia 




i • oy 


UUl v i lCUii 




I • uu 


UUx 1 v lu 






3"Pa 7, \ 1 






w ell 1 ^.U. ui. 




O » uu 


Phi 1 r 




on 


Oil j»XieA 




O • UU 


<J J_ will J la 




• e^U 






• UO 


U ci 




on 


w C. C XIO olOVaK lcl 




± • uu 


ivOTuii la-C t^n 3UDJ. 


ic • 


• JO 






• uo 


V*' <~>'*"rr> "f* 




• r U 


EI Salvador 




• UD 


Ethiopia 




• UD 


French Cornr.uttcc 


of National 




Liberation 




4t • UU 


Greece 




• ou 


Guatemala 




♦ uo 


Haiti 




.05 


Honduras 


1 


.05 


Iceland 




.05 


India 




4.00 


Iran 




.10 


Iraq 




.10 


Lib c ria 




.05 


Luxembourg 




.05 


Mexico 




.70 


Netherlands 




1.50 


11 cw Zealand 




.30 






.05 


Eiprway 




.30 


Pan arna 




.05 


Paraguay 




.05 


Peru 




.25 


Philippines 




.05 


Poland 




1.00 


Union of South Africa 


1.00 


T ; . o • 3 • R • 




15.00 


United Kingdon 




15.00 


U • S • A • 




40.00 


Uruguay 




.20 


Venezuela 




.10 


Yugoslavia 




.70 
100.00 



4 



-9- 



■6608^ 



APPENDIX I to the Report of Committee I 

A Resolution fixing the composition of the Committee of 

the Council for Europe, 

WHEREA§, In paragraph 5 of Article III of the Agree- 
ment there is established a standing Committee of the 
Council for Europe and, 

WHEREAS, The Agreement further provides that the said 
Committee "shall consist of all the members of the Council 
or their alternates, representing member governments of 
territories within the European area and such other mem- 
bers of the Council representing other governments dir- 
ectly concerned with the problems of relief and rehabili- 
tation in the • European area as shall be appointed by the 
Council;" and, 

WHEREAS, The terms "Europe" and "European area" are 
not defined in the Agreement; it is therefore 

RESOLVED 

1, That for the purposes of the Committee of the 
Council for Europe, the terms "Europe" and "European 
area" shall be construed to include the entire contin- 
ent of Europe, the British Isles, Iceland, and all 
islands in the I.Iediterranean, 

2» That the Committee of the Council for Europe 
shall consist of the members of the Council or their 
alternates representing Belgium, Czechoslovakia ; the 
French Committee of National Liberation, Greece, Iceland, 
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, the Union 
of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom, and 
Yugoslavia, being countries included within the European 
area, and in addition the members of the Council or their 
alternates representing Brazil, Canada and the United 
States of America. 

3. That the Central Committee is authorized to 
appoint additional members to the Committee in cases of 
emergency between sessions of the Council, such appoint- 
ments to" continue until the next session of the Council. 



-10- 



(609) 



APPENDIX II to the Report of Committee I 

A Resolution fixing the composition of the Committee 
M the Comic il for the Far Last 



WH2REAS, In paragraph 5 of Article III <bf the UNRRA 
Agreement there is established a "Committee of the Council 
for the Far East"; and, 

WHEREAS, The Agreement further provides that the said 
Committee "shall consist of all the members of the Council, 
or their alternates, representing member governments of 
territories within the Far Eastern area and such other members 
of the Council representing other governments directly con- 
cerned with the problems of relief and rehabilitation in the 
Far Eastern area as shall be appointed by the Council"; and, 

WHEREAS, The terms "Far East" and "Far Eastern area" 
are not defined in the Agreement; it is therefore 

RLSOLVED 

1. That for the purposes of the Committee of the 
Council for the Far ^ast the terms "Far East" and "Far Eastern 
area" shall be construed to include eastern continental Asia, 
the East Indies, Philippine Islands, Australia, New Zealand, 
and the Islands of the eastern Indian and western Pacific 
Oceans . 

2. That the Committee of the Council for the Far East 
shall consist of the members of the Council or their alter- 
nates, representing Australia, China, the French Committee 
of National Liberation, India, the Netherlands, New Zealand, 
the Philippine Commonwealth, the United Kingdom, and the 
United States of America; and 

5 f That the Central Committee is authorized to appoint 
additional members to the Committee in cases of emergency 
betv/een sessions of the Council, such appointments to con- 
tinue until the next session of the Council.- 



11- 



(610) 



APPENDIX III to the Report of Committee I 

A Resolution relating, to the Functions of the Committees 
of the Council for Europe and the S'ar East 



RESOLVED 

That the functions of the Committee of the Council for 
Europe aid the Committee of the Council for the Far East 
shall be: 

1. In the light of conditions prevailing in Europe 
and the Far East, and with the advice of such technical or 
special subcommittees as may be created, to recommend from 
time to time, as policies to be adopted by the Council, what- 
ever basis or bases for overall requirements the Committees 
think appropriate for the whole or parts of their respective 
areas; and. to advise the Director General with respect to the 
computation of overall requirements for their respective areas 
in conformity with the bases and policies approved by the 
Council; 

2* To advise the Director General with respect to the 
fair and equitable apportionment of relief and rehabili- 
tation supplies available to areas within the European and 
Far Eastern regions respectively where the Administration 
may operate; and to assist him in securing the maximum produc- 
tion and interchange of any surplus supplies which can be 
made available within each region, by promoting appropriate 
national or Intergovernmental action on the part of member 
governments » 

3. To receive and discuss the periodic reports covering 
the programs and activities of the Administration in Europe 
and the Far East, respectively; and to advise the Director 
General on the organisation of measures to assist displaced 
persons and the coordination of national action in regard to 
medical and other relief and rehabilitation problems common 
to each region; and 

4„ Generally to consider relief and rehabilitation 
policies in Europe and the Far East, respectively; to 
formulate recommendations on such policies, and to discuss 
such recommendations with the Director General or his 
representative; and to transmit such recommendations to the 
Director General for distribution to the Council aid the 
Central Committee. 



-12- 



(611) 



APPI2MDIX IV to the Report of Committee I 

A Resolution relating to the creation and composition of 

standing technical" committees' 



WHgRSAS, Many of the policy problems of the Council 
and of its regional committees ai»0 highly technical in 
character; and, 

Ye'eRBAS, Ih paragraph 6 of Article III of tho Agree- 
ment, the creation of standing technical committees is 
authorized; it is therefore 

RESOLVES 

1. That the Council hereby creates standing 
technical committees on: 

Aai'icul Lure 
Displaced Persons 
Health 

Industrial Rehabilitation 
Welfare 

2. That such committees shall consist of such 
members of the Council as indicate to the Director General 
their intention to participate in the v?crk of a committee or 
committees , or of alternates nominated by such members of 
the Council as shall elect to do so, such alternates to 
possess special competence in the problems relating to tho 
work of the committee to which they are nominated. 

3. That the Central Committee is hereby authorized 
to make any further arrangements necessary in regard to the 
work of - these committees and to make emergency appointments 
between sessions of the Council, such appointments to continue 
until the next session of the Council. 



-13- (612) 
APPETTDIX V to the Report of Committee I 



A Resolution relating to the 
Functions of the Committee on Agriculture 



RESOLVED 

That the functions of the standing technical Committee 
on Agriculture shall be: 

1. T© advise the Council, the Central Committee and 
the Director General as to the nature of and scope of prob- 
lems relating to agriculture, fisheries and food production 
and the rehabilitation of industries concerned therewith in 
areas in which the Administration will operate; 

2. Periodically to review the programs of the Admin- 
istration with regard to agriculture, fisheries, food pro- 
duction and related subjects, and consult v/ith the Director 
General thereon with respect to any suggested modifications; 

3. To formulate proposals on technical policies in 
regard to agriculture, fisheries and food production and the 
rehabilitation of the industries concerned therewith and 
related subjects, discuss such proposals with the Director 
General, and transmit such proposals to the Director General 
for distribution to the Council and the Central Committee; 
and 

4. 7hen requested by and in consultation with the Com- 
mittees of the Council for Europe or for the Far East or such 
other regional committees as may hereafter be established, to 
appoint subcommittees to advise the regional committee and 
the chief representative of the Director General in the region 
concerned with respect to agriculture, fisheries and food 
production and the rehabilitation of the industries concerned 
therewith and related subjects. 



-14 



(613) 



APPENDIX VI to the Report of Committee I 

A Resolution relating to the functions of th| 
Committee on Displaced Persons 



RESOLVED 

That the functions of the standing technical Committee 
on Displaced Persons shall be: 

1. To advise the Council, the Central Committee and 
the Director General on the organization of the work of the 
Administration in assisting in the repatriation and return 
of persons who have been obliged to leave their hemes as a 
result of the war; 

2. Periodically to review the programs of the Adminis- 
tration with respect to displaced persons with a view to 
calling the attention of the Council to any features in 
those programs which in their view require modification; and 

3. When requested by, and in consultation with, the 
Committees of the Council for Europe or for the Far East or 
such other regional committees as may hereafter be estab- 
lished, to appoint subcommittees to advise the regional 
committee and the chief representative of the Director 
General in the region concerned, with respect to problems 
of displaced persons. 



-15- 



4614) 



APPENDIX VII to the Report of Committee I 



A Resolution Relating to the Functions of the 

Committee on Health 



R£30LVi,D 

That the functions of the standing technical 
Committee on Health shall be: 

1. To advise the Council, the Central Committee and 
the Director General as to the nature and scope 
of problems relating to health, medicine, and 
nutrition in areas in which the administration 
will operate; 

2. Periodically to review the programs of the Adminis 
tration in the health, medical, nutrition and re- 
lated fields, and consult with the Director 
General thereon with respect to anj suggested modi 
fications; 

3# To formulate proposals on technical policies 
relating to health, iiiodicalj nutrition and re- 
lated fields j discuss such proposals with tho 
Director General , and transmit such proposals to 
the director General for transmission to the 
Council and to tho Central Committee j £nd 

4. "hen requested by, and in consultation with, the 
Committees of tho Council for the Par East or 
for Europe, or such oth.r regional committees 
as may hereafter be established, to appoint sub- 
committees to advise thv, regional committee 
and the cirief representative of th6 Director 
General in the region concerned, with respect 
to health and rolatcd special problems. 



-16- 



(615) 



APPENDIX VIII to the Report of Committee I 



A Resolution relating to the functions of the 
Committee on Industrial Rehabilitation 



RESOLVED 

That the functions of the standing technical 

Committee on Industrial Rehabilitation shall be: 

i« To advise the Council, the Central Committee 
and the Director General as to the nature of and scope 
of problems in fields relating to the rehabilitation 
of public utilities and services, to the rehabilita- 
tion of industries producing urgently needed goods, 
and to rehabilitation supplies in areas in which the 
Administration will operate; 

2. Periodically to review the programs of the 
Administration in such fields of industrial rehabilita- 
tion, and consult with the Director General thereon 
with respect to any suggested modifications; 

3. To formulate proposals on technical policies 
relating to the rehabilitation of public utilities 
and services, to the rehabilitation of industries 
producing urgently needed goods, and to rehabilita- 
tion supplies, to discuss such proposals v/ith the 
Director General, and transmit such proposals to the 
Director General for distribution to* the Council 

and to the Central Committee; and 

4. uhen requested by, and in consultation with 
the Committees of the Council for burope or for the 
Far ^ast or such other regional committees as may 
hereafter be established, to appoint subcommittees 

to advise the regional committee and the chief repre- 
sentative of the Director General in the region con- 
cerned, with respect to problems of industrial 
rehabilitati on 1 



-17- 



(616) 



'.APPENDIX IX TO THE REPORT OP eOHMITTKE I 

A Resolution relating to the functions of 
the Committee on Welfare 



RESOLVED 

That the functions of the standing technical Committee 

on Welfare shall be: 

1 To advise the Council, the Central Committee, and 
the Director General as to the nature and scope of welfare 
problems in areas in which the Administration wi 11 be 
operating: including the direct provision to victims of 
war of relief through other than normal economic channels 
of distribution; emergency measures for the care of chil- 
dren expectant and nursing mothers, the aged and disabled, 
end other victims of war; and the measures necessary to 
secure the effective cooperation in this work of voluntary 
relief organizations; 

2 Periodically to review the programs of the Adminis- 
tration in the above fields and consult wi th the Director 
General with respect to any suggested modifications; 

3. To formulate proposals on technical policies 
relating to welfare problems, discuss such proposals with 
the Director General, and transmit such proposals to the 
Director General for distribution to the Council and the 
Central Committee ; and 

4. When reouested by and in consultation with the 
committees of the Council for Europe or for the Far East 
or for such- other regional committees as may .hereafter be 
established, to appoint subcommittees to advise the 
regional committee and the chief representative of the 
Director General in the region concerned, with respect to 
welfare problems. 



-10- 



(617) 



APPENDIX X to the Report of Committee I 

A Resolution relating to facilities and immunities 
for the Administration, its Council and Committee 

Members and its staff 



WHEREAS, the Council is desirous of ensu^in- to 
the Administration and its agents the independence nec- 
essary for the efficient performance of the duties 
entrusted to them, and of avoiding the imposition of 
financial burdens upon the funds contributed by member 
governments to the Administration; it is therefore' 

RESOLVED 

I. That the Council recommends 

. , . 1 * That the member governments accord to the 
Administration the facilities, privileges, immunities and 
exemptions which they accord to each other, including 

(a) Immunity from suit and legal process 
except with the consent of, or insofar "as 
is provided for in any contract entered 
into by or on behalf of, the Administration; 

(b) Inviolability of premises occupied by 
and of the archives of the Administration; 

(c) Exemptions from taxation, including 
customs duties; 

(d) ^Exemptions from or facilities in respect 
of foreign exchange controls. 

2 » That member governments take any steps that 
they may consider necessary to enable the Administration 
to exercise within their jurisdiction the powers conferred 
on it by Article I, paragraph 1, of the Agreement. 

3. That member governments accord to repre- 
sentatives of member governments on the Council and 
its committees and to the officials and employees of 
the Administration when engaged on the business of the 
Aoministration, the following privileges and immunities 
m their respective territories: 

(a) immunity from legal process of any kind 
in respect of acts performed by them in their 
official capacity and falling within their 
functions as such: 



(b) immunity from taxation on official sal- 
aries, allowances or other emoluments as 
representatives, officials, or employes of 
the P, dministraticn; 

(c) the same immunities from Immigration 
restrictions, alien registration and military 
service obligations and the same facilities 
as regards 'exchange restrictions as are ac- 
corded to representatives, officials and 
employes of similar rank of other member 
governments ; 

(d) any further privileges and immunities 
that the Director General may request as 
necessary to safeguard representatives, 
officials or employes in the territories 
of any member government whore they are 
engaged and particularly those engaged in 
field operations in the areas in which the 
Administration may be undertaking relief and 
rehabilitation. 

Provided that each member government shall determine to 
what extent the above recommendations shall apply to its own 
nationals, and to non-nationals in permanent residence in 
its territories. 

4. That the member governments make any necessary 
arrangements with the Director General for the application 
of tne foregoing recommendations. 

II. That the Council requests the Director General 

1. To initiate immediate negotiations with member 
governments to bring such arrangements into operation as 
rcpidly as possible; 

2. Wherever appropriate, to approach non-member govern- 
ments ^ with a view to their granting such of the above-mentioned 
lacilities, privileges, immunities and exemptions as may be 
desirable to facilitate the work of the Administration. 



20- 



(619) 



.APPENDIX XI. to the Report of Committee I 

A Resolution relating to official correspondence of 

the Administration 

WHEREAS f The Council recognizes the need for expedition, 
economy and secrecy in the transmission ol the official cor- 
respondence of the Administration; it is therefore 

RESOLVED 

I. That the Council recommends 

1. That the member governments accord to the offi- 
cial correspondence of the Administration 

(a) the same treatment as is accorded by them to 
the of f.iciel. correspondence of other member govern- 
ments, including: 

(i) Priorities for telephone and telegraph 
communications, whether cable or radio, and 
for mail transmitted by pouch or by courier, 

(ii) Government rebates for official tele- 
grams . 

(ill ) Diplomatic status for couriers and 
pouches of the Administration, 

(iv) Under appropriate safeguards, exemp- 
tion from cens orshio of the official cor- 
respondence of the Administration. 

(v) Appropriate arrangements for the use 
of codes and of cable addresses for the 
telegraphic correspondence of the Adminis- 
tration, 

(b) Appropriate postal facilities, including such 
franking privileges or arrangements for the use 

of specially printed or overprinted stamps as may 
be possible. 

2. That the member governments make any necessary ar- 
rangements with the Director General for th3 application of 
the foregoing recommendations . 

II. That the Council requests the Director General 

1. To initiate immediate negotiations with member 
governments to bring such arrangements into operation as 
rapidly as possible. 

2. Wherever appropriate, to approach non-member 
governments with a view to their granting such of the above- 
mentioned facilities, privileges, immunities and exemptions 
as may be desirable to facilitate the work of the Administra- 
tion* 



21 - 



APPENDIX XII to the Report of Qommittcc I 

A Resolution relating to Travel Facilities for 
the Staff of the Administration 



f/HEREAS, the Council has in mind the importance of 
securing the expeditious and unhindered travel of officials 
and employes of the Administration necessary to permit the 
prompt fulfillment by the Administration of the urgent tasks 
entrusted to it; it is thereforo 

RESOLVED 

I. That the Co-ancll recommends: 

1, That the Director General issue to officials 
and employees of the Admini strati on for use when traveling 
on official business a document identifying the official or 
employee and r eque sting in the nemo of the Administration 
that all appropriate facilities be granted to the bearer. 

2 m That all member governments give' full recogni- 
tion to such documents and instruct their diplomatic, con- 
sular, customs and immigration services and any other services 
which may be concerned to recognize such documents as entit- 
ling the bearer to all eg prorpiate facilities. 

3. That in respect of passports and visas the 
member governments accord to the officials and employees of 
the Administration t he same treatment as is accorded to the 
officials and employees of comparable rank of their own or 
otiier governments . 

4. That all member governments take the necessary 
st o-os to grant all appropriate and possible priorities for 
the't ravel of the officials of the Administration on official 
business and government rebates for such travel. 

5. That the member governments make any necessary 
arrangements with the Director General for the application 

of the foregoing recommendations . 

II. That the Council requests the Director General 

1. To initiate immediate negotiations with member 
governments to bring such arrangements into operation as 
rapidly as possible; 

2. Wherever appropriate, to aper each non-member 
governments with a view to their granting such of the above- 
mentioned facilities, privileges, immunities and exemptions 
as may be desirable to facilitate the work of the Adminis- 
tration, 



(621) 



Appisriiyix to the report of aoiflHTTEE i 

RU IgS OF PR OCTO R OF T Hjg COUNCIL 
Article I 
Sessions of the Council 



1. In accordance with Article III, section 2, of 
the Agreement* the Council shall be convened in regular 
session by the Central Committee not less than twige a 
year* It nay be convened in special session whenever 
the Central Committee shall deem necessary, and shall 

be so convened within thirty days after the request there- 
for by one-third of the members of the Council # Such 
request shall be communicated to the Director General 
who shall transmit it forthwith to the Central Committee, 

2. The Director General, after consultation with 
the Central Cbmmittee, shall fix the tine and place of 
the first meeting of each session of the Council and 
shall notify the member governments* not loss than si;:ty 
days in advance of a regular session and not less than 
three weeks in advance of a special session* 

0. As a general rule, the plenary meetings of tho 
Council shall be public, but the Council may decide that 
any meeting shall be held in private. 

4. All decisions of the Council which nay h?.ve 
been taken at a private meeting shall be announced at an 
early public meeting of the Council # 

Article II 

Offi cers of the Council 

1. At the opening of each session of the Council, 
the Director General shall preside until the Council has 
elected a Chairman for the session, 

'2. The Council shall, after consideration of the 
report of the Committee on Nominations, elect a Chairman 
and three Vice-Chairmen of the Council, The Chairman 
and Vice-Chairmen shall hold office until the close of 
the session at which they are elected. In the event of 
the death, resignation or other inability of the Chairman 
to complete his" tern, a new Chairman shall be elected for 
the unexpired term. 



^Whenever the term "member government" is used in these 
Rules of Procedure and any Anne:: thereto, it shall be 
construed to mean a member of the Administration whether 
a government or an authority. 



-23- 



(622) 



5. In addition to the other powers conferred upon 
the Chairman by these Rules of Procedure, ho shall 
"declare the opening and closing of each meeting of the 
Council. He shall direct the discussions of the Council, 
insure observance of these Rules of Procedure, accord 
the right to address the Council, put questions to the 
Council, and announce the results "of all votes. 

4, In the absence of the Chairman during a meeting, 
or any* Dart thereof, one of the Vice -Chairmen, taken in 
rotation according to the alphabetical order of the 
governments which they represent, shall preside.- A Vicc- 
Chairman acting as Chairman shall have the sane powers 
and duties as the Chairman. 

5. The Chairman, or a Vice -Chairman acting as 
Chairman, shall not vote but may appoint an alternate to_ 
act as the representative of his government on the Council, 



Article III 

The Director General 

1, The Director General or his representative may 
attend and address any meeting of the Council and of its 
committees and subcommittees and may participate in the 
discussions, but may not vote,. 

Article IV 
The Secretariat 



1. In accordance with Article IV, Section 4, of the 
Agreement, the Director General, or upon his authoriza- 
tion the Deputy Directors General, shall supply such 
secretariat and other staff and facilities as shall be 
required by the Council and its committees, including 
the regional committees and subcommittees. 

» 

2. The Director General shall be responsible for 
the organization and direction of the secretariat / of 
the Council. 

5. It shall be the duty of the secretariat to 
receive, translate and distribute documents, reports 
and resolutions of the Council and its committees; to 
prepare the records of the proceedings of the Council 
and its committees; to distribute reports and rocom-^ 
mendations of committees of the Council to the Council 
and the Central. Committee; and to perform such other work 
as the Council shall rcc.uirc. 

4. The secretariat shall distribute to member govern- 
ments proposals and other documents relating to the a ;enaa 
of any session of the Council as far as possible in advance 
of the opening of such session. • 



-24- 



(623) 



Article V 

The Central Committee 

1. Meetings of the Central Committee may be con- 
vened by the Director General whenever he deems advis- 
able and shall be convened by him within ten days after 
the request therefor by any member of the Central Com- 
mittee, 



2. The time and place of the meetings of the 
Central Committee shall be fixed by the Director General 
after consultation with the members of the Central 
Committee • 

3. The meetings of the Central Committee shall be 
held in private unless it shall, by unanimous vote, 
decide that any meeting shall be public. 

4. In accordance with Article III, section 3, of 
the Agreement, the Central Committee shall invite the 
participation of the representative of any member govern- 
ment at those of its meetings at which action of special 
interest to .such government is discussed. It shall in- 
vite the participation of the representative serving 

as Chairman of the Committee on Supplies of the Council 
at those of its meetings at which policies affecting the 
provision of supplies are discussed. 

5. The minutes of each meeting of the Central Com- 
mittee shall be sent as soon as possible to members of 
the Central Committee and to the representatives of 
those member governments participating in such meeting 
of the Central Committee, who shall, within forty-eight . 
hours, inform the Director General of any corrections 
which they may desire to have made in the record of their 
own remarks. As corrected, the minutes shall be filed 
with the Director General and communicated promptly to 
each member government of the Administration. 

6. At each session of the Council, the Director 
General shall render a full report on the work of the 
Central Committee since the preceding s ession of the 
Council. 



Article VI 

C ommittee Organization of the Council 

1. At the opening of each session, the Council 
shall elect a Committee on nominations consisting of 
eleven members of the Council. This Committer shall 
submit to the Council nominations for the offices of 
Chairman and Vice Chairmen of the Council, for the 
four members of the General Committee to be elected by 
the Council, and for appointments to each standing .or 
other committee of the Council for which new appoint- 
ments may be required*** 



■^Whenever the term "staiding committee" appears in these 
Rules of Procedure, it shall be construed to include the 
Committee on Supplies of the Council. 



-25- (024) 



2. At the opening of each session, the Council 
shall establish a General Coiamlfctoa consisting of the 
Chairman and Vice Chairmen of the Council, the members 
of the Control Committee, and four other members elected 
by the Council, The General Committee shall, subject to 
the concurrence of the Council and in consultation with 
the Director General, determine the order of business 

of the Council, set the date of adjournment of the session, 
fix the time and place of each mooting during the session, 
decide v/hat matters are to be considered at each meeting, 
pass upon the provisional agenda in accordance with 
Article VIII of these Pules of Procedure, coordinate 
the work of all committees of the Council during the 
session, and otherwise facilitate the orderly dispatch 
of the business of the Council and its committees*. The 
Chairman of the Council shall convene and preside at 
the meetings of the General Committee. 

3. Subject to the provisions of Article III of the 
Agreement, the Council shall, after consideration of tho 
report of the Committee on nominations, designate the 
member governments to be represented on the Committee on 
Supplies, the Committee of the Council for Uurope , the 
Committee of the Council for the Par liJast, and such other 
standing committees, other than standing technical com- 
mittees, as the Council may es Aiblish. 

4. In accordance with Article III of the Agreement, bho 
Council shall, after consideration of the report of the Oori- 
mittwo on nominations, appoint the members of all standing 
technical committees which the Council may from tlmo to 

time establish. 

5. The rules of procedure applicable to all standing 
committees of the Council are set forth in Annex I to 
those Pules of Procedure. 

6. The Council may appoint, or in particular cases 
authorize the appointment of, such temporary or special 
committees as may be required for advice or investigation, 
or for report on specific matters. Unless the Council de- 
cides otherwise, each temporary or special committee 
shall elect its. own chairman and, if deemed necessary, a 
vice-chairman and a rapporteur. The term of these com- 
mittees shall end when their respective assignments have 
be^n completed or when the Council so decides. 

7. Even when nominations are submitted to the Council 
by any committee pursuant to these Rules of Procedure and 
any Annex thereto, the members of the Council shall, within 
the limitations imposed by Article III of the Agreement* 
retain the right to propose and to vote for persons other 
than those nominated by such committee. 

Article VII 
Attendance of Observers 

1. The Council and the Central Cov.imittee may invite 
observers, or may invite public international organizations, 
non-member governments or authorities, relief and welfare 
agencies or others to s ,nd observers, to attend all or any 
of their meetings or parts thereof, or to participate in 
such meetings or parts thereof, without vote, under such 
conditions as the" Council or the Central Committee j res- 
pectively, shall determine. All such invitations shall be 
transmitted by the Director General* 



-26- 



(625) 



Article VIII 
Agenda 

1. The provisional agenda of each session of the 
Council shall be prepared by the Director General, and 
shall include 

(a) all items proposed by the Council at any 
previous session; 

(b) all items proposed by the Central Committee; 

(c) all items proposed by any member of the Council 
and transmitted to the Director General at 
least ten days in advance of the session: and 

(d) any item which the Director General desires to 
put before the Council . 

2. The provisional agenda shall he communicated to 
member governments as far as t ossible in advance of ai 
not less than three weeks before the opening cay of the 
session. Items transmitted to the Director General too 
late for inclusion will be at once communicated to mem- 
ber governments . 

5. The provisional agencU so communicated shall 
be passed upon by the General Committee and submitted to 
the Council for approval as soon as convenient after the 
opening of any session. 

4* The Council may later revise or aC6 to the 
agenda. 



Article IX 

Procedure for the Conduct of Council Business 



1, Every proposal which may be introduced into the 
Council by a member and which involves formal action V. 
the Council on any item of the agenda shall forthwith 
be referred by the Chairman of the Council to the appro- 
priate committee or committees • No action or vote shall 
be taken by the Council on any such proposal until a 
report thereon by such committee or committees has been 
presented and circulated to the members of the Council, 
unless the Council shall, by two-thirds vote, determine 
otherwise. Such reports shall, in so far as practicable, 
be circulated at least twenty-four hours orior to the 
meeting at which the Council takes action or votes 
thereon. 



-27- 



(626) 



2. The chairman or rapporteur of a committee shall 
be accorded preference for the purpose of explaining or 
defending the report of the committee. 

3. During the discussion of any question, any mem- 
ber may move the previous question or the ad jourtimant-. 
Any such motion shall have priority in the debate. 

4. A member may at any time move the closure of the 
debate. If application is made to speak against the 
closure, it may be accorded to not more . two speakers. 
If the Council decides in favor of the closure, the Chair- 
man shall declare the closure of the debate. 



Article X 
Voting 

1. A majority of the members of the Council shall 
constitute a quorum for any formal action by the Council, 
except that for any proposal to amend the Agreement 
three-fourths of the members shall constitute a quorum. 

2. Each member government represented on the Council 
or on any of its committees or subcommittees shall have 
only one vote, 

3. When any representative is unable to attend one 
or more meetings of the Council, his place may be. taken 
by an alternate. The name of such alternate shall bo 
communicated to the Chairman of the Council. 

4. Except as otherwise provided by the Agreement 
or by these Rules of Procedure, all decisions of * 
Council shall require an affirmative majority vote of the 
members present. 

5. Voting shall be by show of hands except as 
hereinafter provided. 

6. In case of doubt as to the rvsult of any vote 
by show of hands, the Chairman shall cause a record vote 
to be taken. 

7. A record vote shall be taken in all cases where 
a special majority is required by the Agreement. 

S\ A record vote shall also be ta-rcn on any 
question if requested in writing by not less than five 
members of the Council and handed to the Chairman in 
advance of the vote or immediately after a show of hands . 

9. Record votes shall be taken by calling upon 
members in the alphabetical order of the governments 
which they represent. 



9 



(627) 

10. The vote of each member participating in anv 
record vote shall be inserted in the verbatim report 
of the meeting, 

11. On decisions relating to individuals, a secret 
ballot shall be taken whenever requested in w ritinp by 
at least, five members of the Council. 



-Article XI 
Lanf -uarre s of the C ouncil - 

1. Enr.lish shall be the official language of the 
Council and its committees . 

2. Upon the request of any member of the Council 
that the final reccrrendntions and resolutions of the 
Council end its committees shall be rendered both in 
English and. in his own Language, it shall bo so provided. 

' Article XI I 

Kc cords of Proceed in t 

1. A verbatim report of ell plenary meetings held 
during each session of the Council shall be pr enured by 
the secretariat and filed with the director General. 
Such report shell be made available to any member govern- 
ment upon request. It shall not otherwise be distributed 
or published unless the Council sk&ll decide tc the con- 
trary. 

2. The secretariat shall prepare minutes of each 
session of the Council rich shall be printed and cir- 
culated to member governments and which n-.y be made 
public. The minutes of all private moetings shall be 
printed separately, distributed to ir ember governments, 
and kept confidential. 

3. The texts of all resolutions and formal deci- 
sions adopted at each session of the Council shall be 
trans: ittcd by the Director General to each member 
government .e soon as practicable after the adjournment 
of the session. 



* 

-29- (628) 



Article XIII 
Adm in i s t ra t i vc Expenditur es and Receipt s 

1. Regulations with respect to the administrative 
expenditures and receipts of the Administration are set 
forth in Annex II of these Rules of Procedure. ■ 



Article XIV 

Suspensi on and Amcndnent of Rules of Procedure of the 

Council 



1.. Any of the foregoing Rulo3 of Procedure raxy be 
suspended by a two- thirds major ity of the members of the 
Council present at any meeting* 

2 r -Amendments thereto may be adopted by a siirplo 
majority of the members present at any mooting subject 
to the proposal having first been reported upon by a 
commit too of the Council* 



Article XV 
Trans it cry Provision 



1.. The adoption of the foregoing Rules of Pro- 
cedure shall constitute a validation of the appointment 
of all standing committees of the Council made at its 
first session* 



30- 



(S29) 



Anne x I_ 

Rules of Standing Committees of the Council* * 

ARTICLE I 
Appoin tment and Tenure 

*'* , r ' " ''' 1 * - — ■■ ^ . M ■ , ■ ■ 

1. Subject to the provisions of Article III of the 
Agreement, the Council shall, after consideration of the 
report of the Committee on nominations, appoint the 
members of the standing committees of the Council. 

2. Such appointments, in the case of the Committee 
on Supplies, the standing regional committees, and such 
other standing committees other than standing technical 
committees, as the Council shall establish, shall be 
made by designating the member governments whose repre- 
sentatives or alternates shall serve as members of such 
committees . 

o. In the case of standing technical committees , 
such appointments shall be made* by naming members cf 
the Council or alternates nominated by such nB mber s 
because of special competence in their respective fields 
of work. 

4. Except in the case of appointments made by the 
Central Committee in accordance with Section 5 below, 
the appointment of members of the Committee on Supplies, 
the standing regional committees and sue . .other standing 
committees other than standing technical committees as 
the Council shall establish, shall continue until changes 
or replacements therein are made by the Council. The 
appointment of members to the standing technical com- 
mittees of the Council shall be made at each regular 
session of the Council. Until such appointments are 
made, the membership of such committees shall continue. 
Members of all standing committees shall be eligible 

for reappointment. 

5. In accordance with Article III of the Agreement, 
the Central Committee, if previously authorized by the 
Council, may make emergency appointments to any standing 
committee between sessions of the Council. Such appoint- 
ments shall continue until the next regular or special 
session of the Council. 

6. Members of standing committees may be accom- 
panied to the meetings thereof by advisers and assistants 
who may participate in the discussions under such condi- 
tions as the committee shall prescribe but shall not be 
entitled to vote. 

7. The travel and other expenses of members of the 
standing committees of the Council, and of their advisers 
and assistants, shall be borne by the member governments 
v/hich have nominated them. 



•"-Including the Committee on Su^nlies of the Council. 



-31 



(630) 



ARTICLE II 

Meetings of St and inn; Commit tee s of the Council 



1. The Director General shall fix the time and place 
of the first meeting of each standing committee and he or 
his representative shall preside at the meeting until the 
committee has elected its chairman. 

2. Subsequent meetings of each standing committee 
shall be convened by the chairman at such time and place 
as may be decided upon by the committee, provided that 
meetings of the Committee on Supplies, the Committee on 
Administrative Finance, and all technical standing com- 
mittees of the Council shall, in addition, be held as 
far as possible at the same time and place as each regu- 
lar session of the Council. The chairman shall convene 
meetings of a standing committee whenever requested by 
at least one-third of its members. 

3. The meetings of each standing committee shall be 
private unless the committee shall decide by a two-thirds 
vote of the members present that any meeting shall be 
public. Any standing committee may invite observers, or 
may invite other public international organizations, non- 
member governments or authorities, relief and welfare 
agencies or others to send observers, to attend all or 
any of its meetings or parts thereof, or to participate 
in such meetings or parts thereof, without vote, under 
such conditions as the committee shall determine. 

ARTICLE III 



Officers of Standing Committees of the Council 

1. At its first meeting each standing committee 
shall elect a chairman, a first vice-chairman, a second 
vice-chairman and, if deemed necessary, one or more 
rapporteurs. The chairman and vice-chairmen shall hold 
office until a new election takes place. 

2. A new election of chairman and vice-chairmen of 
any standing committee shall be held if, after a period 

of not less than a year from their election, the committee 
shall so decide. In this event, the election shall be held 
at the next meeting of the committee. The officers of all 
standing committees shall be eligible for re-election. 

3. Upon the death, resignation, or inability to 
serve of any officer of any standing committee, an 
election to fill the. vacancy thus created shall be held 
as soon as practicable. 

4. Upon the death, resignation, or inability to 
serve of the chairman of any standing committee, the 
first vice-chairman, or if he is not available the second 
vice-chairman, shall serve as chairman ad interim until a 
nev/ chairman is elected. 



-52- 



(631) 



5. • The chairman, cr a vice-chairman acting as 
chairman, shall have the same powers and duties in 
respect of committee meetings, as are provided* for the 
Chairman of the Council in Article II, Sections 5 and* 
5, of its Rules of Procedure. 



ARTICLE IV 

Agenda 



1. The provisional agenda for each meeting of 
each standing committee of the Council shall be prepared 
by the Director General or a Deputy Director General in 
consultation with the chairman of the committee, and 
shall include : 

(a) all items proposed fey the committee at any 
previous meeting; 

(b) all items proposed by the Council, the Central 
Committee, or another standing committee of the Council; 

(c) all items proposed by any member of the com- 
mittee and transmitted to the Director General at least 
five days in advance of the meeting; and 

. (d) any item which the Director General desires 
to put before the committee. 

2. The provisional agenda shall be communicated 
to the members of the committee as far as possible in 
advance of the meeting. Items trrnsmlttcd to the 
Director General too late for inclusion in the provi- 
sional agenda shall be at once communicated to the 
members of the committee. 

3. Tiie committee may revise or add to the agenda. 



ARTICLE V 

Procedure f o r the Conduct of Committee Business 

1. A majority of the members of. each standing com- 
mittee shall constitute a quorum for any formal action 
by such committee. 

• 

2. Unless otherwise provided by these rules, all 
decisions of a standing committee giall require an affirma- 
tive majority vote of the ftombprs present at the meeting* 

o. Any standing co.nmittce may establish such ad - hoc 
subcommittees as it considers necessary for the facTTi- ' 
tation of its work* The chairman of the committee shall, 
with the approval of the committee, appoint the chair- 
man and members of e ach such subcommittee, which shall report 



-33- 



(632) 



only to- the committee which established it. In case 
of need, the chairman may proceed to appoint such" 
ad hoc subcommittees with the authorization of a 
majority of the members, subject to subsequent formal 
approval by the committee. 

4. Any request from a regional committee to any 
technical committee for the establishment of a technical 
subcommittee to advise the regional committee shall bo 
transmitted to the Director General, vfoo shall forthwith 
inform the chairman and members of the technical com- 
mittee concerned. The chairman of the technical com- 
mittee shall, with the approval of the committee, appoint 
the chairman and members of each such subcommittee. In 
case of need, the end rman may proceed to appoint such 
technical subcommittees with the authorisation of a 
majority of the members, subject to subsoauent formal 
approval by the committee, 

5. Any subcommittee so appointed shall report to 
the regional committee concerned through the appropriate 
representative of the Director General ] who will trans- 
mit copies of the report to the Diroetor General for his 
information. A copy of the report shall b^ distributed 
to the technical committee and to any oth^r standing com- 
mittee concerned. 

6. Each standing committee may adopt such other rules 
governing the conduct of its business and the busin.-ss of 
its subcommittees as are not inconsistent with the Agree- 
ment, the Rules of Procedure of the Council, .and any 
Annex thereto. 



ARTICLE VI 

Records and Reports of Standing Committees 

1. ' All reports and recommendations of standing com- 
mittees, whether made on their initiative or at the 
request of the Council, the Central Committee, the Director 
General, or any member government, shall be, transmitted 

to the Director General for distribution to the Council 
and the Central Committee, 

2. The secretary of each standing commi ttee shall 
prepare minutes of each meet in-- which shall contain r. 
record of the conclusions reached by the committee. 

When approved by the chairman, the minutes shall be filed 
with the Director General, who shall distribute a copy 
thereof to each member government of the Admini:; trotion, 

3. A verbatim report of the meetings of any Stand* 
ing committee shall be kept if the committee so decides. 
Such report shall be filed with the Director General and 
made available to any member government of the Adminis- 
tration upon specific request, but shall not otherwise 
be distributed or published. 



34- 



(633) 



ARTICLE VII 

Amendment of Annex I 

1. The rules contained in this Annex shall apply to all 
standing committees of the Council but not to the Central 
Committee * 

2 4 The rules contained in this Annex may be amended by 
the Council in the same manner as provided for the amendmont 
of the Rules of Procedure of the Council* 



~ 35 ~ (634) 
APPENDIX XIV TORFPORT OF GOMMITTEE I 

Regul atiagis » With Respect To 
Expenditures and Receipts' ofEhe A dministration 

1. The fiscal year of the Administration shall be the 
calendar year. c 

2; The Director General shall submit to the Council at 
its regular session next preceding the commencement of the 
calendar year an annual budget covering the estimated adminis- 
trative expenses of the Administration for that year The 
budget for the calendar year 1944 shall include estimated 
administrative expenditures for the year 1944 and for the 
unelapsed part of the year 1943. The budget shall be accom- 
panied by a statement of the estimated receipts, a statement 
of the actual expenditures through the end of the quarter 
preceding the submission of the budget, and by an explana- 
tion and justification of the amount budgeted. 

3. The Director General may submit to any session of 
the Council supplementary budgets or a budget amending a 
previously approved budget. 

4. The proposed budget or a supplementary budget shall 
bo referred for consideration to the appropriate committee 
of the Council for report, comment, and recommendation for 
action by the Council. 

5. The approval of the budget or*a supplementary budget 
by the Council shall make available to me Director General 
from the general resources of the Administration, for obli- 
gations aid expenditures for administrative purposes during 
the year to which the budget relates, the amount specified 
therein but not exceeding such amount. 

6. Pending the consideration which may be required for 
the final determination of a method of allocation, the amount 
of administrative expenses of the Administration approved by 
the Council in the annual budget or in a supplementary budget 
shall be allocated for the year 1944 to member governments 

in the proportions shown in the resolution adopted by the 
Council relating to the Administrative Budget and the allo- 
cation of administrative expenses. The consideration of the 
question v/hether the proportions shown in the Appendix require 
revision in order to provide a method of allocation for sub- 
sequent years appropriate to the Administration shall be 
referred to an appropriate committee of the Council upon its 
establishment. The Council recognizes that the criterion of 
allocations hitherto adopted by other bodies is not suitable 
to the Administration* 

The allocation to member governments for the succeeding 
year shall be adjusted for any differences between the pro- 
visional allocations and those finally determined. 

Upon the admission of a government as a member, its share 
of administrative expense shall be fixed by the Council upon 
recommendation by the appropriate committee of the Council. 

1* Each member government undertakes, subject to the 
requirements of its constitutional procedure, to contribute 
to the Administration promptly its share of the administra- 
tive expenses so determined. A member government may 



-36- 



(635) 



treat its share of the administrative expense as 
included in its general contribution for participation 
in the work of the Administration. 

8. The Director General shall prescribe the pro- 
cedure for setting up and maintaining accounts showing 
administrative and operating expenditures and the re- 
ceipts from each government of its contribution, includ- 
ing its share of the administrative expense. 

9* The Director General shall make provision for 
the bonding of employees to insure the Administration 
against loss by their acts, 

10. The Director General s hall designate the 
depositories of any funds held in the name of the 
^dministrat :.on, 

11. The Director General shall, in consultation 
•with the appropriate member ^over.nment, select such 
fiscal agents for the Administration as he may require. 

1C. The Director General shall submit to the 
appropriate committee of the Council, quarterly reports 
of operating and administrative expenditures and re- 
ceipts , and copies thereof furnished to each member of 
the Council. 

13. .Upon nomination by the appropriate committee 
of the Council the Council shall appoint a person or 
firm to make annually an independent audit of the 
accounts and records of the Administration, and a copy 
of each audit shall be furnished to each member of the 
Council. 



-37 



(636) 



APPENDIX XV TO REPORT OF COMMITTEE I 

MESSAGE OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 
SUBMITTING THE ADMINISTRATIVE BUDGET FOR THE 
FISCAL YEAR 1944 AND THE UNELAPSED PART OF THE 

YEAR 1643 



Estimate by the Director General of Administrative 
Expenditures and Receipts, and an Explanation and 
Justification of the Estimates. 

To: The Council: 

The Ad Hoc Subcommittee on the Administrative Budget: 



. As required by Article VI of the United Nations Relief 
and Rehabilitation Administration Agreement and the appro- 
priate regulations, I an submitting to the Council my esti- 
mates of the administratiye expenses and receipts for the 
year 1944 and the une lapsed part of the year 1943. By 
Council action, the Ad Hog Subcommittee, on the Administrative 
Budget is the appropriate- body of the Council to receive and 
consider these estimates. The Expenditures and Receipts are 
each estimated, for the period ending December 31st, 1944, 
at ^10,000,000. 

The estimate of ^10,000,000 required for administrative 
expenditures is subdivided as follows: 

For Salaries and Other Personal Services ; 

For headquarters, regional offices, 
committee staffs, and other activi- 
ties except field missions - § 4,800,000 

For field missions - 4.000,000 



For Expenditures Other Than Salaries and 
Personal Service , including : 

Living quarters, post and represen- 
tation allowances, travel, communication, 
administrative supplies and equipment, 
other contractual services, and general 



Total Salaries and Personal Service 



$ 8,800,000 



expense 



Q 3.000.000 



Total Personal and Other Than 
Personal Service 



gil, 800, 000 



Less anticipated accruals from non- 
expenditure - 50;° of above 

Total planned expenditures 



5.540.000 
$ 8,260,000 



V -.distributed aggroprlatio^ to me^t 

contingencies i}j> 1,740,000 

Total Estimated Expenditures 10,000,000 
Estimated receipts from Contriiut :■ ens ■'rcv.i 

Member Governments : ...10,000,000 

The Council will not have supposed that I should be able 
at this time to present a budget based upon a definite pat- 
tern of organization, nor would it have desired me to do so. 
Even in respect to the administrative organization (as dis- 
tinguished from field missions), it is evident that the 
pattern of organization mus t "wait upon the completion of the 
work of this first session of the Council, and then upon the 
analysis of the activities to be undertaken by the Director 
General, the regional offices and various committees, and 
upon discussion of the most efficient organization with 
representative members of the Council and others. While I 
expect to begin assembly of a staff i h tely, I shall not 
determine the final form of the administrative organization 
until I shall have had time fully to anal; .:-; all the actions 
of the first session of the Council. 

From an examination of the tasks which must be under- 
taken by that part of the administrative organization which 
is responsible" for executive activities, for programming, 
for arrangements for procurement and for accounting, a dit, 
services as secretariat to the Council, and for all the other 
non-field services which are required for an organization of 
this kind, it is evident that within the next few months a 
substantial number of employees will be required. Some of 
these employees will be in Washington, son'.', in a 
European' office, some in a Far Eastern office and some in 
other places, such as for example, Cairo. I cannot yet 
determine the relative needs of such offices. Because of the 
size of the task which lies ahead of the Administration, ^hc 
urgency of its mission, and the fact that in substantia] 
measure its work will be that of coordination, it must secure 
the most competent employees possible, and it will be neces- 
sary to pay them adequate salaries related to this high 
degree of competence, I estimate that the cost of compensa- 
tion for these employees on an annual basis will amount to 
approximately $4,800,000 f 

For the field missions to be established during the year 
1944 it will likewise be necessary to attract persons^ of 
outstanding ability and pay them commonsuratoly. I fc , ls 
obvious that no definite forecast of the number of missions, 
or their size, or the time when the;- will commence to operate 
is possible at the present time. I have assumed that the 
missions would vary greatly in size, ranging from perhaps not 
more than ten persons in areas where an existing government 
is prepared to assume all administration of rclici and 



-39* 

(333) 

rehabilitation, to as many as 250 persons in areas where the 
government de s ircs more assistance in the organization of relief 
and rehabilitation activities during a period of disorgani- 
zation following rcoccupation of the territory. I am aware 
of the desire of some governments for technical personnel 
in considerably larger numbers than these mentioned, and I 
shall do ray utmost to be of the greatest possible assistance 
in that connection. But I believe that where such technical 
personnel is furnished to the government of a liberated area 
to engage directly in relief and rehabilitation activities as 
distinguished from administrative supervision -- the charge for 
salaries is properly an operating expenditure, and not to be 
charged to the administrative budget. The figures given, there- 
fore, arc not to be road as an indication that such technical 
personnel will not be made available. That question remains 
for future decision in the light of circumstances as they develop, 
and the requests and needs of the different governments. 

For the field mission employees, I believe that an 
estimate of $4,000,000 for 'salaries and personal service is 
a reasonable figure. Although I can make no final commitment, 
I would expect that UNRRA employment, apart from field missions, 
is unlikely to increase after 1944. On' the other hand, at the 
peak of operation the staffs of the field missions may well 
be much larger than the number needed in 1944. Exactly how much 
larger no one can tell. 

In addition to salaries for personnel, there must neces- 
sarily be very substantial items of expenditure. Those persons 
who are assigned to work far from their homes and away from 
their families must in many cases bo given an added allowance 
to compensate them for the extra cost of maintaining their 
regular homes and maintaining themselves in a foreign post, 
sometimes under expensive conditions. This is a recognized 
practice of government. The cost of travel will undoubtedly 
be heavy because of the vast distances over which the Admin- 
istration must operate. The cost of communications will like- 
wise bo heavy because of the need for constant interchange of 
cabled information. The estimate of expenditures for supplies 
and equipment, for other contractual services and for general 
expense is based upon normal government experience. For these 
items I have estimated a total expenditure of $3,000,000 until 
the end of 1944. In fixing this sum I have taken a very 
conservative figure, in light of the expenditures of United 
States public agencies engaged in similar activities, but I 
believe that a determined effort at economy will make it 
possible to keep within the figure. 

The total personal and other than personal service estimate 
is |11,800,000. This figure is on an annual basis, assuming 
fyll scrvico of all personnel for a full year. It is obvious 
that the total personnel will not be employed for the full 
year* Even as to the selection of the administrative personnel, 
it will take time to find the right people for the right 
Places, and a certain amount of the annual salary will remain 



t 



(639) 

unspent because some individuals will not go on the payroll 
until well aft or January first. In respect to the field 
missions, there will be a larger difference between full 
annual salaries and actual expenditures because many of the 
missions will not commence to operate until well into the 
year 1944. 

Similarly, because the Administration will not be engaged 
in its full scope of activity in its early months of existence, 
expenses for other than personal services will be less than 
would be required for full operation for the entire year. 
I estimate that on an overall basis, 30 per cent of the estim- 
ated full annual amount will remain unsoont, and I have, there- 
fore, deducted from the estimate the amount of $3, 540,000, 
leaving a net of $8,260,000 as the estimate of the total 
planned expenditures. 

But it will also be evident to the members of the Council 
that an operation of this character, there must be provision 
to nc< t very substantial expenditures for activities the 
exact nature, location and time of which we cannct now foresee, 
but which arc bound to develop. Indeed, throughout the life 
of the Administration I anticipate that wo shall meet con- 
stantly the unexpected, and we must always make adequate pro- 
vision for it. Obviously, it is impossible to make any 
accurate estimate of the amount which should be reserved for 
those unplanned activities but, in order to have a sufficient 
provision, I have requested this provision in the amount of 
„1, 740, 000 to be available to the Director General to meet 
contingencies as they arise. If the amount is net needed, it- 
will not be spent. If it is needed, the need will be urgent 
and the money must be available. 

Accordingly, the total amount of the budget, approval of 
which is requested by the Council for the year 1944 and for 
the une lapsed part of the year 1943, is ^10,000,000. 



Estimate of Receipts 

Under Article VI of the Agreement provision is made that 

"Upon approval of a budget by the Council the total 
amount approved shall be allocated to the member 
Covernments in proportions to bo determiner] by the 
Council. Each member government undcrt akes , subicct 
to the requirements of its constitutional procodv. .!, 
to contribute to the Administration prompt!: its 
share of the administrative expenses so det trained." 

The subcommittee on the administrative budget has pro- 
posed an allocation of administrative expenses among the 
44 member nations of the Administration. The financial plan 
approved by the Subcommittee on Finance provides that the 
share of administrative expenses allocated to each member- 
government may be included by the government in its general 
contributions for participation in the work of the Adminis- 
tration. Under the allocations approved by the Subcommittee 



/ 



-41- 



(640) 

rr; the Administrative Budget, the smallest contribution from 
cny member government will be $5,000, and the largest con- 
tribution Will be ,,^4, 000,000, if the Council shall appro- 
my request for a .„;10,000,000 budget « 

I have based my estimates of receipts to moot adminis- 
trative expenses upon the assumption that every member govern- 
ment will contribute to UFRRA at least the amount of its 
allocation for administrative expenses. 

Form of Appropriation 

In view of the lack of experience with administrative 
expenditures for tJNRRA, it would be desirable to have the 
greatest possible flexibility in the use of the appropriation 
voted by the Council. Indeed I am not certain that the 
experience during any year of the life of UNRRA will ever be 
a very good guide as to what may be expected in the next. The 
most effective use of the administrative appropriation will 
be possible if it is voted as a lump sum, subject to alloca- 
tion at the discretion of the Director General in the light 
of circumstances as they develop. In ether words, while I 
have indicated the amount which I presently believe will be 
required for salaries for administrative personnel, for field 
personnel, for other than personal service, and for con- 
tingencies, developments may show that more is needed for one 
purpose and less for another, and it would be helpful if an 
propriation of the Council might be for a single sum of 
10,000,000, 

Control of Administrative Expenditures 

The regulations approved by the Subcommittee on the Admin- 
istrative Budget provide for the establishment and maintenance 
of accounts under' the direction of the Director General, As 
soon as the Council shall approve a budget, the Director 
General will establish the necessary accounting system and will 
also promulgate appropriate regulations designating the 
officials and determining the procedures under which expendi- 
tures of administrative funds may be authorized or made. 

I am deeply conscious of the fact as head of the United 
Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, charged with 
the relief of human misery and suffering throughout the world, 
I must make every effort to assure the wise and economical 
use of the Administration's resources. I give to tnc ocuncii 
my assurance that no expenditure will be made from the sum 
which it may approve for administrative expenses except where 
such expenditure is necessary, and where it contributes to 
the ultimate purpose of the Administration - the relief .nd 
rehabilitation of the victims of. war who have, suffered, so 
tragically from enemy plunder and exploitation. 

Respectfully submitted, 



Herbert H, Lehman 
Director General. 



-42 



(641) 



COMMITTEE II 

(Reception No. 299) 
REPORT 

OP THE 60MI.tIT.TEE ON GENERAL POLICY 



Chairman: Vasili Alexsecvich Sergeev 
(U.S.3.R. ) 

V.Lce-Chairman: Blatta Ephrem Tewelde 

hedhen (Ethiopia) 
Secretary, Eugene Staley 
Assistant Secretary: James G • Johnson 

The Committee on General Policy, having been established 
by the Council at its first session ana having met and con- 
sidered the reports submitted by its subcommittees, submits 
the following report to the Council. 

A. The Scope qf__the jictiv_ities_of the /administration 

.v'ith reference to the broad policies relating to the 
scope of the activities of the Administration, the Committee 
recommends that the Council adopt the following resolution: 

A resolution, plating .. t .9_ t . 1 ^ e .scope ._qf ^the .activities .of 
the Admih istf t ; - pn : 

RESOLVED 

That the following shall bo the broad policies of the Ad- 
ministration with respect to the scope of its activities: 

I . ARE AS IK WHIC H Tgg ADMI NISTRATION WILL O PERATg 

The exact geographical areas in which the Administra- 
tion will operate and the kind of operations it will under- 
take in each case must be determined by the Director General 
tin the li-ht of policies laid" down from time to 
time by t&e Council) only after consultation witn, and with 
the consent of, the government or authority (military or 
civil) which exorcises administrative' authority in the area. 
The Administration's activities in seeking to achieve the 
objectives referred to in the preamble of the Agreement set- 
ting it up will be governed as follows i- 

l In the case of a liberated area in which a govern- 
14 ment or recognised national authority does not yet 
exercise administrative authority , the Adm nis 
tration will operate from such a time ^/^.gj* 
purposes as may be agreed upon ^ tw «^^ t m B^h 
command and the Administration and ^ject to su.h 
control as the military command may iir-d ae £ e 2W* * 
§h£ /dministr-tion shall, so far as circumstances 
pormt??sock Jho advice of the government or recog- 
• nized national authority concerned. 



- 43 - 



(642) 



2, In the ce.se of a liberated area in which a govern- 
ment or recognized national authority exercises 
administrative authority, the Administration will 
operate only after consultation with, raid with the 
consent of, the government or recognized national 
authority concerned regarding the form of activities 
to be undertaken by the Administration within the 
whole or part of such are; 



3. If it appears necessary for the Administration to 
operate in an enemy or ox-enemy area in carrying 
out the purposes of the Agreement, it will do so 
only from such a time and for such purposes as may 
be agreed upon between the military command, the 
established control authority or duly recognized 
administration of the aroa on the one hand and 
the Administration on the other, and subject to 
such control rs the military command or the estab- 
lished control authority may find necessary; pro- 
vided that the Council z pprove the scale and nature 
of the operations it is proposed to undertake and 
the standard of provision, and that all expenses 
connected with, such possible operations in an 
enemy or ex-enemy area should be carried by the 
enemy or ex-e-nemy country concerned. The Director 
General will consult with the military command or 
established control authorities having control of 
enemy or ex-onemy areas with a view to securing 
information as to any surpluses of supplies from 
time to time available in such enemy or ex-enemy 
areas from which relief and rehabilitation import 
requirements of liberated areas might be met. 

Nothing in the above should be taken as preventing the 
Administration from carrying en activities in other areas 
in order to perform the tasks laid upon it in the Agreement, 
provided that the government or authority (military or 
civil) exercising administrative authority in the area con- 
cerned agrees. 

1 1 • THE RAiiG n. OF SERVI CES V,H ICH gBg AD MIMISTftATI ON 
elLL PRO VIDE 

The supplies and services of which the Administration 
will seek to ensure the provision fell under four heads : 

1. Relief supplies : essential consumer goods to meet 
immediate n^eds, such as food, fuel, clothing, 
shelter, medical supplies. 

2. Relief services : such as health and welfare; 
assistance in coring for, and maintaining records 
of, persons found in any areas under the control 
of any of the United Nations who by reason of 
war have been displaced from their homes and, in 
agreement with the eppropri-'te governments, mili- 
tary authorities or other agencies, in securing 
their repatriation or return; and such technical 
services as may b-e necessary for these purposes. 



-44- 



(643) 



3. Roliabilitation supplies nn^ OA • 

(such e^^^^-^-^ces: materials 

equipment, machinery spire ^^f^ 1 !' fishitt 6 
enable a recipient p ? Parts) needed to 

relief supplies t VE* 7 to §* 0duce and transport 
areas, and such tecUw?™ 1 an< ? ° thor liberated' 
sary for these p^e^f S ° rviccs * s be ncces- 

*' #|^#*5^^^Ai^utilitics and services- so 

W^nee^ 

power tranam^ light, water, sanitation, 

a^d assistance ^f^ary storage, communicatioAs, 

5X£taiT?J«*^ Procuring material equipment for 
the rehabilitation of educational institutions. 

III. RELATION OF THE ADMINISTRATIO N WITH EXISTING riin -nwRM 

SUPPLIES, SHIFT IKS _amu RELATED ^UESTI C gg 

1. The activities of the Administration in bringing assistance 
to the victims of war will bo so conducted that the J do not 
iapede the effective prosecution of the war. The urosocution 
of the war demands that scarce supplies and shipping tonnage 
shall be carefully controlled and allocated in order to assure 
not only that the supplies and shipping requirements of the 
araed forces are fully met, but also that a fair distribution 
of supplies is made between the civil populations of the various 
areas having due regard to their actual or potential contribu- 
tion to the war effort. It will therefore be essential, both 
for the conduct of the war and in order to promote a fair dis- 
tribution of supplies between the inhabitants of areas with 
which the Administration is concerned and those of other areas, 
that demands upon supplies and shipping presented by the 
Administration should be co-ordinated with other demands through 
the use of the existing intergovernmental agencies concerned 
with the allocation of supplies end shipping. 

2 ' It will be an essential part of the functions of the Admin- 
istration to secure a fair distribution of goods which are in 
short supply and of shipping services to and among the various 
areas liberated or to be" liberated. 



iU % informed of their requirements and programs of intended 
Purchases. The Director General may present to the inter- 
governmental allocating agencies such recommendations or 
factions as he may deem necessary to obtain a fair aistnbu- 
^ ^ and among both liberated and to be liberated areas 

doctor General will present before the intergovernmental 
^eating agencies the overall requirements £ or relief und 
;.: h ^Uit , of all areas liberated and to be lib orated in 

^ to permit a global consideration of these ne.ds witn .11 
lf«* needs. Ho may also present the particular roquir.mont, 

country for which the assistance of the /-^^^™ ral 
Z requested. It is anticipated that the Director ™ 
y/ nore necessary, the Chairman of the Committee on .urp 



-45- 



(644) 



will bo fully consulted by the intergovernmental allocating 
agencies when any matter touching the interests of the Admin- 
istration is under discussion. 




expeditiously 

and without duplication of effort, the Director General, after 
consultation, where necessary, with the appropriate inter- 
governmental agency, will make use wherever possible of the 
established national agencies concerned with the procurement, 
handling, storage and transport of supplies, Th« ber govern* 
merits to which such national agencies "nro responsible would 
agree on their part to put the s >:.rvices of such agencies at 
the disposal of the Adminis trat von . Such additional responsi- 
bilities would form part of those already undertaken in 
prosecuting the war effort of the United Notions, 

IV. RELATIONSHIP 0: ^ THE API "TNT S TRATI ON V-ITK THE MILITARY 
CO"' ;AeD 

1. Before an area is liberated, the Administration will, when 
requested by the military authorities, 

(a) consult with them in the planning of supplies 
for the relief and rehabilitation of the area 
during the period of military control; 

(b) arrange for the advance procurement of such 
suppli . s as may bo agreed on to supplement 
supplies to be" provided by the military 
authorities . 

2. During the oeriod when a liberated area is under military 
control, the Administration, insofar as the Director General 
deems practicable, will, when requested by the military 
authorities, 

(a) arrange for the orocurement of supplies to supple- 
ment supplies being provided by the military 
authorities ; 

(b) furnish exnert oersonnel and services, and advise 
on the conservation and utilization for relief 
purposes of stocks and productive resources; 

(c) assist in the carrying out of policies with regard 
to the repatriation or return of displaced persons 
as formulated in paragraph 11 » 2 > pbovo '> 

(d) undertake other relief and rehabilitation activities; 

(e) assume responsibility in whole or in part for such 
activities ♦ 

T A , , * Lv,,,,, fimrtions the Administration 

m undertaking any of those run ? 1/1 J"* , lHr . of thG 

shall, so far as circumstances permit, seek the advice of tne 
government or recognized national authority concerned. 



-46- 



(645) 



5, It is recommended to the member governments that the Admin- 
istration be kept informed so far as is practicable of th 
operations of the civil affairs branches of the military 
command and control authorities, in order that the Director 
General may make the necessary preparations for the pre ' Ion ;f 
staff and facilities so that a smooth transition from tho 'period 
of military control may be ensured and the flow of supplies 
maintained. 

4, It is recommended to member governments that the transition 
in-each area from military to civilian relief and rehabilitation 
operations be consummated at the earliest date that military 
considerations permit. 

B. Relations with Governments 

The Committee considered a number of problems con- 
cerning the relations between the Administration and governments, 
and reached the following conclusions: 

1, Communications with toember Governments 

The Committee recognizes that prompt and efficient com- 
munication between the Administration and member governments 
is. essential to the effective discharge by the; Director General 
of the responsibilities and duties placed upon him by the 
Agreement and by the Council, It is, therefore, desirable that 
the Director General be given latitude with regard to the 
channels and methods to be used by him in communicating with 
member governments. While j in matters involving important 
policy or the rights or obligations of governments arising out 
of the Agreement, communication should bo through the foreign 
offices of the member governments, thor< will be occc sioiis 
when direct contact with technical or administrative governmental 
or intergovernmental agencies will lead to the gruates t ^ effi- 
ciency of operation, ^Iso, in certain cases, communication 
with or through representatives on regional or other standing 
committees of the Council will provide the most effective channel 
particularly in the case of matters of a peculiarly regional or 
technical character. 

It is recommended that the definition of channels and 
methods of communication with member governments be left to the 
Director General to work out in collaboration with each such 
government . 

2. Immunities and Priorities for Tra-sit Goo's. 

The Committee recommends that the Council adopt the 
following resolution: 

A resolution r^i^g to immunities aid' priorities for 
transit goods 



RESOLVED 
^xpedit 



That the Council records that mfcer government 

o to the extent possible supplies and equipment oi th. 



-47- 



(646) 



Administration in transit, and that it exempt such supplies 
and equipment of the Administration from adverse legal action 
or seizure. ° 

3. Collaboration with regard to Economic Measures. 

The Committee recommends that the Council adopt 
the following resolution: 

A resolut ion relating to colla boration with regard 
to economic measures ' : 

RESOLVED 

That the Council recommends that member governments 
consult with the Director General with a view to avoiding, so 
far as possible, the subjection of the funds, supnlies, equip- 
ment and services of the Administration to economic measures 
which might diminish the effectiveness of such activities or 
impose financial burdens on the Administration. 

4. Assistance from Member Governments. 

The Committee recommends that the Council ador>t the 
following resolution: 

A resolution relating to assistance from member 
governments 

RESOLVED 

That the Council recommends that member governments 
take such steps as may be necessary and feasible to facilitate 
any operations of the Administration within areas under their 
control, assisting the Administration in obtaining such services 
facilities and personnel as may be required to carry on such- 
operations, and arranging to the extent possible that the Admin- 
istration's expenditures for services, facilities, supplier,, 
equipment, and personnel be minimized so that its rescurc' 
may be devoted directly to relief and rehabilitation. 

5. Non-Discrimination. 

The Committee recommends that the Council adopt the 
following resolution: 



A resolution relating to non-discrimination 



RESOLVED 



1. That, in any area where relief, and rehabilitation 
operations are being conducted through the employment, in 
whole or in uart , of the Administration's resources, relief 
and rehabilitation in all its aspects shall be distributed or 
dispensed fairly on the basis of the relative needs of the 
population in the area, and without discrimination because of 
race, creed or political belief. 



-48- 



(647) 



. 2 * ^ hat > in determining the relative needs of the 
population* there may be taken into account the diverse needs 
caused by discriminatory treatment by the enemy during its 
occupation of the area. 

6. Administration Publicity.. 

The Committee recommends that the Council adoot the 
following resolution: 

A resolution re l ating to Administration publicity 

RB130LVED 

That the Council recommends that member governments, 
consistently with such measures as they consider necessary to 
regulate the dissemination of inform-. lion while hostilities or 
other military necessities exist, afford the Administration 
opportunity to make public information with regard to its 
operations, and that they permit the use of special labels or 
other designations on supplies and e quipracnt belonging to or 
furnished by the Administration. 

7. Channels of Communication with Non-Member 
Gov crnment s ( Noutre Is). 

The Committee, mindful of the absence of any direct 
reference in 'the Agreement to relations between the Adminis- 
tration and non-member governments (neutrals) has given con- 
sideration to the question whether or not it might be desirable 
that the Council formulate a policy with regard to procedures 
for communication with non-member governments (neutrals). 

The Committee is of the opinion that it would be 
cksirable that the Director General have latitude with regard 
to the methods and channels of communication with non-member 
governments (neutrals) . It is recommended, that member govern- 
ments extend to the Director General technical facilities for 
communicating with neutral governments, and the Committee 
accordingly recommends that the Council adopt the following 
resolution: 

A resolution relating to communications with neutral 
government's ~ 

RESOLVED 

That the Council recommends that member governments 
extend to the Director General technical facilities for com- 
municating with governments neutral in the prosent conflict. 

8. Procedures for admission. 

It is recommended that no general principle be laid 
down at this time for the admission of non-member governments 
and that applications for admission to the Council should be 
considered by the Council as individual applications are 
received , 



-49- 



(648) 



C. Relations with Other Intergovernmental Agencies 

reference to relations between the Adminis- 
tration and intergovernmental agencies other than inter- 
governmental authorities and agencies established to deal 
with supplies, shipping and related questions, the Committee 
recommends that the Council adopt the resolution set forth 
below, It is the view of the Committee that, if this resol- 
ution be adopted, the organizations named in paragraph 2 
thereof will bo invited by the Director General to send 
observers to future sessions of the Council without the 
necessity of further action being taken thereon by the 
Council. 

A Resolution relating to the relations of the 
Administration with intergovernmental agencies other than 
those e stablished to deal with supplies , shipping and 
related questions . I 

RESOLVED 



1. That the Council reaffirms the principle 
cf cooperation between the Administration and other inter- 
governmental agencies as set forth in the report of the 
Temporary Committee on Admission of Observers adopted by 
the Council on November 12, 1943, 

2. That the Council invite representatives of 
the League of Nations Technical Organizations, the Inter- 
national Labor Organization, the Intergovernmental Committee 
on Refugees, and the United Nations Interim Commission on 
Food and Agriculture (or representatives from the Permanent 
Organization for Food and Agriculture now represented by 
the Interim Commission), to attend as observers and to 
participate in the meetings' of the Council, its committees, 
and subcommittees, and in the meetings of regional com- 
mittees and technical standing committees, in accordance 
with appropriate provisions in the Permanent Rules of 
Procedure . 

3. That the Director General avail himself 
of the organizations mentioned in paragraph 2 above as 
the nature of the work and other circumstances make 
appropriate . 

4, That, the Director General, in pursuance of 
the orinciple set forth in paragraph 1 above, cooperate 
to such a degree and to such extent as he may deem 
desirable in the interests of the Administration with all 
other intergovernmental agencies whose operations and 
specialized services may be of value to the Administray 
tion, including the sending of his representatives as 
observers to the meetings of other intergovernmental 
agencies, as well as those mentioned in paragraph 2 
above , 



-50- 



(649) 



COMMITTEE III 
(Reception No.. 298) 
REPORT 

OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE AND SUPPLIES 



Chairman: Jean Monnet (French Com- 
mittee of National Libera- 
tion) 

Vice-Chairman: Gustavo Gutierrez 
(Cuba) 

Secretary: Kenneth Dayton . 
Assistant Secretary: Richard Funk- 
housor 



The Committee on Finance and Supplies, having met rnd 
considered the matters referred to it. Lts the follow- 

ing report to the Council: 

I. The Committee recommends the adoption by the 
Council of the following resolution with regard to tho 
Financial Plan of the Administration: 

A Resolution Relating to a Financial Plan for -the 

Administration. 

RESOLVED 

That the following Financial Plan for the Adminis- 
tration be adopted: 



ADMINISTRATIVE BUDi&jT AND PH0GRA?j OF OPERATIONS 

Secti on 1. Program of Operations, The Director General 
shall prepare as soon as possible, and submil next ses- 

sion of the Council, a program of operations covering ^roooscd 
activities of the Administration in" connection with relief and 
rehabilitation including the care and transportation of dis- 
placed persons. This program may cover the entire period of 
contemplated operations of the Adninis tret ion, or any part 
thereof. Tho operating progrem shell serve an a guide to the 
activities of tho Director General, but, except as provided in 
Article IV, Paragraph 2 of the Agreement, shall not limit his 
action when the situation requires other action. From time to 
time, the Director General shall submit to the Council revi- 
sions of, or supplements to, the operating program v/hieh experi- 
ence may show to" bo desirable. 

Sectio n 2. Annu al Administrat ive .]^j_d;v>t . The Director 
Gene :- l shall prepare annually a budget covering the esti- 
mated administrative expense of the Administration for a calen- 
dar year. The budget shall be accompanied by an explanation 
and justification of the amount required. The proposed v • ;t 
shell be submitted to tho Council in accordance with the regu- 
lations of the Council with respect to administrative expendi- 
tures and receipts.. 



-51- 



( 650 ) 



S ection 5. Supplementary Administrative Budgets. The 
Director General may submit supplementary budge ts-To't he Coun- 
cil covering the necessary administrative bxpohsos not pro- 
vided for in the annual budget. 

C0NTRIBUTIO2JS 

Section 4 . G en e r al C on t r i bu t i ens . As to the amount and 
character of the contribution of each^'member government, to be 
determined by its constitutional bodies as provided for in 
Article V of the Agreement, the Council recommends that each 
member government whose home territory has not been occupied by 
the enemy shall make a contribution for participation in" the 
v/ork cf the Administration, approximately equivalent to one per- 
cent of the national income of trie country for the year ending 
June 50, 1945 as determined by the member government. 

The Council recognizes that th^re are cases in which the 
recommendation above may conflict with particular demands aris- 
ing from the continuance of the war or may be excessively bur- 
densome because cf peculiar situations, and therefore recog- 
nizes that the amount and character of the contribution recom- 
mended is subject to such conditions. 

Section 5 . Char ac ter of Co ntribution. Subject to the 
provisions of Article V", paragraph T, cf the Agreement the 
Council recommends that as much as possible, but net less than 
10 pe-rccnt , of the amount contributed by each member government 
as recommended in Section 4 hereof, shall be in such form of 
currency as can be expended in areas outside cf the contribut- 
ing country; and that the balance thereof shall be in the t'ovm 
of a credit in local currency which shall be available for the 
purchase of the contributing country's supplies and cervices. 

Section 6 . Contribut ions toward administr ative H"pc:"c"c . 
A member government may treat its chare of the administrative 
expenses, as determined by the Council under Article VI cf the 
Agreement, as included in 'its contribution made under sections 
4 and 5 hereof. 

Section 7 . Contributions by Other ^:CJ^ or^cj^crn^^n^ . 
Iho Council recommends that member governments other than a 
nember government referred tc in Section 4 hereof, which arc _ 
£ble to contribute to the work of the administration for relief 
and rehabilitation outside its own territory (in addition to 
its annual contribution for allocated administrative expenses), 
should do so. 

Section 8. Additiona l Contrdbuticns_bj^oj^^ 
The Council recommends that member governments desiring to me.Ko 
contributions in addition to those recommended in Section 4 
hereof should do so. 

Section #\ nnnhr^itions b y N^-Hosibor ^gpvorn^cnts and 
^^^^Etal SoureeW The Council expects that contribu- 
tions IrTTTbe received to the v/ork of the Administration from 
jo number governments or non-governmental sources, -ucn con- 
Watiens may be accepted in accordance uun rules ana recu- 
sations established by the Director General in owt:ovm.t$ wxth 
general policies of the administration. 



-52- 



(651) 



Section 10 . Action on Contributions. The Council recom- 
mends that each memEer government U%" the earli . b posi Lb to 
timo such constitutional budgetary, administrative, or lb^s- 
lativo stops as may bo necessary to make its contribution availv 
able when needed for the purposes of the Adminis tration. 

Secti on II, Direct Co ntribut ions to Liberated \Toas, r nho 
Council recommends that member governments giving or receive 
to or from loreign sources, direct contrib is or other di- 
root aid in the nature of relief and rehabilitation in addi- 
tion to contributions to or from the Administration, . I do 
so only after prior notification and consultation with the 
Director General. 

Section 12 . Immediate Administrativo Expen ses. In order 
to moot immediate administrative expenses, tho"~D£rector Gen- 
eral may ask such of the member governments as aay bo 1:: a posi- 
tion to do so to make immediate advance payments in the amounts 
necessary, with a y vropriato credit towards the general '.mounts 
recommended in Section 4 and 5 hereof. 



EXPENDITURES: ADMINISTRATIVE AND OPERATION. .L 

Section 15 . Rate of Contribu tions. The Council recom- 
mends that, insofar as is con Lst( itta ff'icient op : .on, 
contributions of all member governments for the work of the 
Administration shall be called upon at an approximately oaual 
rato. 

Section 14 . Admi nistrative Ex penses . The Director Gen- 
eral ma./ incur obligations and make tditur L . ; .s- 
trativo purposes from the general resources of the administra- 
tion, in accordance with approved administrative budgets. 

Section 15 . Use of Currency* The Director Gonaral may 
use so mucn of the" foreign xchango available to the Adminis- 
tration as he may doom necessary for defraying administrative 
and operational expenses which cannot be mot from local cur- 
rency credits. Such expenditures may be :iada in any country, 
whether or not the government thereof is a member government* 
Fao consent of a member government must be secured for the use 
of any of its local currency to finance expenditures in any 
othc*r country. . 



DISTRIBUTION 

S ecti on 16 . Governm ents in a P osition to Pay with Suit - 
able Means of Foreign Exchange , it shall be the policy of the 
Administration not to deplete Its available resources for the 
relief and rehabilitation of any area whoso government is in -a 
Position to pay with suitable moans of foreign exchange. 

Section 17 . Do t erminat ion of pother a Governmen t is in 
a Position tn AWy Wi t'li • Suit-able Mean ".A. A .-. 

•ffion a member government 'considers that it is not in a position 
to pay as in the foregoing section, the Director General, in 
consultation with the member government involved and on the 
-dvico of the aptropriate committee or sub commit too of tho 
Council, shall" determine whether the government or country is 



53- 



(652) 



30 t in a position to pay for relief and rehabilitation simp] I 

services. In case of disagreement, either the r • b I -- 
er nment or the Director General may refer the matter to thf 
Council* 

In making the determination the applicant's foreign exchange 
assets and its sources of foreign exchange shall be taken into 
account. . Although payment for relief and rehabilitation Supplies 
and services shall be considered to have a strong claim on the 
foreign exenange assets of the applicant country, due considera- 
tion shall be given also to its need of foreign exchange for 
other purposes. 

The Director General, from time to time, shall review such 
determination in the light of changing circumstances. 




foreign 

exchange debt for the procurement of relief and rehabilitation 
supplies and services. 

Secti on 19 . Sup plies a nd Serv ices for ' hi o h f!embe : 1 0_o v - rn- 
rents Ar e not in a Positi on to P ay with' ~;.ui t "c or : "s* _!J 3 bre Lgn 
Zxcha nge . The Council recommends that" govern] in a 

position to pay in suitable means of foreign exchange for neces- 
sary relief and rehabilitation supplies or cervices make avail- 
able to the Administration in whole or in part the local currency 
proceeds from the sale of supplies furnished by the Administra- 
tion. It shall be the policy of the Administration to use any 
such local currency for relief and rehabilitation vrcrk, including 
the care and movement of displaced persons, and for such other 
purposes as may be agreed upon with the government . Programs for 
the utilization of such local currency shall be formulated by the 
Director General and the member government involved. 

Sec tion 20 . Expe nses P!et with Local Curr ency. The Council 
reootair.ends that insofar as possible all < nses of tl Lnis- 
tration within a liberated area shall be borne by the government 
of such area, and shall be paid in local currency made available 
by the government of the. area or derived from the proceeds of 
the sale of supplies. 

Seotion 21. Dist ribution of Gold or Converti ble Cj^encjr 
ESTbiHden. tJnder no~prcumstance s shall any distribution oi .--old 
or convertible currency resources be made by the Administration 
to any r.cmber or non-member government except for purcnases of 
essential suorslics and services. 



custody aitj :miag:z:.z:h of puipds 

Section 22. Form of Assets. All funds and currency credits 
^ the form in which they arc received until neoctea. 

Thr> Director General shall in 
mbcr government, select such 
ho misty require . 




-54- 



(653) 



Section24, Accounting, The Director General shall pre- 
scribe a procedure to secure careful account inn- for all funds 
a nd other property of the Administration and ahaU require" all 

SecU^n 25. Audit. All financial transactions of the Ad- 
ministration^ shall be audited annually by an Auditor selected 
by the Council upon the recommendation of the appropriate com- 
mittee of the Council. x 



Ii. The following interpretation of Section 16 of the 
Financial Plan, as stated by the Uember from Belgium, is in- 
cluded in this report at his request. The Llember from the United 
States, who proposed this provision, and the Director General, 
have indicated their agreement with this interpretation. 

"As far as f inancial resources arc concerned, temporary 
financing is not necessarily a depletion of the financial 
resources of the Administration but long-term financing is. 

"As far as resources in supplies are concerned, a direct 
purchase from the Administration by a country having suit- 
able means of foreign exchange and paying with these means 
is not a depletion of existing stocks of the Administration." 



III. The Committee, having considered the subject of in- 
surance, recommends the adoption of the following resolution: 

A Resolution Relating to Insurance. 

RESOLVED 

That if it appears to the Director General conducive to 
the efficient? and economical discharge of the business of 
the Administration, the Administration may carry its own 
risks without insurance except as may be otherwise di- 
rected by the Council. 



IV. The Committee, having considered the subject ox taxa- 
tion of relief and rehabilitation supplies, recommends the 
adoption of the following resolution: 

A Resolution Relating to Taxation of Relief and Rehabili- 
tation Supplies 

RESOLVED 

I rm: a1 - L ha council recommends that all member govcrn- 
x. mao oiie council x according to their consti- 

ments make appropriate ^^f^r^icf and rohabilita- 
tutional procedures b °^*^ *?^d by the Administration 
tion supplies and services furnisnea^ rcd uces 
are not subjected to taxation in a manner 
the resources of the Administration, 



-55- 



(654) 



2' f That in so far as may be required for the attainment 
of the above purpose, the Council recommends to all mem- 
ber governments that, i nter alia, 

(a) e;:port taxes on supplies to be furnished by the 
Administration to a member Government for po- 
lief and rehabilitation be waived, or ot ter, 
equivalent action taken; ana such supplies be 
exempted from any new or additional export taxes. 
The Council recognizes that such action on exist- 
ing export taxes may be equivalent to a Part of 

a member Government Va general contribution under 
Section 4 of the Financial Plan, but urges that 
such contribution be made under Section 8 of the 
said Flan; 

(b) appropriate action be taken where the necessary 
arrangements do not already exist to provide 
that supplies cf the Administration in transit 
through a member Government ? s country arc not 
subjected to any burden of taxation; 

(c) relief and rehabilitation supplies furnished by 
the Administration be not subjected in liberated 
areas to the burden of any form of taxation in a 
manner which reduces the resources of the Admin- 
istration; 

3. That the appropriate Committee of the Coimcil concern 
itself with the relationship of customs duties and other 
taxes in liberated areas to relief and rehabilitation 
work, and that a study of the problem and the preparation 
of recommendations be' undertaken for the future guidance 
of the Council with regard to relief and rehabilitation 
work. 



VR The Committee, having considered the subject of pro- 
cedures for ascertaining and meeting deficits in supplies re- 
quiring importation, recommends the adoption of the following 
resolution; 

A Resolution Relating to Procedures for Ascertaining and 
nesting Deficits in Supplies Requiring Importation 

RESOLVED, 

That the following shall be the policies of the Adminis- 
tration with regard to procedures for ascertaining and 
meeting deficits in supplies requiring importation: 

A. POLICIES RGLATIRG TO PilOCEDUHSS FOR ESTIMATING Aim RATING . 
IMPORT RBQUIREniSlTS 

1 ♦ Preparation and presenta tion of o veral l requirements, 

1. The Committee of the Council for Ruropo ami the 
Committee of the Council for the Far Erst will 
recommend, from time to time, as policies to be 
adopted by the Council whatever basis or bases 



~ 5S - (655) 

lltttTAlT, think ??P r °P^ate for the whole or 
parts or their respective areas. 

2 ' and C ?™^- Wil i C01 ? sidGr recommendations 
b2 JdS??/l h° tim °' det ^mine the policies to 
™ °5 'v n , tho ° asis of v/hich over-ail esti- 
snall be Itllf ^ * iUt ^ requirements 

5, The Director General, in consultation with the 

appropriate regional committee* , will compute esti- 
mates of over-all requirements for their respective 
areas m conformity with the bases and policios 
approved by the Council. ' 

4. The Director General will present before the inter- 
governmental allocating agencies estimates of over- * 
all requirements for relief and rehabilitation of 
all areas, liberated and to-be-liberated, in order 
to permit a global consideration of these require* 
monts and all other requirements. 

Preparation and presentation o f national _r_ a i j iromj > n ts . 

1. The Director General may present to the inter- 
governmental allocating agencies the particular 
requirements of any country for v/hich* the assist- 
ance of the Administration has boon requested. 

2. In cases where requirements or programs of in- 
tended purchases are presented directly to the 
inter-governmcntal allocating agencies by the gov- 
ernment of a country liberated or to -be -liberated} 
such government, in advance of their presentation, 
shall keep the Director General fully informed of 
such requirements or programs. The Director Gen- 
eral may present to these agencies such recommen- 
dations or objections in respect of these require- 
ments or programs as he may doom necessary to ob- 
tain a fair distribution of relief and rehabilita- 
tion supplies to and among the various areas libe- 
rated or to-bo-libcratcd. 

3. In determining what requirements he should present 
to the intergovernmental allocating agencies in 
respect of countries for v/hich the assistance of 
the Administration has been requested, and v.hat 
recommendations or objections he should make in 
respect of requirements presented by member govern- 
ments directly to such agencies in order to obtain 
a fair distribution of relief and rehabilitation 
supplies, as provided in paragraphs 1 and 2 immedi- 
ately preceding, the Director General shall pay duo 
regard to the degree of urgency of particular relief 
and rehabilitation requirements and to the extent 

of damage suffered by member governments in a part 
or the whole of their respective areas as a result 
of hostilities or of occupation by the enemy. 



4, 



-57- 



(65G) 



III. Procedures for obtaining suppjh ns . 

1- ^f C L t0 ^ rticlG l > Paragraph 2, of the Agree- < 
ment, the Director General, after consultation 
when necessary with the appropriate Inter- 
governmental agency, will make use whenever" pos- 
sible of the established national- agencies con- 
cerned with procurement, handling, stpre.se and 
transport of supplies; such use to be subject to 
tho general agreement of the government concerned. 
By consultation with the government concerned, or 
otherwise, every effort will be made to prevent 
any dislocation of the economy of a supplying coun- 
try resulting from procurement by or on" behalf of 
the Adminis tr at ion ♦ 

2. The Director General will consider it one of his 
first and most important tasks to seek, through 
the appropriate national and intergovernmental 
agencies, to arrange for necessary allocations 
and procurement of supplies and their storage, 
shipping and handling," so that there shall be 
created as promptly as possible balanced reserves 
which shall be available at the request of the 
Director General whenever and whcrccvcr the need 
arises . 

5. Member governments having administrative author- 
ity in a liberated area will keep the Director 
General and tho appropriate regional committee 
fully informed as to any surplus of supplies ' from 
time" to time available in such area, to meet, 
when circumstances permit, relief and rehabilita- 
tion import requirements of other liberated area3. 

4. Tho Director General will consult with the mili- 
tary command or other established control author- 
ities res-eons iblo for enemy or ex-cnemy terri- 
tories, with a view to securing information as to 
rny surolus of supplies from time to time avail- 
able in such enemy or ex-enemy territories, from 
which relief and rehabilitation import require- 
ments of liberated areas might be met t 

3, RECOMMEJNDATIOHa RELATING TO PERIOD OF FILTTAHY -FOPOVSI- 
3ILITY FOR CIVILIAN RELIEF AND REHABILITATION. 

With rc-ard-tc tho period when a liberated area is under 
Military control, LrCoLcil recommends to member governments 
that: 

1 The n-iiita-v authorities be invited to advise the 
i. me miii^a-iy **f,r^ r ,.n r ..,.f extent consistent 

Administration, to the full £^*£S round in the 
with military neurit/, of ^ roha bilitation 
area affecting civilian relief^ ni and 
requirements ane .up^li-, poss iblo. 
estimating may be as accural 

u- c. r>r tho /dministration enter the 

area at the earliest P^-i^- military to 

preparations ^^Jf^tefhairing first 
civilian responsibility, ax ^ oprlatG military 
secured the permission of h - p consul- 
command, and, ^vhonevor prpctic. , ^ ^ 

tat ion with the ^tio^a t ° 

, . ... „„4.v,rtY»itv concerned. 



2, 



-58- 

VI. The Committee havin. „ ^ 657 ^ 
the committee on Supplies, rS3L2£S! ld f red , the functions of 
lowing resolution: ioco.uands bhe adoption of the fol- 

A Resolution Relating? tn Mv« 

-•^oxn, to the functions of the Committee 
on Supplies 




RESOLVED 

That the functions 6f- tae,Cmmi-ttoe on Suoplios shall be: 

1# lL & ^:% th % C0lmC '^' thc CeRtral Committee, and 
t he Director General on general policies regarding 

bhe provision, financing and transport of supplies. 

2. To discuss with the Director General broad programs 
for securing the provision of supplies, as such 
programs affect the supplying countries., 

3 * ?° coo £ erate with the Director General and the es- 
taolished inter -governmental supply and shipping 
agencies regarding supply policies and, when neeeaec 
sary, make recommendations to supplement the ac- 
tions of such agencies and to assure the availabil- 
ity of required supplies. 

&• To cooperate with the Director General and the es- 
tablished inter-governmental and governmental agen- 
cies in efforts to increase production and the 
availability of supplies. 

5. To cooperate with the Director General and the inter 
governmental supply and shipping agencies- concerned, 
so that as between contributing countries, their 
supplies and services shall be drawn upon in an 
equitable manner; and that any necessary financial 
adjustments lamohg thorn may be arranged. 

6. To consider whether there arc unjustifiable differ- 
ences in the valuations placed by the contributing 
countries upon the supplies and services purchased 
by or made available to the Administration, and 
make necessary recommendations regarding the adjust- 
ment of such valuations. These recommendations 
would be made after having given due regard to the 
points of view expressed by the representative of 
the contributing country concerned. 



VII. ' The Committee considered the report of the Commit- 

00 on Ad Hoc Committees to thc Council (Reception No. 235), 
ecpnanonding 

The appointments to be made to the Committee on Supplies, 



i 



-59- 



(658) 



SSh*fSSSS?^ ^Committee, on Financial Control 
with I unctions as sot forth in the report, 

The appointments made to the Committee on Financial 
Control, 



The appointment of a Subcommittee of the Committee on 
Supplies and the Committee on Financial Control to 
advise the Director General relative to determining 
whether a government is in a position to pay as 
provided in Section 17 of the Financial Plan, 

and containing other details in respect to the Committee on 
Supplies, the Committee on Financial Control and the Subcom 
mittee. The- Committee recommends that the Council take 
appropriate action to carry out the recommendations in the 
report of the Committee on Ad Hoc Committees. Accordingly 
the following resolutions are proposed: 

A Resolution fixing the composition 
of the Committee on Supplies 

RESOLVED 



1. That the Committee on Supplies shall consist of 
members of the Council or their alternates representing 
Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, the Frenc 
Committee of National Liberation, the we the r land:; . New 
Zealand, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the 
United Kingdom and the United States of Anerica; 

2. That the Central Committee is authorized to make 
emergency appointments between sessions of the Council, 
such appointments to continue until the next session of the 
Council . 



A Resolution relating to 
the appointment of a 
Subcommittee of the 
Committee on Supplies 



RESOLVED 

That the Council approve the appointment by the 
chairman of the Committee on Supplies, after consultation 
with the chairman of the Committee on Financial Control, 
of a subcommittee of not more than five members, of wnom 
a majority would be drawn from the Committee pn Supplies 
with the other member or members drawn from the Committee 
on Financial Control, and that this subcommittee be con- 
sidered the appropriate subcommittee to advise c 
Director General relative to determining whether a 
government is in a position to pay, as provided .n 
Section 17 of the Financial ±aan. 



-60- 



(659) 



A Resolution fixing the 
composition of the 
Committee on Financial 
Control 



RESOLVED 



1. That the Committee on FinanM-n rvvw*«~i u n 
consist of the members of f-v," ru„ Control shall 

representing China Greece Lv? I ° r their ^emates 

Africa, Union df SovU? locialS? °S ^f 7 ' Unl ° n ° f S ° uth 

and the uStef Statf of Afloat ' ^ 

2. That the Central Committee is authorized to make 
emergency appointments between sessions of the Council 

rcouncll t0 COntlnUe UntU the ncxt session of 

A Resolution relating to the functions of 
the Committee on Financial Control 

RESOLVED 

1. That the functions of the Committee on Financial 
Control shall be: 

a. To review the annual budgets and any sup- 
plementary budgets of the Director General and* to 
make reports, comments and recommendations to the 
Council on those budgets. 

b. To receive the quarterly reports of the 
Director General on Administrative expenditures 
and receipts and to make reports to the Council 
regarding them. 

c. To recommend auditors to the Council and t« 
advise the Council regarding the scope and frequency 
of the reports to be obtained from the auditors. 
Such auditor's reports shall cover, in particular, 
the system of accounting employed by the Administra- 
tion, the funds expended in the purchase and received 
from the sale of supplies, the liabilities of the 
Administration and, generally, any matters of sub- 
stance which the auditors may raise on examination 

of the Administration ' s accounts. 

d. To make recommendations to the Council regarding 
the share of the administrative expense of the Adminis- 
tration to be provided by each .nembor government. 

e. To give attention to the effect, if any, which 
the receipt and expenditure by the Administration of 
local currency proceeds, referred to in Section. 19 of 
the Financial' Plan, may have upon inflation in any 
country in which the Administration may operate, and 
make recommendations as to procedures in relation to 
such receipts or expenditures which may aid in 
counteracting inflationary trends. 



-61- 



(660) 



f . Generally to advise the Council on all finan- 
cial matters within the competency of the Administra- 
tion other than those falling within the scope of the 
Committee on Supplies. 

g. To advise the Director General uoon any of the 
foregoing matters when he so requests. 

2. That the Central Committee is hereby authorized to 
make any further arrangements necessary in regard to the > 
work of the Committee on Financial Control* 



-62- 



( 661 ) 



COMMITTEE IV 
(Reception Nos : 310, 311, 31? 313 vm 

REPORT 

0? THE COMMITTEE ON RELIEF AND REHABILITATION POLICIES 

Chairman: D r. Tingfu E. T slang (China) 

Vice-chairman.: Sr. Dr. D. Juan Carlos 

Blanco (Uruguay) 

Secretary: Mr. Luther Gulick 

Mr. John K. Cover, Assistant 

The Committee on Relief and Rehabilitation Policies having 
met and considered the matters referred to it reports as follows 

1. While other committees of the Council have been concern' 
with the highly important problems of the scope, the organiza- 
tion, the rules, the personnel, the relations with governments, 
the finances, ' the procedures, and the mobilization of supplies, 
Committee IV has been concerned directly with the war sufferings 
of men, women and children around the world, r.nd wi th the 
specific commodities and services which will be needed to end 
starvation, epidemics and suffering and to unable peoples to 
help themselves again, as their countries are liberated from 
Axis oppression and slavery. 

2. The terms of reference of this Committee are sot 
forth in the first dozen lines of the UNRRA Agreement in 
the following inspiring words in which the United Nations 
express their determination: 

"....that immediately upon the liberation of 
any area by the armed forces of the United 
Natlor- ~~ a ««ri»oflucnco of retreat of tl. 
enemy 
and r< 

Snd S'ito Recovery of the hoexwj 01 ■ 
and that preparation and arranfeon .cnts sh.ll Do 

made for the return of f s » r ^^^Lion 
their homes and for assistance in the rosui p 



-63- 



(663) 



of urgently needed agricultural and 
industrial production and the restora- 
tion of essential services. 



& Reco-nizin- that relief and rehabilitation involve 
ffla ny technical questions of polio;:, Coimn.it tec IV was divided 
into the following six subcommittees: 

Subcommittee L. belief Distribution Policies 

2, Policies with Respect to Health and 
Medical Care 

" 3. Policies with Respect to Welfare Ser- 

vices, Includin;; Relations with 
Voluntary belief Agencies 

" 4. Policies with Respect to Assistance 

to Displaced Persons 

" 5, Policies Relating to Agricultural 

Rehabilitation and Other -'cans of 
Raisin:; Food Essential to Relief 

" C, Policies Relctir/; bo 3 ohabilitation 

of Such Industries, Transport and 
Other Services as &re Essential to 
Relief 

4. The reports of those siibcommittees have been reviewed, 
discussed and as amended adopted by Committee IV. 

5. Your Committee recommends that these six reports, v.-hich 
are appended hereto arid made a part of this report, 15© received 
by the Council and transmitted to the Director General for his 
information and for such further consideration and action as 

he nay deem necessary. 

0, Your Committee has embodied its policy determinations in 

a number of resolutions, all of which have received the approval 

of the Committee. The titles of those resolution;, co; ios of 

•<hich arc attached, arc as follov/3: 

A Resolution Rclatinr; to Relief . „'* .." 

' Distribution Policies {.Rocepvion i; o. oil,; 

A Resolution Relating to Health J' , ' ^ 

ana Medical Care (Reception Ho, 612 ) 

A Resolution Relating to '..elfaro 

Services and Voluntary Agencies (Reception No. olo) 

A Resolution Rclatin.:; tp Policies 

with Respect to Displaced Persons (Reception Ho. 



-64- 



(663) 



A Resolution Relating to Policies 

SSk????®!? t0 ^.cultural 
Rehabilitation and Other Mbans of 
Increasing Food Essential to Relief (Inception 



No, 315) 

A Resolution Relating to Pol^ci-^s 
With respect to Rehabilitation of 
Such Industries, Transport nnd 
Other Sorv.lces as are fcssontial 
to Relief / D 

(Reception 

No, (316)325) 

A Resolution Relating to Policies 

With Respect to Emergency Shelter (Reception 

No. Ul7)326) 

7. Your Committee respectfully urges' the adoption by 
the Council of the aforementioned Resolutions. 



-65- 



(664) 



A Resolution rclatina to relief 
distribution policies. 



(Reception No, 311) 

RESOLVED 

That the Council approves the following Statement as o 
Ss^ibSt2on: V With r ° Sp0Ct t0 roliof ™ d rehabilitation 

1. Thr.t at no tine Shall relief and rehabilitation 
supplies do used as a political v/eapon, and no discrimination 
shall oc made m the distribution of reli..f supplies because 
of race, creed or political belief. 

2. Thrt in ronoral the responsibility for the distri- 
bution, within an area, of relief and rehabilitation supplies 
should be borne by the £ overman t or recognized national 
authority ivhich exercises administrative authority in the 
area. 



3. That distribution should b. so conducted that all 
classes of the population, irrespective of their purchasing 
pov.or, shall receive their equitable shares of essential 
commodities. When supplies are sold to consumers, prices 
should be Set at such levels as to facilitate the flow cf 
supplies into the proper hands, PJ»d to avoid maladjustments 
in the price structure of the areas. 



4, That distribution of relief end rehabilitation 
supplies should take piece under effective rationing and price 
controls. The suppression of black markets should not be left 
to general pronouncements and decrees, but should be the sub- 
ject of active measures of enforcement applied vigorously 
and unremittinclv. 



-66 



(665) 



5. ih^t tho government or recognized national authority 
which exercises administrative authoritv in the area should 
take appropriate measures to insure that insofar as the dis- 
tribution wit. a in a liberated territory of relief and rohabil'i 
tation goods is done through private trade, the remuneration 
earned by private traders for their services ts no more than 
is fair and reasonable. 

6. That use should be made to the maximum practicable 
extent of normal agencies of distribution (governmental* com- 
mercial, cooperative), to the particular ends of combating 
inflation and restoring normal economic activity. This 
principle, however, cannot be pursued at the expense of 
measures found necessary under emergency conditions to insure 
an adequate control of the distribution of supplies and their 
direction to the appropriate consumers. 

7. That if the Administration is called on by the mili- 
tary authority to furnish distribution services through its 
ov/n organization and personnel in a liberated territory in 
which a government or recognized national authority does not 
yet exercise administrative authority, tho Administration 
should, subject to the general provisions governing the rela- 
tion of the Administration to the military authority und 

the government or recognized national authority concerned, 
nake the fullest possible use of local author! uies and of 
local organizations. 

8. That tho Administration be prepared to render direct 
assistance in distribution whenever, because of unusual cir- 
cumstances the government or recognized national authority 
concerned requests such aid within its territory. •Wherever 
as a consequence of such request, the Administration is 
directly concerned with internal distribution, it should 
follow, in cooperation with the national or local authorities 
the same general principles as those recommended above. 

9. That the Director General should be kept fully in- 
formed concerning the distribution of relief and. rehabilita- 
tion supplies within any recipient areas, end under all cir- 
cumstances there should be the fullest working cooperation 
between the governments or recognized national authorities 
concerned and the Administration for this purpose. 



~ S7 - (666) 



A Resolution relating to 
health and medical care 



(Reception No. 312) 

R2S0LVED 

litorn^e^or^beS ^\?%™>?»*°, >*cn nominating 

on Health to ,03^^°^% S^^c^^LK"" 
technically competent FeoresentaHwo „ " . clCGUu V? 

. . n 1 -, . , j- uot^ubuuives Ox their tp^ip^Hw 

national health services. 1 ie ^Peci±vc 

2 : That the Council recommends that governments' and 
recognized national authorities cooperate fullyTith the 
Administration in establishing at the earliest taS«lhl2%«i-P 
regional and other emergency Agreements Sd Sr^lments & " 
for the notification within the limits or military securitv 

?e,uiatioL S "ind 1 ? *° 1?°°™ **^°> origin quarantine 

regulations-, ana for other measures of prevention. 



3. rhat. the Council recorr-ends that governments and 
recognizee national authorities, whenever so reouestcd b- the 
Administration, offer all facilities in making available" to 
tae administration suitable personnel for its health organi- 
zation, including the temporary loan of technical experts, 
and the services of scientific institutions. 

4. That the Council recommends the closest collabora- 
tion at the earliest possible time between the Administra- 
tion and the Allied Military Authorities, particularly in 
relation to the nof if i cation of infectious" diseases, within 
the limits of military security, and to the orderly transfer 
to the Administration of the epidemic control and other 
public health measures put into operation by the military 
authorities, 

5. That the Council recommends that governments and 
recognized national authorities whenever so requested by the 
Administration, facilitate in ever;;- way possible the assign- 
ment of their nationals from the occupied countries for 
technical training especially in the newer aspects of medical 
and sanitary sciences in the countries whore such training is 
available j under the condition that the request be filed by 
the government concerned. 



-68- 



( 667 ) 



A Resolution relating to 
welfare services raid voluntary 
relief agencies 



(deception No. 315) 



RESOLVED 



1. That welfare services administered bv or in coopera- 
tion with the Administration shall be provided without dis- 
crimination because of race, creed cr political belief. 

2. That it shall be the policy of the Administration 
to enlist the cooperation and seek the participation of 
appropriate foreign voluntary relief agencies, to the extent 
that they can be effectively utilised in relief activities 
for which they have special competence and resources, subject 
to the consent and regulation of the Director General in 
accordance with Article IV, paragraph 2 of the Agreement. 

3. That the extent to which foreign voluntary relief 
agencies should be used for assistance in the relief and 
rehabilitation of distressed people in any country should be 
a matter to be determined by the Director General in consul- 
tation with the government or recognized national authority 
concerned . 

4. That within the framework cf its total program and 
with the closest collaboration between the health, welfare 
and other appropriate organization units, the Administration 
should make* specific provision for welfare services for 
victims of war — in particular for children, expectant and 
nursing mothers, the aged and the disabled. 

5. That in general, welfare services should be ad- 
ministered, as far as possible, by the government or recog- 
nized national authority concerned and the Administration 
should make its resources available to the appropriate 
national governmental agency in accordance with plans agreed 
upon between the Administration and the national agency. 




6.. That the Administration should be prepared to ad- 
minister welfare services directly, either m^art or in whole, 
when called uoon by a government or recognized nation, 1 
authority, which for any reason is unable itself to administer 
these services. 



-69- 



(6S8) 



7. That because of already prolonged suffering duo to 
war and because of critical needs, the Administration should 
arrange to provide, as promptly as possible, the necessary 
welfare services to be available when countries are liberated 
or occupied by the United Nations. ' operated 

8. That welfare services should be designed to help 
peo-lc to help themselves. wherever possible constructive 
work opportunities and measures for self-holo should be pro- 
vided to permit those receiving relief to oroduce at least 
seme of their own basic requirements. 

9. That because of the magnitude and comnlcxitv of the 
welfare problems confronting the Administration, and the 
necessity for effective technical guidance, there should be 
established a standin;; technical Committee on Welfare. 



-70- 



(669) 



A Re solution relating to policies 
wttk respect to displaced'.pcrsons, 

(Reception Do. 314) 



RESOLVES 



1. That the Council recommends that member Governments 
and the Director General exchange information on all phases 
of the problem, including such matters as the numbers and 
places oi temporary residence of their nationals in other 
countries, and of the presence of the nationals of other 
countries, or stateless persons, within their territories ; 

2. That the Council recommends that member Governments 
consult with and give full aid to the Director General in- 
order that Vie may, in concert with them, plan, coordinate, 
administer or arrange for the administration of orderly and 
effective measures for the return to their homos of prisoners 
exiles and other displaced persons; 

3. That the Council recommends that member governments 
consult with the Director General for the purpose of carrying 
out measures with respect to the repatriation or return of 
displaced persons; and that the classes of persons to be 
repatriated be those referred to in paragraphs 5 and 6 of 

the report of Subcommittee 4 of Committee IV. 

4. That the question of the assistance to be given by 
the Administration in the return to their homes of displaced 
persons of enemy or ex-cnemy nationality who have been in- 
truded into homes from which nationals of the United Nations 
have been expelled should be considered as a separate issue 
to bo dealt with in accordance with the provisions of para- 
graphs II and 12 of the report of Subcommittee 4 of Com- 
mittee IV; 

5. That stcos be taken to ensure the closest coopera- 
tion with the Committee on Health, as well as with the 
national health authorities of the various countries con- 
cerned, with a view to preventing and controlling any 
epidemics which nay bo expected to arise in connexion with 
the repatriation of large groups of displaced persons; 



•71- 



(670) 



6 rhat the Director General take steos to ensure the 
closest cooperation with such agencies as the International 
Red Cress and the Intergovernmental Committee f Se f 

°f^tlrlt ^/SFSr^? 0 b ° diuS 0f s ""able st and inches e 
assistance may. be of value, with a view to invoking their 

collaboration in the work of the repatriation of displaced 
persons; 

7. That the Director General should establish the 
earliest possible contact with the military authorities of 
the United Nations with a view to concerting plans for deal- 
ing in a uniform and closely co-ordinated manner with any 
large groups of displaced persons which nay be found in any 
liberated or occupied territory on the entry of the forces 
of the United Nations into that territory. 



- 72 - 



(671) 



A Resolution relating to noi^- 

with respect to aSicSltSJ? 10 ' 8 
.rehabilitation and I tS?£^S of 
increasing food essentia "lief 

(-••- gc ption No, 515) 



RESOLVED 

That the Council 



fion and oth,, ^thodo «* taSSS.Ug'g*?'^ iaffo 11 "*- 



relief: 



1. That for the first crop year after liberation in 

any area the Administration, through its ogricStwel pchabili- 
tation and food production program, should give priority to 
he production of food for direct human consumption? P^r 
that year the war production pattern in lib-rated areas 

f^otf ?rom J?- b " "? nti ^ d With -^hasis 'upon maximum out- 
put DOtn from the soil ana from fisbcri. s. In certain arc- * 

wi;^ in thiS P ° Uc * & undertaken wncrt 

a continuance o ± the war production pattern results in a dis- 
proportionate sacrifice in productivity, provided essential 
fooas are otherwise available, 

2, That it shall be the responsibility of the Adminis- 
tration to assist governments and recognized national autho- 
rities in the liberated areas immediately to take the neces- 
sary steps in providing the supplies and services needed to 
enable farmers to so-.:, and harvest essential crops during the 
first crop year, to .maintain their dairy herds/ and to re- 
habilitate their farms for immediate food production. It shall 
also be the responsibility of the Administration to assist in 
restoring necessary processing facilities; in providing for 

the early expansion of fisheries and of the whaling industry; 
in reinstating the agricultural labor needed to carry out the 
production program; and, to the extent that they can contribute 
to the solution of relief problems, in reestablishing experi- 
mental stations and essential agricultural institutions, 
organizations and services, in making the necessary technical 
surveys to determine agricultural requirements and to lay the 
busis for production programs. 



73 - 



(672) 



. fcJSE tf th^nV^ , th ° P ° liCy ° f the Administration 
t0 rrh^i^ Jf St P °! sible cxtent its short-run 

agncultural rehabilitation and food production efforts with 
the longur-run reconstruction objectives of the United Nations 
Organization for Pood and Agriculture, and to shape its 
policies so as not to hamper the achievement of those ob- 
jectives, which call for the progressive realization in all 
countries of diets adequate both in quantity and quality. 

4. That since priorities between various agricultural 
items will vary from area to area, such priorities shall be 
determined by the government or recognized national authority 
concerned in conjunction with the Director General in accord- 
ance with the general policy outlined above. In determining 
such priority for agriculture and fishing .requirements the 
test should be applied whether the supply of these require- 
ments will bring early and large returns" in the form of 

crops and fish for direct human consumption. 

5. The Administration should be prepared when requested 
by a government or r ocogriizcd national authority to assist 
them in making technical field surveys in establishing 
criority on the need for supplies in making available informa- 
tion concerning production surpluses in nearby areas, and in 
providing such other technical assistance as is required. 



\ 



-74- 



(673) 



A Resolution relating to policies 
with respect to the rehabilita- 
tion of such industries, trans- 
port and other services -as are 
essential to relief. 

(Reception Mo* (51G) 325) 

The preamble of the Agreement states that preparations and 
arrangements shall be made for assistance in the resumption of 
urgently needed industrial production and the restoration of 
essential services, it is therefore 

RESOLVED 

That, subject to the provisions of Resolutions Nos. 1 and 17 
of this Session, the Council approves the f ollcv/in,-; statement as 
•a niidc to activities with respect to tho rehabilitation cf such 
industries, transport and other services as are essential to re- 

1 • i* 
1101 f 

I # Rehabilitation supplies are to consist o£ Materials, 
such as raw materials, inachinory and spare parts ricoded to onable 
a recipient country to produce and transport relief supplies for 
its own and other liberated territories; and, within the scope 
cf the Acnini strati on, the rehabilitation cf public utilities 
and services, so far as they can be repaired and restored to 
ncct immediate, basic needs, such essentials as li:;ht and water* 
'cover, transportation and coinuuni cation* Tlioso needs include 
rehabilitation of essential relief industries, such as those 
v/hich provide food, shelter, clothing,, uedical supplies. 



n 



... Raw materials may be supplied by (a) the liberated 
countrv in which the inclustr" is situated and in which the 
satcrlals 'are to be used, (b) another liberated country, or 
(c) an- other countrv. The task of the administration incases 
(a) and (b) should be the rehabilitation of the rav: material 
producing industries such as coal mines, mineral mines, con- 
struction materials industries, etc... 

3. If the raw materials required must bo ported from ' 
it should be the responsibility ■ of the Admini Ration, 
^ough tho appropriate national or injorsovc^ontal ^gclcs, 
toarranco for necessary allocation and P^ocurGmont of^supplics, 
? that there may be created as promptly a? possxblo, rosorvos 

^ available at the request oi tho ^rccto, 
••'acrovor the need arises. 

sutf 4. it is recommended that pools be created of ^.rials^ 

r -2 f as processing materials, mac) ^v-^^f both standard 
;:r"--ncc eminent, industrial pachaTtcn ox 
m s Pecic.l types, and spare parts. 



-75- 



(674) 



5. It is recommended fckat in cases where home nroduction 
exceeds homo consumption, the government or recognised national 
ruthonty concerned, should take all steps necessary to enable 
the excess of production available in a country to bo put at 
the disposal of other liberated areas which may need such sup- 
plies to cover their deficits. 

G. It should be the policy of the Administration to help 
those countries whose industries en be rehabilitated for pro- 
duction of relief and rehabilitation goods urgently required 
in other liberated areas . It is recommended that in attainment 
of those objectives the following be considered: special allo- 
cations of raw materials, machinery, and spare parts, by plac- 
ing at the disposal of those countries, a t the request of" their 
governments, an experienced staff, and by providing special 
priorities for the- return of skilled personnel awaiting 
repatriation . 

7. It is recommended that the Governments or recognized 
national authorities having administrative author: ty in a 
liberated area, wi-ll keep the Director General md the appro- 
priate regional committee fully informed as to any surplus of 
supplies from time to time available in such area", to meet, 
when circumstances pe ..v.:i.t , relief and rehabilitation import 
requirements of other liberated areas. 

8. It is recommended that the Administration should, in 
consultation with the governments or recognized national author- 
ities cone ,-rned and the appropriate international coordinating 
authority, assist liberated areas in restoring the transport and 
communications system to satisfactory working condition; it 
should also help to restore equipment, repair shops, work shops, 
shipyards, etc. It is recommended that a pool of transportation 
equipment both fixed arid mobile should be created either from 
stocks manufactured overseas or in Allied or in neutral coun- 
tries. Equipment which has been the property of the enemy may 
rise form part of the pool. 

9. It should be the task of the Administration to parti- 
cipate in conjunction with military and other appropriate 
authorities in the organization and coordination of the trans- 
portation of relief and rehabilitation supplies during the 
relief and r eh abil i tat ion period. 

10. It is recommended that the requirements for raw 
materials, machinery, spare parts and processing materials should 
bo established within each country and that a definite order of 
priority be established talcing into consideration: (a) techni- 
cal factors, such as v , on the one hand, the public services (gas, 
water, electricity), and, on the other, the necessity of re- 
storing the needs of various t:/pcs of consumer goods; (b) social 
factors such as the necessity of providing reemployment; (c) 
temporary economic factors such as scarcity of certain raw 
materials and shipping. 

11. The task of rehabilitation must not be considered as 
the beginning of reconstruction, - it is coterminous with relief. 
No new construction or reconstruction work is contemplated, but 
only rehabilitation as defined in the preamble of the Agreement. 
Problems, such as unemployment, arc important, but not deter- 
mining factors * They are consequences and, at the same time, 
motives of action. ' The Administration cannot be called upon 

to help restore continuous employment in the world. 



-76- 



(675) 



A Resolution relating to 
policies with respect 
to shelter 



(reception Ho. (317) 326) 



RESOLVED 



That the Council approves the following statement 
as a guide to activities with respect to shelter; 

1. That any general rebuilding policy for the areas 
to bo liberated is in the sphere of long-term reconstruc- 
tion and docs not, therefore, come within the purview of 
the Administration. 

2. That in the relief period priority in the reha- 
bilitation of essential shelter or accommodation in the 
liberated areas should be given to: 

hospitals and schools; 

habitations for homeless persons, especially for 
workers engaged in essential public services 
and in industries having high priority in relief, 
as well as for farmers and agricultural workers. 

3. That where it may bo necessary, however, there 
should be imported construction tools such as hand tools, 
building supplies and equipment, including excavating 
machinery, 'should essential materials and equipment not 
be found available, or be in short supply. 

4. As regards the problem of shelter for displaced 
persons, which falls into two parts - temporary accommoda- 
tion at collecting points and at frontiers, and accommoda- 
tion of a more permanent, though not necessarily final 
character, for persons who cannot be returned to their 
homes cither because their homes have boon destroyed or 
because those arc in territories still occupied by the 
enemy - wherever possible existing buildings, camps, 
barracks, hospitals and other public buildings, should 

bo used as they arc or can be made suitable. 

5. That where, in some cnomy-° ccu Piod territories, 
^tensive enemy colonization has taken place and where 
consolidation of holdings and construction of military 
installations has been accompanied by dcst ^ c J 1 °^ 1 iarm ' 
kouses and buildings there should be provided camp 
^<*o£tiSE f orders and agricultural workers upon 
**um to their own country. Any W-scalc P^anent 

Construction of holdings and the '^l^^i^bt 
hou scs and other structures should not be undertaken b. 



-77- 

(67S) 




trr i^anf S%ST£3£iS£?£ is a socialized Indus- 

try m any 01 Tine territories of a member rov-rnmmi- t-v^ 
importance of making these supplies ~ J™ aTa part of 
the contribution of these governments should be recognized. 

7.. That where there is widespread destruction of par- 
ticular areas caused by military operations or of a delib- 
erate "scorched earth" policy on the part of the enemy, 
although priority should be given to housing repairs as 
indicated m paragraph 2, accommodation or shelter for 
workers in the food processing industries should be provided. 

8. That it is of importance that arrangements should 
be .made, with the consent of the government concerned for 
an export assessment of this damage, so that detailed* and 
accurate specifications of the equipment required in the 
reconstruction of factories providing essontial relief 
requirements and the shclt or or accommodations for the 
workers engaged in those industries may be obtained at as 
early a- date as possible. In order that this work may be 
started, if possible, during the period of military respon- 
sibility for civilian relief and rehabilitation, the Council 
recommends to its member governments that the military 
authorities be invited to advise the Administration, to the 
fullest extent consistent with military security, of con- 
ditions found in the area affecting civilian relief and 
rehabilitation requirements and supplies. 



-78- 

(677) 

M^r^led Final Reports of 
Subcommittees 1 to 6, inclusive , of Committee IV 

(Reception No. 318) 

The following are the amended final reports of 
the six subcommittees of Committee IV, to which 
reference is made in paragraph 5 of the Draft Report 
of Committee IV (Reception No. 310). 



t 



-78- 



(677) 



Am® n£ed Pinal Reports of 
Subco^Uees 1 to 6, inclusive, of Conraittee IV 

(Reception No. 518) 

•The following are the amended final reports of 
the six subcommittees of Committee iv, to which 
reference is made in paragraph 5 of the Draft Report 
of Committee IV (Reception No. 310)." 



-79- 

" " ' • • ■ ■/ " '*<•'"- .*••.-.''* 

(678) 

Report 



• Chairmen: i>ir uwen ^kon'^ Australia; 

Vice Chairman: Jen iviazaryk (Czechoslovakia) 
secretary J Son ft, Lewis 

The Subcommittee on Relief Distribution Policies, 
having met ana considered the matters referred to it, 
submits the following re-port to Committee IV: 

1. In dealing with the subject cf "Relief Distri- 
bution Problems' the subcommittee has not attempted to 
furnish in advance e s ,t of detailed rules for the 
guidance of the administration in the essentially prac- 
tical task of providing relief and rehabilitation 
according to the necessities of the case as they appear 
et the time. The subcommittee feels that it will better 
serve the interests of the AdministrJ tiori and of the 
Countries receiving relief if it confines its report to 
tho statement of a few leading principles by which, in 
its opinion, the distribution of relief end rehabilita- 
tion supplies should be governed, and to the expression 

of its opinion upon some, que •;' oris of general significance 
in that part of the work of ti*^ Administration. 

2. In the course of its deliberations, however, 
tho subcommittee invited the members representing 
countries at present occupi-d by the enemy to submit 
papers outlining the distribution systems a is ting in 
their countries and the nature of particular distribution 
problems to be anticipated after liberation. Valuable 
contributions were made by the representatives from the 
following delegations; Belgium, China, Czechoslovakia, 
French Committee, Greece, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, 
Poland and Yugoslavia, The subcommittee desires that 
th^so documents should be regarded as part of the mater- 
ials uper Lch its report is based. They should be 
referred to for the guidance they give as to particular 
conditions rnd considerations. 



at 

s 



3. A majority of countries, from the information 
Present available, anticipate that th'ey will _ them. 

--Ives be able to undertake the * i "*-*J??*iJ?o?^Sll. 
ttioir territories of relief and rehab . ^xt,.t.uon syPPli- 
mailable by or with the assistance^ oi ln 
countries there is expected to bo in 
f ter liberation, an effective fr tom °L"tJ*i 
r (governmental, cooperative, com. c, 1, 

stable! - ad the framework jf^tioni ^ wh t ch 
ontrol capable of conversion into an i^trumont 
aj -l assure a. fair and efficient Qisuj 



-eo- 



(679) 



plies It is the intention of t-w- r 

countries to do all thr.t is SowiM Go J epaBlsat « ^hoso 
market activities and to rem-dv i^T ? fJPPPW black 
distribution consequent on ene^y oLSpaUpS! inequitab1 ^ 

normal 4 '< S rganr 2 ati a on SFStXfc^^^ ° f the 
far reaching by reason, fir ^ " ^/T^ ?2 bo 
of many commercial aad^owS^o^S^-.S^^ 011 
destruction of technical equipment for sto^e'and 
transport and of retail shoos T* - ?L i $ a ?7 
i , r£r , soetlnn** nf I sno Ps. ine forced migration of 

largv sections of the population will have clt Q dis- 
rupted, temporarily et least fh nttJ^Z? * 
and 3 yen governmenLl dis?r butivo'org^z'tir'^n 1 ^ 
these circumstances the direct assignee of ?ne Adminis- 

tlohl? ^ b °f^;m- fCr tb f *™ st Possible re^a! 
tion 01 theso facilities and organization, and for th 
provision of temporary expedients to make possible the 
immeaiate resumption of distribution. 

5. In the opinion of the subcommittee the following 
are^the principles to which the distribution within the 
recipient areas of relief and rehabilitation supplies 
snould be subject and it recommends their adoption: 

I. In general the responsibility for the 
distribution, within an ar_a, of relief 
and rehabilitation supplies should be 
borne by the government or recognized 
national authority which exercises 
administrative authority in the area. 

II. Distribution should be so conducted that 

all classes of the population, irrespective 
of their purchasing pow.r, shall receive 
their equitable shares of essential com- 
modities, "hen supplies are sold to con- 
sumers, prices should be set at such levels 
as to facilitate the flow of supplies into 
the proper hands, and to avoid m; lad jus t- 
ments in the price structure of the areas. 

III. distribution of r-lii-f and rehrbilitation 
* supplies should take place under effective 
rationing and price controls. The sup- 
pression of black markets should not bo 
left to general pronouncements and decrees, 
but should be th- subject of active 
measures of enforcement applied vigorously 
end unremittingly. 

IV. The government or recognized national 

authority which exercises adminis trrtive 
authority in the arec should take appro- 
priate measures to insure that insofar 
as th- distribution within a liber-ted 
territory of relief and rehabilitation 
goods is dorie through private trade, the 
remuneration earned by private traders 
for their services is no more than is 
fair and r-asonable. 



-81- 



(680: 



cablf eSLv ? ad ° to th * »«*«™ Praoti- 
bution to tJt n °^ al rondos of distri- 

opMwh-,/ -na restoring normal economic 
bo t^tlU ^^Principl*, however, cannot 

oc ? ^ ; u - ;Xp ° nso of ^aauroa found 

, emergency conditions to 
but^n n? a f° q lff tQ control of tho distri- 
bution oi supplies and their direction to 
the appropriate consumers. 

VI. At nb time should relief and rehabilitation 
suppli-s bo used as c political weapon, and 
no discrimination should be made in tho 
distribution of relief supplies because of 
race, croed or political belief. 

VII. In view of the expectation that, in a 

liberated territory in which a government 
or recognized national feuthority do-s not 
yet exorcise administrative authority, the 
Administration may be called on by the 
military authority to furnish distribution 
services through its own organization and 
personnel, it is recommended thct, .subject 
to the general provisions governing the 
relation of tho Administration to tho 
military authority and th.. national gevern- 
ment or recognized notional authority con- 
cerned, tho administration should make the 
fullest possible use of local authorities 
and of local organizations f 

VIII. The Administration must be prepared to 

render direct assistance in distribution 
whenever, because of unusual circumstances, 
thj government concerned requests such aid 
within its territory. Irfherever, as a con- 
sequence of such request, the Administra- 
tion is directly concerned with internal 
distribution, it should follow, in coopera- 
tion with the national or local authorities, 
the same general principles as those recom- 
mended above to member governments. 

IX f The director General should be kept fully 
informed concerning the distribution of 
relief and rehabilitation supplies within 
any recipient areas, and under all circum- 
stances there should be the fullest working 
cooperation between the Governments con- 
cerhed and the Administration for this 
purpose . 



-32- 



Committee Iv - Subcommittee 2. 
Report 

| SOU* Sub«.°^tt.e on »o» ? .Uj wrt^g,^ t0 Kc!t . bh 

Moaicai jCare " ~" * — - - 

I Chairman: Thomas Parran 

ir*-*' ™ . (United States of America) 

Vice Chairman.: j. Hong Liu (Chin-.) 

-Pportour: ftfelvilfc r4konz?e 

b ^. . (United Kingdom) 

ascrotary: Jamcs A. Crahtroe 

The Subcommittee on Policios wi-f-in n„ ovl „ ■ , „ „,„ 
Losing mot end consider^ £&£??X&W^!f e *^ 
L«mer?^ mOU 7 »W*ifafe report ,.hich it tub^its'tf 

Scope of the health' wor k of UHRRA 

1. The health work will necessarily constitute one of the 
[primary and fundamental responsibilities of mfciU. The relief and 
| rehabilitation pro-ram must aim toward the maximum of health 
security within the practicable limits of the resources 'of the 
pi ted Nations . 



0 



This program would consist chiefly of the provision of 
assistance to governments in the rapid re-establishmcnt of their 
health services generally, preventive and curative. These services 
i include not only disease control and relief from malnutrition, but 
also the re-establishment of medical services, hospitals*, dis- 
pensaries, sanitoria, health centres, laboratories', environmental 
, sanitation, maternity and child welfare services, the control of 
endemic diseases, particularly tuberculosis and yener.eal diseases, 
jna other essentials for health. For this purpose UN:.::;., should bo 
prepared to give assistance in connuction with equipment and 
fi!? ? J ios * Personnel, expert advice, facilities for technical train- 
[3 tJl e collection and dissemination of infor: ; at ion bearing en 
I ne above problems. 

for, fl ^' ® nj °^ the aims of Ui-EEA should be to equalise opportunity 
li i rost °ration of health in the various countries* This will 
BM a sharin S of responsibilities and equitable distribution of 
1 1 1.5 s an a other assistance in proportion, to need and in accordance 
| w a coordinated plan. 

V Among the most important functions of the Health Qrganisa- 

Lv of U-inP.A will be work in connoction with t he control of opi- 
" v " lcs » Particularly those a-f footing more than one country. 

con, !* rl ? examination will have to be made of the best method of 
h k Sj ^lysing and collating such reports regarding epidemics 
th* v-|. 0 available from any source including such information as 
kbuH tary m 7 find it possible to furnish, and subsequently dis- 
IliSng this information for the uae ot Member Governme bs as 
1 ^ UKR RA itself. 

I 

inth° S T 232 and 239 of this document, as they originally appeared 
* v Jo ^nal, have been corrected. 



lie 



ASeS 



Furthermore the Health Organisation «+n 
Promptly the conclusion of cmo.?goncy a^oom^f l P T* 0 * 
th0 various Governments establishing SomUv E°3 
quarantine measures to be observed among them! 

In addition the Health Organ! s at i or. »n i 

coordinate the steps taken by SoStoieS mtiil?°^ ° 

corned in the control of ontbrerhs S°? n ? lj ,° n ~ 

groover UNRRA may be called upon fro crwido u^ont?v 

needed medical supplies for mating at 2= 0 S| ! 2 

view of the obvious importance or dWalinF ranidlv Jtb 

epidemics, it is essential th-t the 5 m ft • Z- 

. . , . > . . , a — - ^4.iv aomM Upon nlftptio'n 

has at its immediate disposal trained peircolmel «nd 
material. . 1 

5. The Health Organisation may be called upon to 
provide for the loan of experts to various pountries 
particularly in cases whore diseases have been introduced 
for the first time as a result of the war, »nd with the 
control of which neither the National Ileal bh Authority no^ 
the "local practitioners a*o. familiar, or whore diseases 
already endemic have reached epidemic proportions . 

6, The medical aspects of nutrition will constitute 
one of the chief preoccupations of the Health Organisa- 
tion, and measures directed against undernourishment and 
malnutrition should boo carried out upon medical advice, 
TH'ao health organisation will be urgently concerned with bh 
provision of nutritional standards adequate for the main- 
tenance of health in the territories in which it operates. 

. 7. The Health Organisation in collaboration with the 
member governments concerned will play an extremely import a 
pert in the health supervision and control of returning 
displaced persons. In this connection it will be important 
to coordinate the health measures taken in the country of 
departure, the countries of transit, and if the Government 
concerned so desires, in the country of destination. 

8. The special health needs of children and expectant 
ana nursing mothers must be given early recognition by 
the Health Organization. Prompt and adequate provision 
f or the health and nutrition of these vulnerable groups 
is essential to the restoration of normal family life* and 
couaunity stability. 



^uor functional units of UIIKaA * op ^t - x ^Z*Z"~ „v 
b J required to deal with communicable diseases. mw& J*- 
f^dren, particularly those who cro- homeless and lost, 
and fv, ' . t _ , B «^nBt sor se has peon 



^laren, particularly those who are nome xe, 4g« 

those whose resistance against disoase has be. n 
J°fProd by malnutrition. This may v/ell ^ intensifio 
^crowding, and the lack of clothing and of o-fcyr 
tia *s for health and normal development. 



jd by 

> * i 



-04- 



C683) 



\ 



deal ^ 

yofs s ,oof^ 0 -? b r h - ■ 

ehmifd be indiridn^Ho'^ *. s Possible, such care 

should De individualized to meet the needs of each. 

The Health Organization should participate in the 
development of UK^RA plana for providing ?ood for these 
special groups in order that food policies may bo main! 
tainod m consonance with their soecial physiological 
needs. * 1 

The Health Organization may also be called upon by 
member governments to assist in dealing with the condi- 
tions of anxiety, fear and emotional disturbances which 
will have arisen in peculiarly great frequency among the 
children and youth of occupied territories. 

9. A constant objective of the health program should 
be to demonstrate the effectiveness and need for inter- 
national collaboration in public health. In so do in? 

it will facilitate the later development of a permanent 
world-wide health orgar ization. 

P olicies wit h reso ^ct to Governmental and Won- 
Cieve.- m _ _ a _ '.. ■'. T_ t :• aizat i ons 

Relationships v/ith national health services . 

10. It is the duty of national health services to 
assume full resoonsibil ity for public health within their 
countries and UNRHA should assist in the effective prose- 
cution of those activities directed to this end whenever 
this is requested by a member government. 

"v^hencver possible the national and local health ser- 
vices should be the channel through which the health 
work of relief rehabilitation operations are carried 

out, and it should be a constant objective of the Health 
Organization to assist in strengthening these services. 

Collaboration between Mo mbor_Governmen1>s in the 
• ftftfttrol of epid emic diseases. 

H- Since deseases are not limited by political 
boundaries, member governments must ^ 1 ^ 0 ^^ r f? 1 ^ il1 
the joint adoption of measures designed to control the 
international spread of disease ,sp.ei t aiy chough tho 
Change of epidemic ^ intelligence - ^ - -Ixt..^ 

health aspects of rcpatriat ;o t^nb.U their 

and where necessary direct collabo 3 . ordin ation 

national health services by the 

and combined action could cost b. ^r r ? Organization 

creation of a special section in the Heax^n g 

or UKHRA for epidemiological control. 



(6G4) 



Co-operation \«ith r«<i.«~ 

niMlili?^^^ 

12. Co-onara on with 4-- 
international health aKeneia* -.5 ?§ Governmental 
The Health Organisation of ^ ? Uld ba fostered, 
the industrial health sect ioS of ^PV! Katio ^, 
Labour Office and the Pa^Am^ Int ***ational 
have much to offer on l^l^Z*™ Bureau 
lance and accomplishments, In vWo?V° nS °^' ir " 
of nutrition from a health noint f 2? the iraD °^ a ^ 
should be sought with the iStSL n . c °-°^-t ion 
lished by the United KatioS ?^? Commission estab- 
Agriculture, and with anv Serm^r nCQ °? Pood " nd 
may succeed it, cJ-onSt'on fS* 6 ? 1 !*** 1 !? which 
Public Health Office i n Par?s il \Ft lRtornabional 
the question at the o^nt ti^! T' 8 ' ° Ut ° f 

Co-ooorr.tion with _K on-Oovernm en tal Health ;.r.en c-: ; r . 

13, The wide experience and good will of the nnn- 
governmental health , ,. s should be uiilised to the' 
utmost as it is clear that the full participation of 
alj such agencies nay well be needed. In accordance 
with the terms of the .Agreement, plans and policies 
should be developed whereby the resources of such 
organisations may be used effectively in those health 
aspects of relief and rehabilitation in which they have 
social competence. 

General Functions of the Health Or -: j sat ion . 

14. The general functions of the Health Organisation 
should include: 

(a) responsibility for the health aspects of all 
the work of UNRRA; 

(b) assembling of comprehensive data on the 
health and medical organi sation of the various 
countries, including information on hospitals, 
dispensaries, health centres, laboratories, 
sanitary installations and scientific insti- 
tutions; the numbers and kinds of local tech- 
nical oersonnel; and the local production 

and distribution of sanitary and medical 
supplies . 

(c) collection of information on health conditions 
in the various territories, including data 

on epidemic diseases, nutrition, sanitation.,, 
materiel and child health, tuberculosis and 
• other diseases, the care of the sick and 
pHfsicaily handicapped, the local production 
and distribution of medical and sanitary 
supolies and all related matters; 



'535) 



(d) overall estimation of the amounts and kinds 
ormedical and sanitary supplies h< i d, 
arid the arrangement for their procurement, 
allocation, transportation and distribution; 

(e) recruitment of technical and professional 
personnel, establishment and conduct of 
training urogram-, - , assignment of oerson- 
nel to specific fields of operation, and the 
general direction of health operations in 
the field: 

(f) preparation, in collaboration with the res- 
pective member governments, of plans for 
health relief and rehabilitation for-soocific 
countri os ; 

(g) where consistent with UKRRA uolicy and within 
the general framework of its fi3ld coerations, 
temporary general administration of health 
services in areas where national or local 
health services are not yet functioning 
effectively; 

(h) responsibilities in connection with the health 
of displaced persons; 

(i) Preparation of recommendations to the Council 
or to the governments concerned for any 
emergency international agreements necessary 
to control the spread of disease; 

(j) provision of exports or expert teams at the 
request of a national government; 

(k) assistance in the control of epidemics; • 

(1) carrying out of the general health policies 
of UWRHA in relation to co-operation with the 
health service of the aporooriate inter-allied 
military authority; international govern- 
mental health ag3nci3s; international and 
national n on- governmental health agencies; 
and other Divisions of UNRRA engaged in 
activities related to the health 
especially food and agriculture, well are 
and displaced persons. 

4-v,., H*a1th Orf rnisationof UNRRA 
Poll c i e s regardirp the Haaiwj \J£hZ£i± — 



15. The re-, stablishmont^of health being one of 

the principal objects of ^Jf^^isa^bn snoKd be 
that the status of the Bealtn o> gan . . - 
commensurate with its importance m the 
whole Admin i s tr a t i on . 



-27- 



(686) 



It is a recognized prin«*ro 
all wrk of a technical ch £~ ? A ^ministration tfaaf 
technical direction. i n v ° r f ^ carried our under 
ovory aspect of the work S ^ ' wt that almost" 
health implications (programming 5™i? Coe * 8apil y ^ 
training, co-operation with liSZL suppli GSv| personnel 



training, co-operation with rwc£»-, P S lluS » P«*sonn i, 
etc.) the Director of Hoalth mLf^^' field operations 
in the Administration wwi^ J???* bo afforded a p • 



16. The Health Or^anizA** ™ , 
irector of Health aitfSuffii ^ 1<3 , C ? nSist a 

, staff, a standing technical cS^??*?* 3 administrative 
Council which would be alvlsorv 5£ ?S °S H ° alth of the 
Central Committee, and to tb c f°D ^ 

necessary regional organization Exr " • - cto F' and the 
a considerable degree of decent™^????? n ?° has shown that 
in health administration, so till lESS? l3 «*° al *&U* 
tions will be need.- a in , " " regional organiza- 

in areas such as Europe and the Par East 

Director of Health of DNRRA 

17. There should be in tho Administration a hmi*y, 
organization with a Directs of Health 7 w£S ahw?d be 
accorded a position in the Admini»tra?ionf>hioh will 
enable him, under the authority of the Director General tfl 
c-velop suitable policies and eo oxerci^f propL SSn ?a^ 
oirection over all health aspects of UNhRA. ' J 

Director^ S?f?^ th ° ferity of the Director General the 
SS?!-!? Health would be responsible for the health and 
^dical aspects ofolX-UNRRA activities. He would be 
airectly concerned in all major policy and administrative 
decisions in which health, medical or nutrition problems 
SoaI 0d ' It follows ^at the'- status and success of 
MKnA from the health point of view depend on obtaining the 
services of a Director of Hoalth of the highest possible 
Proiessional stand in. v., whose previous work is such as to 
con-mend the respect of those qualified to judge, both from 
* technical end administrative point of view, 

. . 1 Health Director. ';; . 

i 18, A Regional Health Director should, be appointed to 
ac " Regional Organization; his position .should be relatively 
s "iilar to that provided for the Director of" Health. 

Executive ' : . - 3 th and Secretarial Staff . 

, 19. Th,. greatest care will be r, quired in selecting 
m \ lth - Personnel for field, work in the various count r i.,s . 
^c.inical competence is fundamental, but almost equally im- 
Kjant is the ability to work in a tee.e With Others of-a 

; r;. n t nationality as the staff will necessarily include 
ue ^lth personnel from a number of countries. Teats qualifies* 
•^of, primary importance for members of the staff required to 
S/*ay from Headquarters, for they must be aele uQ under- 
Up^ d the outlook of the people among Whom they are called 
& t0 W0 ^k. In comparison va th this q ;e ] . .. ic- , r ■ . 
pledge of Innanr.^I though a valuable asset, is of 



cone 



l So of languages, tho 
fpj importance. 



-88- 



During and- immediately af ter the war it will bo by 
no means easy to find health personnel who pos s such 

dl ^nflv ^ rpaCltltS ' In ° rdcr to Wble UNRRA to obtain 
promptly the necessary staff, the various member govern- 
ments shoula facilitate the secondment or otherwise make 
available health personnel both from central and local 
health authorities, including short term appointments. 

Field Missions 

20. The organization of health missions and the 
constitution of individual missions should bo the res- 
ponsibility of the director of Health or the Regional 
Directors of Health, acting under the authority of the 
Director General. • 

With regard to the field organization, however, it 
is impossible to anticipate what typos of individual or 
special missions may be required. Member Governments 
may well ask for highly technical assistance in almost 
any branch of medical or sanitary science, particularly 
in viow of the isolation of many of their own cxpi rts 
during the years of war. The Health Organization of 
Uj'RRA should, therefore, collect information regarding 
individual experts and expert teams which might be made 
available for service in the field should the occasion 
arise . 

Standing Technical Committee on Health 

21. A standing technical Committee on Health should 
bo appointed as provided for in the Agreement. For effi- 
cient work the number of members should be limited to 
between 9 and 15. Chairmen of the Regional Health Sub- 
committees should be included in the membership of the 
standing technical Committee on Health. As the Agreement 
provides that the Council can appoint as members of the 
Committee Qn Health alternates of special competence in 
their respective fields of work, it is urged that members 
should nominate for the Committee alternates technically 
capable of aiding in the deliberations of the Com., ittce. 
It is of the greatest importance that such alternates 

as are nominated be accredited as representatives of 
their respective Public Health Services. 

Regional Health Sur co^;. ittecs 

22. Since experience has proved the desirability 
of a considerable degree of decentralization in hca.ttn 
administration, particular attention should be^paia to 
the setting up of strong Regional Health Organizations 
including Regional Health Subcommittees. Undoubtedly 
the Regional Health Subcommittees, consisting o. ^rom 
S to 15 members, should be made up of accredited 
representatives of the national hcaltn ^rninis ^tions 
concerned. The importance of such representation IS 



1 . 

-39- 



(£88) 



lK^t^/S\f epidemics involving more th,n 
ono oounjp for m those circumstances success in nrc 

acpion oh, several health administrations involved. 

o- Heclth «nd h ^r% CC ^ trf i * tandi ng technical Committee 
Sake it a 1 e «S« ? 8l ?^J°5 lth Subcommittees should 
sentntive/of >£2 \?\Ji! vlto thc Participation of repre- 
S?^f J J hoalth services of any countries in 
m ■.a,n,s at which important measures directly affecting 
sucn countries arc discussed. ing 

^iTlZLiig ir -miss ions 

v, 24 n '^ In v f CV \°? thG hi Shly technical character of 
the health work of MRA.it will be essential for thc 
standing Committee on Health and any Regional Health 
Subcommittee to have authority to appoint export comauYs- 
sionsv The members of these export commissions should 
ce nominated as individuals and solely on the. ground 
of their special knowledge of the subject concerned. As 
members of expert commissions speak as individuals only, 
there is no necessity to make any such commission even 
approximately representative of a number of countries, 
except in so far as this may be; necessary in order to 
get a balanced representation of several' schools of 
scientific thought, National end administrative views 
would be represented by the st: nding 'technical Committee 
on Health and the Regional Health Subcommittees, and it 
is for this reason among others, that recommendations of 
experts or exp' rt commissions should invariably pass 
through the Committee on Health or the Regional Herlth 
Subcommittee, as the case may be, before their final 
acceptance . 

25. Among others, expert commissions on nutrition 
will be required which, in view of the wide differences 
obtaining in the food habits and nutritional status 
between various parts of tho world might be rcgiona 1 in 
character. These experts would deal with the scientific 
and physiological aspects of the nutrition problem end 
would, give advice in connection with any proposed, altera- 
tions in the constitution of rations, the priorities of 
special rationing and the classes of the population re- 
quiring special consideration, e.g., expectant and 
nursing others, infants cases of tuberculosis, depri- 
vation diseases, etc. 

26. Consideration should, be given to tho consti- 
tution of an expert Commission dealing v/ith the health 
of mothers and children which night be related to com- 
parable groups of experts dealing with other aspects of 
maternal and child care. 

Conference of Directors of ^ tional Pub lic - 1th Services 

27. Provision should be made to enable the Director 
of Health under the authority of the Director General and 
with the approval of the Council to summon, either cen- 
trally or regionally, a conference of Directors of 
National Public Health Services whenever practicable 

and desirable. 



-9i> 



Immediate Tasks of the Haalth Omm 

28. Tho tasks calling for immediate action include: 

(a) Selection of a Director of Health, and tho 
recruitment of r. competent staff, utilizing 
the full resources of the United Nations so 
far as they cm be made available at the 
present time. 

(b) Immediate provision of help upon request of 
any member government in order to meet emer- 
gency health problems which have actually 
arisen as the result of the war. 

(c) Collection and assembly of all information 
available on those erea.s liksly to be liberated 
first end scientific data which mry be of 
value to the Health Organisation, 

(d) Conferences with appropriate Health Officials 
of the Member Governments concerned with 
regard to the nature and amount of p ssistnr.ee 
that mr=y be required of UTTRRA . 

(e) Recruitment and training cf personnel for 
field missions. 

(f) Study r-nd collation of previously pr>^-r;d 
estimates of health, medical and sanitation 
supplies, and arrangement for their scheduling 
?nd procurement, with emphasis uoon the 
importance of rapidity in forward orocursr 
ment particularly in respect of supplies 
required for the control of 3pldemics. 

(g) Col^bomtlcn with the Allied Military Author- 
ities for bhe collection of information regard- 
ing the existing conditions in liberated erees, 
th^ pre.viiionbe of epidemics rnd the arrange- 
ments for the orderly transfer of any health 
responsibility to UHHRA , where this is so 
requested by the Member government or tho 
Military Authorities themselves. 

ih) Training of nationals of the various countries 
' In special medical and allied technical wo,-k. 
<VMl*t facilities h^ve already been made 
av Uable in connection ^^V'rU^ 
training in the making J^Ha Usf of mrss 
ficiW li-bs, gaining in ^ the use of^J. 

radiography ^P-fi^ f n t-t this 
assistants, etc., gg i* jncr : rsjd go , s to. 

covIr°a ^uch wider^oPe in order, to orovice 

^r^lT^r * country is 

medical ^ this purpose it would be 

^sfr.bifforso^e^overnments to assign 



-91- 

C 1 



(690) 



certain of their nationals for training 

(1) Obtaining of medical literature doaling with 
the progress of medicine and hygiene during 
the years of war for the liberated countries. 
i<or this purpose the Health Organisation of 
UITPiRA should givo immediate consideration to 
the possibility of collecting selected 
periodicals on the various branches of mcdi- 
cr.l and sanitary science. 

29, Even though it may not be possible for UNRRA 
to meet all the relief and rehabilitation needs of the 
populations affected by the war, nevertheless by 
approaching the tasks through the wise use of the tech- 
nical resources of the United Nations, mobilized and 
engaged in the s r mo spirit of cooperation as they are 
now devoted to the prosecution of th<j war, it should be 
possible, in the public her 1th sphere, to attain com- 
parable success in the war against diseaso and for the 
restoration of health, 

30. In the foregoing report the problems dealt 
with include those which it is hoped will be of value 
to the Director General and the Health Organization and 
those vhich may require Council action. The natters 
which may require Council action arc presented in 
separate resolutions. 



(691) 



Committee IV - Subqonutjlttee 3 



REPORT 



t ^juocp.-nr,lttee on Policles_^ithJ^ pe c t to Welfare 

j5^£^^5Sjni with Vol untar y Belief Aaen c I , . , 




Chairman: Jan Kwa$>inski (Poland) 
Vice-Chairman: Henrique Gil-Fortoul (Venezuela) 
Rapporteur: Viscount Alain du Pare (Belgium) 
Secretary: Harry Greens toin 
The Subcommittee on Policies with Respect to Welfare 
services Including Relations with Voluntary Relief Agencies, 
having met and considered the matters referred to it, submits 
" t jie following report to Committee IV: 

7, Within the framework of its total program and with the 
closest collaboration between its health, welfare and 
other appropriate organisation units, the Administra- 
tion should make specific provision for welfare services 
for victims of war -- in particular for children, expectant 
and nursing mothers, the a^ed and the disabled. 

As defined by the Subcommittee the term welfare includes 

(a) social relief such as food, clothing, 
shelter and other basic necessities of 
life made available to persons unable 
through the effects of war to provide for 
themselves or their dependents, and 

(b) services for the gorsonel rehabilitation 
of individuals requiring special help. 

II. In general, welfare services should be administered as 
far as possible, by the country concerned and UHRRA should 
make its resources available to the appropriate national 
governmental agency in accordance with plans agreed upon 
between UNRRA and the national agency. 

Continuous cooperation should -be maintained and ^forma- 
tion exchanged between the government concerned and JuRRA • 

HI. UNRRA should be prepared to adminis tor wclf 

directly, either in part or i-whole, /^ b ^elf to 
by a government, who for any reason 
administer these services. 

T „ , due to war and 

IV, Because of already prolonged suf t ov±ny to pro _ 

because of critical needs , UNRRA si a °^ c y Welfare 
vide, as promptly as possible, ™J° are liberated 

services, to be available when countries 
or occupied by the United Nations. 



-93- 

(692 



* It should be the oolicv of mibt»« 

operation n nd participnt?on^?^ CnliS * tKe c °- 

relicf agencies which Vv in voluntary 

Director General Wo 1^ tho l ud 6^nt of the 

and other necessary reso U;nCC ' P°™o«nol, 

x eaources v < > r n c^y, k - ^p..„+. 
interpreted v n^^'mmn, wiij.cn e n be effect 



y, in tho judgment of tho 
he competence, personnel, 
integrated vith" the -U^f ^ g ^ h bo effectively 

VI . The Council in furtherance of the .bovc stated 

principle, should .«doot t-H^ „f4.„ ^ j ? 

"The Role of Pni «i ?; -. f attached resolution on 
inc koxc oi foreign Volunt~rv Relief ' p-on^i %« Tr, 

the Relief and Rehabilitatio/prdgrai ol^uWRRA" 

VII. V.elfar.e services should be designed to helo people 
to help themselves, forever possible instructive 
work opportunities and measures for self -help should 
be provided to permit those receiving relief to Pro- 
duce at least some of their own basic requirements. 

VIII. Welfare services administered by. or in cooperation 
with UNRR \ should bo provided without discrimination 
because of race, religion, nationality', citizenship 
or political belief. 

IX. Because of the magnitude and complexity of the 
welfare problems confronting UNRR'., nnd the necessity 
for effective technical guidance, there should be 
created by the Council n technical standing Com- 
mittee on Welfare, 



-94- 



(693) 



Statement of Committee IV, ^cor^^ 3, 

for information and not for action 

(Policies with Respect to Welfare Services 
including Relations with Voluntary Selief 

Agencies) 

The following Statement was approved by Committee IV 
without change. It is contained in the document bearing 
Reception tlo , (217)246. 



-95- 



(694) 

STATEMENT 
(For Information and Not for Action) 

Committee IV - Subcommittee 3 
qnSC0J3 ITTEE ON POLICIES hTTp mr-opp^m m„ 

S %CLWma RELATIONS ' : I TH VCLUIJTARV ^t?f ^|2 VICES 

Chairman: Jan Kwapinski of ? 0 i av>d 
Vice-Chaimian: Henrique Gil-Porto^ ^r' ™ 
Happorteur: Viscount Alain du Pare o"^? 1 * 
Secretary: Harry Greens te in Belgium 




^information and not for aoMin™"; ^c^r^uT 
,. ; ;co;:3::ittee nas made .specif ic recommendations for consideration 
and action. 

1, Reports presented by members of the Subcommittee relate in 
grim detail the appalling toll that war has exacted in their 
respective countries. They indicate too the importance of provid- 
ing within the broad framework of the total UHRHA program, welfare 
services, /l 

2, The principal groups of the population for which special 
relfare care will bo required are the children, particularly war 
orphans, persons disabled by war, the homeless and th«, stateless 
aid, finally, families in which war has created welfare problems. 

In view of the magnitude of these needs it is already apparent that 
inun§er of governments will require special and immediate assistance 
dealing with these classes of populations. 

Millions of those, in need as a result of the war, obviously, 
^persons who in normal tires would be wholly capable of provid- 
h fop themselves and would not new require help except for the 
-:-stcr that has overwhelmed them. 

The extent to which UJTItflA may need to cooperate in providing 
:1 ^re services will, of course, depend upon the decree of dis- 
.^ion and destruction of the social shd economic life of each 



% defined bv the Subcommittee the tern welfare .nclaoe. 
!*> social relief such as food, clothing, shelter and 
other basic necessities of life made available to 
persons unable to provide for themselves or on, ir 

, dependents and t-f.**.*<M«n of indivi- 

(b ) servicer for the personal rehabilitation ol inai 

duals requiring special help* 



r 



-96- 

(605) 



tr& tivc Responsibility 



^ hould%c to help, wherever necessary ^fro- ° f 
lengthen national governmental wolf nre'agenc^cs 
J. fore, be the general policy of UBRRA not to admini; 
5e services within a country with its own porsonnV 




igcncies 

^r^tien Between UNRRA and Foroi ; n Voluntary Rcl 3 J_ AgenC v. r, 

5 Though one of the primary functions of UNRRA will be to 
kelp governments to meet welfare needs existing within their 
respective jurisdictions, this -lone will not be enough, The 
reS ourc,esj personnel rnd skill of voluntary agencies, too, will 
be needed* Within such limits as may bo' imposed by necessity , 
It should, therefore, be the policy of UNRRA to enlist the 
^operation of foreign voluntary relief i gencios rnd to seek their 
rrticim-tion in relief and rehabilitation measures which they 
UcVnc competence, personnel, and other resources to administer 
I Stfiich cm be effectively integrated with the UNRRA program 
! a q v-hoic . 

:, The close working relationship- between UNRRA and voluntary 
1 :-r>cios envisaged here will, obviously, require crroful super- 
vision .'find coordination to prevent either duplication of service 
ff g«fa in service. Foreseeing need for such supervision ..^ 
ordination the Agreement establishing f^A prescribes th^t 
foreign voluntary relief agencies may not initiate oper.t on, ^in 
any & receiving relief fro- UNRRA unless subject oo the pegu 
ktion of the Director General. 

», to furtherance of principles outlined here the Subeo^ttoe 
■■•MiEcnas for Council r.otion the following resolution. 

»• Boreas, the Council is convinced the, . relief 
needs within a country are a primary r^sp 
that country; and 

r has disrupted 




11 „ that even the combined 

4 ' "Wbereas the Council ^f- 1 ^ 1 ^;^ 'countries and of 
r sources of governments ci j lerve unmet 

^-eir national voluntary *6°*fi!£" personnel, skill, 
^rtain needs which th^ oxperi^co^P^ 
r; na other resources of lor-J-b therefore 
agencies may help to meet; n * 



¥ 

} 



t , r , t it f.hOUld bo the policy Of TTOnm . ( : > 

on ,nd seek the. participation ofa^^ ^ WcfcU- 
Zary relief agencies, to the extort tw P f£ C forci Cn volun- 
$ ly utilized in relief act^t? s ' S 2ft?H*» 
Jccirl competence and resources, ht R , h ? V ?„ 
2 ^ ^rector General in accordanc^wiL *&S^fPW 
p«t»orfXi , 3h 2 ox the Agreement r S t-hi i.m! , i . * 

and" Rehabilitation Acinic tration? a£d Uritcd * ations 

.. rn , t the extent to which foreign voluntary relief aroncios 

* ^t^^T^T^T" in , thC ™* -hSiiUatio, 

of distressed people in any country should be a matter to be 
determined bj the Director General in consultation v/ith the 
respective governments. " 

-„i r/ c lfarc Principles 



, 4i The first objective of a welfare program must be to provide 
pessary supplies and services, at the earliest possible moment, 
'."•' r -n, women, and children who for various reasons arising out of 
■ v;?.r arc unable to care for th::»3 elves. In this connection it 
is extremely important to establish centers of advice and inf orma- 
[ion where people in need can bo directed to secure, v/ith a mini- 
of delay, the help they need. 

Almost as important as the prompt provision of necessary 
vies is the method of their distribution. Por example, in 
a instances what is most needed may be temporary measures for 
is feeding or, perhaps, school-feeding projects. In other 
;::.r:ccs the use of food tickets or food orders might be desirable, 
•air., it might be that cash allowances should be granted to 
Ksourccloss persons to. permit them to purchase through normal chan- 
ts the relief supplies they require, 

15. If, in initiating relief operations it is impossible immcdi- 
ttely to inaugurate all needed measures or if, for any reason avail- 
resources should prove inadequate to meet all needs, it may be 
'•cess'iry to establish priorities. In establishing priorities 
-a? attention from the welfare standpoint must, of course, be 
ton to the special needs of young children and youths. Of para, 
^importance too is the- provision of immediate aid to Prognant 
and nursing mothers. Early consideration will also need to 
-ecorded to key workers such as physicians ana nurses. 

L Canons priorities established in any ^l^^e 
-;;^.»tions for children, the aged, -b led ,« rson 3 > - 
: : Physically or mentally »«ndlo-P|^) olh^nocossitlss 
allotments of food, blankets, clowning, 

' , ^tovcr priorities may have to be establi ^ 
•••^tbe given to local opinion. To secure thi3 gui tcrns 
, kr ' certain that policies adopted follow ^^advisory groups 
5 0 0 ^ity lif c wide use should be made of Jxgaj. a hcrmorc 

of representative leaders of he co^ nxty . COMmunitic: 
Slor * reached must be carefully interpreted 



-03- 

(G97) 



9t Responsible authorities must oonatMin, i 

extent of needs remaining urn*.-? II* V 7 bc awaro 

for to sec chat essential w^-'' c ^ do ail ^tain their 
& as possible. PorV^alX^^ ST*** as 
o rations it maybe necessary- to'b^S^ thf^n^ 

ffort must bo made, as soon as circumstan^ Ta ?i 1& E 91Q 
;- t ond needed assistance to their pSStfSJo? ' 

20. Although certain priorities may have to ho ■ , , 
there should bo no discrimination because of race ?ev"ior 
nationality, citizenship or political belief. roi-gipn, 

21. Welfare services should be dosignca to hoi* qoo^TVs l-« 
hfl ip themselves. They must also permit ^i&WLi^ ■ 
tain their self -respect • • . 

22. To prove truly rehabilitative, welfare services must be 
of sufficient diversity to meet the wide vsrioty of needs 

For example, provision for medicine as well as food, provi- 
sion for a needed appliance, provision for tools to a noedy 
workman, or seed and equipment to a farmer who cannot secure 
thorn otherwise, may all help people to become s.olf-sup.oorting. 
Failure to provide needy persons with those essential' sorvi 
vices, on the other hand, may prolong the necessity for re- 
liance upon relief measures. 

23. Wherever possible constructive work opportunities ^nd 
measures for self-help should be provided to permit those 
receiving relief to produce at least some cf their own 
clothing and other rocuir orients, 

24. Social insurance institutions in each country also offer 
s sound and permanent basis for constructive rehabilitation. 
Every effort" should be taken, therefore, to rebuild and 
strengthen those systems v/hcrovcr necessary* Agoci, sick •■■nd 
disabled persons, widows and orphans and unemployed indivi- 
duals can be provided cash, insurance payments through these 
institutions." In this way beneficiaries will be enabled to 
Purchase their own requirements through regular channels thus 
expediting the return "to a normal wry of life. 

25 « There are also somewhat more extensive programs that will 
°c needed. These include aid to broken families to help broad- 
triers and dependents to reunite; vocational training or re- 
fraining 0 f workers young or old, injured or diss 1 >d, or 
"orlcors temporarily or permanently displaced* 

Still another cardinal principle to be observed is tliat 
*¥**o services must be carefully related to the customs, 
SV f and standards of living prevailing in $no 

»ics of operation, For example, foods to-b- ^J*^*^ 
3°*} so far as oossiblo and consistent bh pr ppor J. : 
lotion take into account native .:>|^f C |i so f^^ 
^Hbo adapted to weather and local ^f^g^eus . s well 
* D ° taken of the various cultural end rwix&io 
"* "ooial sensibilities. 

n^^rnore, every effort should bo md|^ 0s«wo m. 
0r jBtaon normal social groupin -. t ^ usj families 
shQ^ lon g unnecessarily mass f r '* iv , tqgothor as 
U * G > wherever -oossiblo, do holpoc to xj-v 



-9y- 

families. Similarly, attempts should * (Gy3) - 
orfWron^to livo with their* own or ltj Q m * do fc o onabl, 
than in institutions unless i' Jr families rather 

n^nt is clearl- required. 8Pw0l *U.*o.d institutional troat- 

•23. As aids to adapting wolfarh 

needs it will be important in tto?d *-° S to ^tibnal and local 
tional and local leaders a re J vif,° p ^ tlons *<> eivo na- 
tobe carried out Only if this orincSl^? of policies 

services inaac available b- or in ccr'^ K 7 13 obs ^vod can 
a naxinur.: contribution- to" tho ra ? i>0 ^ with UKRRA make 

continuing relief and. welfare measures °* a nafcion 's own 

29. Careful adherence to tho broprt 

will also help to restore to *Sf ««S in 2 ft>1 °* outlined here 
those who, for the moment and booa£S P 2? self-sufficiency 
choir control, temporarily need ?So woi?J« Ct<>rS . far b ^ ond 
UftRSA may provide, v • g w<*i*a*o services that 

Wolf ar c Personnel 





th 0 tho r _ the t a s k is to c ar e 

for 
id 

ikblv t-o hr -r> — " 7* r**^ " *«**u»y oi services 
riv? jo bo /needed, fcne primary requisite shoa bo know- 
ledge ei the work to bo done and skill in its P e. ormanco . 

31. Among chc types of welfare personnel likely to b- n >odcd 
aro specialists in the care of children; specialist In nu- 
-x.ion; specialists in tho care and vocation*! training of 
JW-fod persons; specialists in the development of work 
opportunities through which needy persons can be helped to 
provide some of their own requirements; specialists in the 
ogeracion of welfare institutions, -nd specialists in tho 
WRistration of employment offices and the social insurances. 

T Second In importance only bo technical competence is a 
TOathctip understanding of the economic and social situa- 
tion of the people among whom welfare work is to be done. 
*°8Sidcration must also be given to the selection of personnel 

W-ng a knowledge and an aporcciation of the normal customs 
to „' 7ays of Ufc of bho People amon<3 whom they work. '.Ability 
h,f 6 ^- 0a ^ tllc ' lannua^o of * a people is, of coure.., to be desired 

Uo should be subordinated to technic el co. p . t .nee . 

7-1 

it further consideration to be kept in nind in the selec- 
*oa. of pD rsomol is the ability to carry out responsibilities 
'* t-out favor, .prejudico, or discrimination* 

Because of the nressuro and difficult conditions under 
1 Policf work must be carried out, care must bo exercised 
facing in demanding roles only those with sufficient 
3$Fi vigor and stamina to perform their arduous duties 



(699) 

ni^ d' o i ^ i nbl ° anCl ***P**W<>* Staff members 
vail n^d to bo imaginative and ingenious in dovisinp ways 
of making resources riold thc x t possible rc tSL and 

iosi5onsioili?^ S n COnin? ' 7lthin thoir U3ual fic1 ^ oi- 

36,i Personnel ^ engaged as members of the staff of UNRTiA must 
have an appreciation of the principles underlying the' UWA 
program. Purthernore, since UITuHA* is a twly international 
organisation, its welfare staff should be comprised orlv of 
persons possessing an international viovroolht and willing — 
for the period of their employment by UII3RA — to dissociate 
themselves iron any national interests or objectives v?¥ch 
might conflict with their r.sponsibilitv to the family of 
nations by which they are employed. 

57. In order that wolf aro workers — whether employed bv 
UilRKA, by other governmental a^oncios or by voluntary organi- 
zations — may be adequately prepared for- their exacting 0 
duties the necessary training programs should bo initiated 
immediately-. 

Recommend ation for .Ts '^hllshmont of ji Teen,., leal Stanc . - 
Committee on Welf are '"" ' " 

33. Discussion by the Subcommittee brought out ahafply bho 
magnitude and complexity of the welfare problems confronting 
UKRHA. .The Subcommittee accordingly recommends to the 
appropriate committee of the Council bho Croatian of a 
Technical Standing Committee on '//elf are. 



(700) 



Committee IV Subcommittee 4 
REPORT 

Of the Sub-Committee on P olicies wi th r espect to 
Assistanc e to Displaced Perso ns"" 

Chairman: Gustavo Gutierrez (Cuba) 

Vice Chairman: Anders Frihagen (Norv/av) 

Rapporteur: Sir George Rendel (United Kingdor. 

Secretary: George L. Warren 

The Sub-Committee on Policies with respect to Assist- 
ance to Displaced Persons having met and considered the 
natters referred to it, submits the following report to 
Committee IV: 

1, The Sub-Committee has had before it the recommendation 

made to the Council by Sub-Committee 1 of Committee II, of 

which the relevant passage runs as follows: 

"The supplies and services of which UNRRA will 
seek to ensure the provision fall under four heads: 

2. Relief services : such as health and welfare; 
assistance in caring for and maintaining records of 
persons found in any areas under the control of any 
of the United Nations who by reason of war have been 
displaced from their homes and in agreement with 
the appropriate governments, military authorities 
or other agencies, in securing their repatriation 
or return; and such technical services as may be 
necessary for these purposes . " 

2. It has assumed that, in making recommendations to 
the Council on the subject of the "preparation and 
arrangements. . .for the return of prisoners and exiles to 
their homes", provided for in the Preamble tp the Agree- 
ment, it should be guided by the general terms of the 
recommendation of .Sub-Committee 1 of Committee ;I referred 
to above. It has felt justified in interpreting those 
terms as widely as possible, and in also giving considera- 
tion to certain consequential aspects of the problem not 
'Pacifically covered by the terms of that recommendation. 



(701) 



3. The Sub-Coamittee has also had befor6 ^ p £*f 
spared in October, 1943, bv the Technical Advisory Com- 
r!itte e on Displaced Populations which formed P art of the 
Int er-Alliod Committee on Post-War Requirements under the 
Chairmanship of Sir Frederick Leith-Koss, as well as a 
factual survey of the whole problem of the Displacement 

of Population in Europe, prepared by the International 
Labour Office, and published by that Office in Montreal in 
1943 (Studies and Reports - Series 0 (Migration No.8)). 
A^ons the other documents which have been submitted to it 
for its guidance has been a report issued in September and 
October of this year by the Inter-Allied Committee in 
London for the preparation of an armistice containing 
various tentative proposals for the establishment of a 
distinct international organisation to deal with certain 
aspects of the problem of repatriation in Europe. 

4. In the light of the information before it the 
Sub-Committee felt that it should bej-in by attempting a 
somewhat more, detailed definition of the various categories 
of persons likely to be affected by the repatriation 
activities of UNRRA , In doing so It has taken into account 
such factors as their nationality of origin, the circum- 
stances which have led to their removal from their homes, 
the countries in which their original homes were situated 
ana whether these were identical or not with their countries 
°f origin, the countries of exile in which they may be 

found when UNRRA is in a position to render them assistance - 
-3. whether they are found in liberated or occupied 
^ritcry, m territory which has been continuously under 
A Hied control, or in the territory of neutral or non- 
^li.cront States - and also such factors as their material 



VI 



-105- i 

(702) 

cir cumstances and their desire or otherwi I 

ounerwise to remain where they 

are , to return to their former homes or to be * ' , ■ v 

UI 10 De settled elsewhere. 

5. Bearlnc these various considerations in n,ind, and 
sa5j ect to what is said in paragraph 8 regarHing the con- 
currence of the sovermnenta concerned, the oub-Ccmittee has 
reached the conclusion 

. (a) that UIIRRA should in particular regard itself 
as responsible for assisting in the repatriation to their 
country of origin of those nationals of the united Nations 
±0 have been obliged to leave their homes by reason of the 
war and are found in liberated or conquered territory; 

(b) that UNRRA should also assist those nationals 
of the United Nations who have been displaced within their 
own (liberated) countries to return to their homes in whose 
countries, if requested to do so by the member government 
concerned; 

(c) that UIIRRA should also assist in the repatriation 
of those nationals of the United Nations in other countries 
who are exiles as a result of the war, and whose return to 
their homes in liberated territory is regarded as a matter 

of urgency; 

(d) that UIIRRA should also assist those nationals 
of the United Nations and those stateless persons who have 
keen driven as a resr.lt of the war from their places of 
settled residence in countries of which they are not 
nationals, to return to those places. 

(e) that ULRRA should also assist in the repatriation 
of any other categories of persons which can be shown to 

fal l within the prop-- scope of UIIRRA ' s activities in this 
r '°spect. 



~104- 

(703) 

6. On the other hand it was decided by the Sub-Committee 
tha t UHRRA snoulc not have any responsibility for the repatri- 
ation of prisoner of war who have served in the a rmies of the 
United Nations i-less requested by the member . government con- 
cerned to undertake such responsibility in respect of any 
particular group. It was felt by certain members of the Sub- 
committee that, while in the case of prisoners of war from 

the armies of certain of the United Nations no problem would 
arise, in other cases the fact that the prisoners had origin- 
ally been prisoners of war is likely to have been to a large 
extent obscured by subsequent acts of the enemy authorities 
in illegally demobilising them, interning them as civilians, 
employing then in labour camps, deporting them to other ter- 
ritories or otherwise ignoring their military status. The 
Sub-Committee felt that in cases where this has occurred on a 
large scale the government concernod may well wish to invoke 
the assistance of UIIRRA with a view to securing the early 
repatriation not only of such prisoners but also of such of the 
prisoners of war from its army as have been allowed to retain 
their military character. The fact that the Preamble of the 
Agreement specifically refers to the return of prisoners as 
one of the possible activities of UlIRPiA would seem not to 
exclude such prisoners from its scope, although they are not 
specifically included in t^t> resolution of Cub-Committee 1 of 
Conmittee II qi oted abo—' ord the Sub-Co.vnittee therefore 
trusts that it will not be regarded as having e xceeded its 
powers in making the present recommendation on this point. 

7. The Sub-Committee fully accepted the necessity, 
referred to in the resolution, for the Administration to dis- 
#?ge responsibilities in assisting the return to their homes 
* the above categories of persons "in agreement with the 
'vpropriate governments, 



~ 1C5 ~ (701) 



military authorities, or other agencies" concerned. 

8. As regards "agreement v/ith the appropriate govern- nts'V 
the Subcommittee understands that the governments concerned 
way include the government or governing authority (other than 
an enemy or ex-enemy government or governing authority) of the 
country in which the persons to he repatriated are temporarily 
resident, of any country thi-ou c ;h which they may have to pass, 
of the country in which thoy wore formerly residents, and of 
the country of which they are nationals. The Sub- Committee 
assumes that UNRRA in the course of socking to reach agreement 
with these various governments will keep the ether governments 
concerned fully informed of the progress of the negotiations. 
The Sub-Committee, recognizing that UNRRA cannot render 
assistance to any of the categories of persons referred to 
above without the concurrence and co-operation of the govern- 
ments concerned, which it will be the duty of UNRRA to seciirc, 
expresses the hope that all the governments concerned will 
deal with any requests which they may r eceive from UNRRA in 
this connexion in a spirit of wide humanity even if the request 
refers to persons who are not their nationals. The Sub- - 
CpBtiaittec's further recommendations on this point and on the 
question of co-operation with the military authorities are . 
contained in paragraphs 14, 15, 17, 20 and 25 below. 

9, As regards the question of co-operation with other . 
agencies, the Sub-Committee is informed that the International , 
Red Cress already possesses a wealth of information and 
experience, particularly indexes containing some 15 million 
names, including those of service personnel, interned 

t i4- Vw of tho p-rc-iitost value in 
civilians and others which might be of the f: r 

the wox* * ~, **** * al8 ° nVm ° r °* S ° thCr 

which have specialised in the worfc of 



voluntary organisations 



-106- 

(705) 

pouring refugees and displaced persons Which could render 
valuab lo assistance to the organ, of Ui RHA in this respect. 
fnc Sub-Comittee recommends that the Administration should 
take steps to ensure the closest co-operation with these 
ag cncies. In tins connexion the Sub-Committee welcomes and 
draws particular attention to the re commendations contained in 
m report of Sub-Committee 3 of Co mittco II on Relations with 
other Intergovernmental Agencies (Reception No. 197). 

10. Another organisation with which the closest co- • 
operation will be necessary is the Inter-Governmental Committee 
on Refugees which has long dealt with those persons who have 
been obliged to leave their homes for reasons of race, religion 
or political bc.icf , UIIHHA will assist in the care rnd repa- 
triation of such of these persons as can, and are willing to, 
return to their countries of origin or of former residence.. 
The Inter-Governmental Committee has the function of finding 
places of settlement for such of then as fall within its 
competence and as can' not or do not desire to be so repatriated 
It should be the responsibility of the relief org-ns of UHRRA 
to assist, for a reasonable period, in the caro of such of 
these refugees as can not bo repatriated, until the Inter- 
governmental Committee, is prepared to remove thorn to new 
Places of settlement. 

11* The question what action if any should be taken by 
®m in regard to assisting the return to their homes of 
displaced persons of enemy or or,- enemy nationality is one 
^h presented particular difficulties. In order to ensure 

, tha J the homes of United Nations nationals that have been . 
^uded into and settled in by enemy or ex-enemy subjects, 
^bo returned to their rightful owner,, the Sub-Committee 

| SU ^ts, that while it is not the purpose of U.TRRA to 
aS5is * enemy subjects, the removal of enemy or er-enemy 



- 107 - 

(70S) 



nationals, who ma, still be in occupation of tho said hones, 
be properly undertaken by UNRKA with the. consent # tho 
government concerned. 

12. As however the return to their countries of origin 
may *>aise questions of great complexity, tho Sub-Com^ittcc" 
suggests that this specific point should be referred to an 
early meeting of the Council as a separate issue, in order 
that a broad directive of policy may be laid down for dealing 
with it, 

13. Having agreed on the above general classification of 
the persons in whose repatriation, or return to thuir homes, 
UNRRA is likely to be called upon to assist, the Sub-Committee 
consicor^c certain other aspects of the problem. 

14. In the first place the Sub-Committee was greatly 
impressed by the fact that, when the problem of the return of 
such people to their homes presents itself, it is likely to 

do so with the greatest urgency f On the liberation of any 
territory from enemy occupation, or on the collapse of enemy 
control in other regions where any large groups of displaced 
persons ar^ resident, there is a grave danger that a mass 
movement of such persons may begin before any adequate 
machinery to control or organise- it has been set up. Tho Sub- 
committee is aware that UNRRA will not normally bo called in 
during the military period in any liberated or occupied ter- 
ritory; but the Sub- Commit tec wishes to emphasize its view 
that, if the eventual task of UNRRA in organising and pro- 
viding for the repatriation and return of exiles to their 
homos is to bo adequately carried out, it is vitally important 
that the closest liaison should" be established with tho 
toiHiary authorities of the United Nations In the territory 
concerned from the outset. In default of this, the already 



108 - 



(707) 



^ficult t-.K of controlling the a , 8 „ mov , m , nts Bhloh , pe 

» koly *° br " ** ° ut b « very C re,tl, oomplio-tod, ' 

15. The Sub -Commit top «<Aiii a i 

juunxiiTJoe would emphasize tfrat , unless bhis 

close li°ison can be rrranp-td « + 

0 lb ' ,a ^ ' n <-arly stage, £ roups of 

displaced persons ,.r, likely bo bo dealt with in an unco- 
ordhvbed runner. In particular it feels th~t the methods 
cdoptcd for identifying and classifying the v inous categoric^ 
of persons bo be repatriated should bo based on a single 
principle from the outset, nnd it ventures to Urge th-t pre- 
liminary discussions should t-^ko place at the e ^rliest pos- 
sible moment between the competent organisations of UNHRe and 
the governments concerned in order to e st.-blish some uM'fOrm 
system of dealing wife, those persons, during both the military 
•-nd the subsequent periods. In bhis connexion the Sub- 
committee would draw particular attention to the report of 
Sub-Committee 1 of Committee IT on the Rolabi onship of UNRRA 
with the Military Command r.nd -• authorities established to 
control Enemy Countries. (Reception No, 219) 

16. Secondly the Sub-Committee wishes to s tress bhe vital 
importance which it considers should be attached to the medical 
aspect of the problem. In Europe r lone it is estimated that 
there are already tons of millions of displaced persons who 
fill need to b e repatriated to their homes. It is clear that 
Mi movements on such a scale are likely to c ause an acute 
dnngor of the spread of epidemics, not only among the displaced 
Persons themselves but in the countries of their residence, 

4.. , i,. 4- 0 nass and those to which 

**oso through which they are likely to pass, 

4-u , i r~...rr* 4- f -r- thorr-f ore recommends that 

they will return. The Sub-Committee tneroiox 

• 4-v, rroblcm should vork in the 

^ny orgnn or- a ted to deal with this proex.n 

«W , ssoc ,,tio„ rlth the mcdlo-1 -nd he«ith or C ~ni^tions 
* USHRA. Tn this connexion the Sub-Connlttcc v-ould dmw 

attention to tho roco^ndntions of Sub-Co»>lttco 2 



- 109 - 



(700) 



°f 6omm ° C IV » P ° lloi " »"h Respect to Health and Modicnl 
Care (Reception Mo. 251) 

17. Finally the Sub-Coimni tt oe has boon much impressed by 
the magnitude of the problem presented by the repatriation of 
thcS o displaced persons and by the complexity of some of the 
political issues liko'ly to be involved. It therefore recom- 
mends that the closest met most continuous liaison Should bo 
maintained between the executive authorities of UMRRA 
entrusted with the organisation of the task and the political 
authorities of the United Nations. This point, is further 
dealt with below. 

18. As r-gards the organisation to be set up to give 
effect to the responsibilities which may be imposed on UNRRA 
in connexion with assistance to be given for the repatriation 
cf displaced persons, the Sub- Commit tee assumes that, in view 
of the provisions of Article IV of the Agreement by vh ich it 
is laid down that the executive authority of UNRRA shall be 
in the Director-General ..and that ho shall have full power and 
authority for carrying out operations contemplated in the 
Agreement, the responsibility for organising and carrying out 
all the various complicated operations involved will fall on 
the Director-General or on such Deputy Directors -General or 
other organs as he may appoint or create for the purpose of 
dealing with this problem. The Sub-Committee therefore does 
not propose to make any detailed recommendations regarding 
the precise form which this organisation should take. On the 
other hand, it considers it desirable to draw attention to the 
necessity of decentralising as far as possible the executive • 
machinery of UNRRA in matters pertaining to repatriation and 
^ draw attention to certain specific tasks and duties vfcich 
m Hkely to fall on UNRRA in this connexion, and to make 



-110-- 

^709) 

certain broad suggestions with a view to assisting the 
sector-General to formulate his general policy, and with a 
V iew>0 ensuring that everything possible is done to secure 
mediate and effective action in this important field, 

19 ♦ Arnon S the specific duties which the Sub-Committee 
considers will fall on UNRRA in connexion with this work, it 
v-ould draw particular attention to the following:-- 

(a) the collection, and dissemination in the proper 
quarters, of detailed information as to the numbers, location 
and condition of the displaced populations, including 
epideniological information; 

(b) the issue of preliminary instructions to civilian 
displaced persons ■ through the radio or by other means: 

(c) the securing of agreement on a unified system of 
identification records, health certificates and preliminary 
identity papers for displaced persons in transit; 

(d) the despatch of special missions, authorised to 
take the necessary measures, to countries in which displaced 
populations are or are believed to be situated; as far as 
possible these missions should contain members of the same 
nationalities as the displaced populations concerned; 

, x . . o^oonit-p shelter and accommodation 

(e) the provision of acequate ^-u^i 

for displaced persons, until they can be repatriated; 

(f) the issue of detailed instructions to displaced. 
Persons awaiting repatriation on the subject of registration, 
*>ve*ent, medical examination and similar preliminaries to 
re ?atriation; 

ar+v regional or world wide 
( £ ) the negotiation with -ny rcg 

^national transport authority, with the transport organs 
Unite* Nations ana with the competent authorities in 
^trU, or transit, for the transport oi ai^M- 
p0 ?ulat^ 



: ions; 



~ 111 cm) 

(h) the creation of central emergency stocks of f,od 
and of medical requirements to be available for supply to the 
returning populations at certain stages of their lournevs 
through various countries; 

(i) the necessary arrangements to ensure the supply 
of the requirements of the displaced persons, including food, 
clothing, temporary housing and medical care, on their return 
to their homes; with respect to temporary housing, adequate 
use should be made of the recommendations formulated in 
paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of the section entitled "Shelter" of the 
report of Sub-Committee 6 of Committee IV; (Reception No, £51) 

(3) the establishment in accordance v/ith the general 
policies of UNRRA with respect to priorities of priorities for 
the repatriation of the various categories of displaced persons. 

20. All those activities and duties would of course have 
to be performed in the closest consultation and co-operation with 
the governments concerned, which should be encouraged themselves 
to assume the greatest possible measure cf responsibility for 
them, particularly - in the case of the governments of which 
the repatriates are nationals - in matter, cf finance, though 
the necessary work of co-ordinating all action in this sphere 
must, in the opinion of the Sub-Committee, inevitably fall on 
WIRRA. 

1 4.i»«4- fv»A Sub-Uowraittoe has recom- 
21. It will be observed, that, the buo uoto 

4ded in Sections (h) and (i) of paragraph 19 above the pro- 
«»ion of supplies to meet the requirements of displaced 
^sons before, during and after their movement. In this con- 
the Sub-Committee wishes to emphasise f lrsOy that 
sunnlies of food and medicines may be required a 

the returning 

M short notice at any point of the journeys of to.. 

• n w„ a constant d anger ol 
6y los, particularly as there «U ~ 0 



-I1T- 



(711) 



opi domics which it must be possible to control and check 
mediately, and as it will clearly bo difficult for any third 
countries through which the repatriates may have to pass to 
undertake any large scale commitments in connexion with them; 
and secondly that returning displaced persons are likely to find 
themselves in an even more distressed condition than those 
victims of' war who have been able to remain in their own homes. 
This will be particularly so in the case of those whoso homes 
and possessions will be found to have been destroyed in the 
devastation caused by the events of the war. It may be that 
the definition of relief supplies and services adopted by 
Subcommittee 1 of Committee II (Deception No. 219) will be 
deemed adequate to cover the special needs which will arise in 
such circumstances, 

22, The Sub-Committee wishes to emphasise that it has no 
desire to go beyond its proper sphere in making recommendations 
on this subject, At the same time it feels bound to lay 
special stress upon the urgent need which will arise to provide 
for the reception, shelter and temporary maintenance of any 
displaced persons on their arrival at their destination. In 
so far as UNRRA undertakes the responsibility of returning these 
persons to their homes it is clear that it must also be pre- 
pared to ensure that adequate preparations are made for their 

. f^y, fchom of .emergency shelter, 

reception, and for the provision for tnom 

• fhc Government concerned 

food and household requirements if the 

. f v ose necessaries or to provide 

is unable itself to provide those noeo 

...-n occur in the case of 

tnem on a sufficient seal-, as hkajt 

TTtfRRA must therefore, in the 
obtain devastated countries. UNRKA ma 

' i ^ cri^u a reasonable measure 
^♦Committee's view, be-.prep*ro4 fc>~€«* 

fl1nc( it would be. unreasonable 
of assistance in these matters, since 

vHnns back to destroyed and 
th *t it should merely bring population 



u 

so 



~ llZ ~. (712) 
stated areas and leave thorn there to starve. Moreover 
inlcSS adequate shelter and the immediate necessaries for a 
rlf -supporting existence can, by one means or another, be 
provid od, these persons will be unable to reestablish them- ' 
sc lvcs in their homes, so that their last state may well be 
worse than their first. In this respect adequate use should 
be irxdc of the practical suggestions indicated by paragraph 
7 of the section entitled "Shelter" of the report of Sub- 
ittee 6 of Committee IV. (Reception No. 251). 
23, As has been stated above, the Sub-Committee does not 
feel justified in making any recommendations on the general 
organisation of the machinery required to deal with this 
croblem. It would however direct attention to the fact that in 
many cases it will be necessary for UNRRA to deal with a 
number of governments simultaneously and for the various 
governments concerned to reach joint decisions or to take 
joirii action. The Sub-Committee feels that the Regional Com- 
mittees of the Council of UNRRA may offer a particularly useful 
organisation for such joint action, and it therefore hopes 
that the greatest possible use will be made of the Regional 
Committees bv the authorities of UNRRA operating in each par- 

region. In this connexion the Sub-Committee would draw 
Wrticaxep attention to Section 3 of the resolution of Sub- 
"*eittce 1 of Committee I on the Functions of the Committees 
* the Council for Europe and the Par East in which it is laid 
thet the functions of the Regional Committees shall 
"the organisation of measures in regard to displaced 
-"^3 and to the co-ordination of national action in regard 
'- Weal and other relief and rehabilitation problems 
C **°n to the area. (Reception No. S00) 



(715) 

24. Your Sub-Committoc has approved the text of this 
por t, which is summarized in tho following r, commend at ions: 

I. That the classes of persons to be r*opa trial d 
be in the first instance those referred to in para- 
graphs 5 and 6 of this report; 

II, That tho question of the assistance to be 
given by UNRRA in the return to tholr homes of 
displaced persons of enemy or ex-enemy nationality 
who have boon intruded into homos from which 
nationals of the United Nations have been expelled 
should be* considered as a separate issue at an 
early meeting of the Council; 

I'll. That th< attention of the Direct cr>-Genorai 
should be particularly drawn to the Specific duties 
referred to in paragraph 19 of this report in con- 
nexion with, tho repatriation of displaced persons; 

IV. That steps should be taken to ensure the 
clos:st co-opcratio'n with the Committee on Health, 
as well as with the national health authorities of 

. the various countries concerned-, with a view to 
preventing and controlling any epidemics which nay 
be expected to arise in connexion with the repatri- 
ation of large groups of displaced persons; 

V. That the Dire c tor-Genera. 1 should take steps 
to ensure the closest co-operation with such 
agencies as the International hod Cross and the 
Inter-Governmental Connr.it tee on Refugees and any 
other appropriate bodies of suitable standing 
whoso assistance may be of value, with a view to 
invoking their collaboration in tho work of the 
repatriation of displaced personr; 

VI That the Director-General should establish the 
earliest possible contact with the military 
authorities of the United Nations with a view to 
rnnr-rtinp- olans for dealing in a uniform and 
closely cf-erd?nated manner ,1th any large WW** 
displaced persons which muy be 3 
or occupied territory on the cnur/ o. th, J. 0*90$ 
the United Nations into tnat torn to. v 



r 



-llo- 

(714) 



Committee IV - Subcommittee 5 
REPORT 

Of the Sub committee on Policies r.Im. 

gssential to ReiiT 7~ * ■ 

Chairman: E. S. Sergeev 

( U • S • S • R Y 

Vice Chairman: Carlos *M & nuel Escalarte 

(Costa Pries) 
Rapporteur: J. H. ::-: -in 

(United Kingdom) 
Secretary: H. W. Farisius 

The Subcommittee on Policies Relating to Agricultural 
Rehabilitation and Other Means of Raising Pood Essential to 
Relief having met and considered the matters referred to it, 
submits the following report to Committee IV: 

PART I 

A. General Considerations 

1» The world food situation including both supplies and 
shipping reauires that for the first ci^op year- 
liberation an absolute priority should be given to the 
production of foods for direct human consumption. 

2 The renal il it at ion of the pattern of agriculture in 
liberated areas and the modification of that pattern to, 
secure agreed nutritional aims can only be undertaken when 
danger of actual hunger has been removed t . Once f££a has 
1 been accomplished, agricultural production can be adjusted 
to meet more desirable nutritional and agricultural goals. 

3. At the present time UNRRA should concentrate its atten- 
tion upon the first crop year after liberation. For that 
year the following factors are of primary importances 

a) European agriculture apart from the devastated 
aJ S ?g reduced but is a going concern. It 

areas i;S al3 the foo d consumed during 

** S e ^ n in r CentrS and Western Europe including 
£t f^d for the German and other Axis snr.es. 
S ' ; on ir the Par East taking the occu- 

* whole is not dissimilar. 

' b) Agricultural ^^^ ^J'^^ 

concentrated on proy i ding looa husbandry 

consumption. ^??^^Sd ?p igs ., poultry) and 
have been drasticaxli Wed ; gft^P^ produc ts 
there are senous -ena^ £n Europe to main- 
although efioit- -I- 
tain milk pr«du«tion. 

„ pr ofter liberation the war produc- 
4. In the first crop year at.^x^^ be cont inued. 
ticn pattern should as far as pra ^ 8 fuller use of 
Intensive. efforts should ic ffl ^ e taln areas the war pro- 
the land. When, however, a * an scute shortage of 

ductl" pattern had been /^fP^uSate sacrifice in 
foodstuffs resulting in 



(715) 



^enfo^riber^i^wn^b 7 ? "° St ^tries fro, the 
« t Lons In eJ™L t0 ? n&ble to sow and 

h ' ^ i "at an ear?? P rfS C ? Untries assistance may also 
b? required i at an ear l£ date to prevent the further deple- 
tion oi aairy herds. Phe local or national authorities 
will have the. necessary knowledge for this tesk Tfiese 
needs can oe assessed with considerable accuracy and UNRRA 
should, m conjunction with the national authorities, 
start forthwith to make provision to meet these deficiencie: 

6. The maintenance of livestock production and herds which 
is of such importance to agriculture requires that the con- 
trol of animal diseases by all feasib.u hods including 
the import of veterinary supplies he undertaken at the 
parliest possible time. 



7; In certain devastated areas the rehabilitation problem 
will require special additional efforts to re-equip farms 
with motive power, i.e., draught animals or tractors; to 
restore fertility to the soil; and to reconstitute essential 
livestock especially for milk production. 

8. T v e Subcommittee agrees that the principal responsibility 
of UNRRA in the field of rehabilitation of agriculture and 
other forms of food production will be to assist local govern* 
rnents in providing the necessary supplies and equipment to 
increase production to the extent that such imports will 
reduce the need for relief after the second harvest. The 
Importation of feedstuffs for milk production should have 
priority over the importation of feed for other livestock 
production. The former should, receive in Principle, secon- 
dary consideration to the requirements for imports of food 
ut,i J . . ^„ vrrt fhf> need -is urgent, the 
for direct human consumption. Waeje the jaeeg is u b > 

of these priorities. 

9. Because of the shortage of ^£*^tj^^ 
vitamins, national governments °£ * ccognx *a expansi0 n 
should take immediate s c-eps uO t and UNRRA should 
of fisheries and of the whalxng ^f v -- ' 

assist, to the fullest extent possible. 




nized authorities m reswiu* — tQ obtain the maxim; 
It is also recommended that in or ratlo should be 

food value from bread grains zuo ^ ^ Q5 percen t. 
maintained at high levels, e.g., 

.^j-oi stations en a 
11. It is recommended that contribute 
other agricultural ^^f^llsl^ agricu3tuxal and 
to the solution of Immediate post ^ a position 

food production problems should^ ^ ssige after libera 
to resume their work as cai^j 
tion. 



-117- 



(716) 



Agricultural organizations and * 
rnd other (including marketing and c^^° eS ' . c ?°? era * 1 ve 

n important role in the provision If societies), had 
tura l equinment to farmers and int-Sl fi ? ance . and agricul- 
cessing of farm produce. Thev shr,i,^ coll9ction and re- 
value in the immediate relieFperfS ° f s ^ eci ^ 
authorities desire assistance in tS2". Whe *??? r the nati °nal 

uch organizations, UNRRA should Sv^f,!j abll6 ^ ent of 
g it can nrovide. l ° 8lve suca assistance 

12. Shortage of labor is proving a serious handicap to 
reduction in a number of countries. The SubSSltSeJ 
therefore recommends that the reinstatement -of agricultural 
workers should oe achieved as early as possible. 

13. In the preceding paragraphs the Subcommittee has been 
dealing with tne snort-term problems end principally those 
of the first crop yoar. The Subcommittee has studied the 
reports and recommendations of the United rations Conference 
on -Food and Agriculture and concurs generally in the con- 
clusions reached at hot Springs, The work of UNRRA will be 
confined to the short-term problems of relief and the be- 
ginnings of rehabilitation. This work will be trie basis of 
more oermanent reconstruction, and it is of the utmost im- 
portance that the actions taken by UNRRA and by the govern- 
ments in that oeriod should net hamper the long-term agri- 
cultural reconstruction programs. It should, in so far as 
Dcssible, assist towards the achievement of the objectives 
of the United Uations Conference on Food and Agriculture, 
including the progressive realization in all countries of 
diets adequate both in quantj by and quality.- 

Responsibility for international action in longer term 
s-ricultural reconstruction is likely to rest with the 
United Nations Organization for Pood and Agriculture.- The 
Subcommittee recommends that UNRRA take every necessary mea- 
sure to secure the closest association between its own work 
and the activities of the United rations Food and Agricul- 
ture Organization. The Subcommittee does not consider that 
it is either desirable or necessary for it to make ar* de- 
tailed proposals as to how this cooperation shoula.e .arri.d 
out, but considers that UNRRA should seek the **W*J° f 
operation, not only between its Council and the 
the Organization for Food and Agriculture, but also 
their respective staffs and standing committees. 



3. Prior ities 

„«Jnizes that UNRRA in approach- 
1. The Subcommittee recognizes un u . al reha bilita- 

ing the problem of supplies xo. & : rr . ore irnma diate 

tion must relate such demands to ™J clothing and 
need to provide food, medical suopx h * weVQr> ft world 
other relief necessities. jnei war and relief 

shortage of many essential iou corftlnued economy in 
demands will imp one the Tieeo 
the use of shipping* 



' -118- 

For these reasons it i s of ^ , 
to obtain from the soil of feh^ utmost importance 

fr om sea fisheries including Whal W ?>! coun ^ rios ™* 
food in the shortest possible time? *a^mum of 

Those considorat iors Mo^i 4 , 
that should be adopted by UNRkI L .ht°^! th ? 
relative priorities amor.- a r oh h S ? determination of 
oroducti.cn needs. 8 a S riou ^ural and other food 

2. The agricultural requirements of liberated aro aa 1n 
elude seeds, veterinary supplies, pasticidts farm 
machinery and implements, fuel sad lubricants fertilizers 
containers and processing equipment, feeding stuSs, ' 

* n * ^ V ?b^ C ^ r^v 01 ?^? deeding and draught animals, 
and to this list should be added for curtain maritime 
countries the needs of the fishing industry: boats, 
repair material, nets, hooks and other fishing g*s>r. The 
priorities between these various items will presumably 
vary from area to area. Generally speaking, the Sub-' 
committee considers that seeds, veterinary supplies 
and pesticides should receive priority immediately 
.following that of the minimum program for food, medical 
supplies and other urgent requirements such as cloth in,:; 
end soap; fuel for existing agricultural machinery and 
fisheries might have equal priority with fuel for 
transoort and domestic needs. The test should be applied 
whether the supply of these requirements would bring 
early and large returns in the form of croos or of fish 
for direct human c on sumo t ion; if so, it is recommended 
that UFRRA should accord the highest priority to such 
requirements. A further important consider at ion. apply- 
ing oarticularly to Eurooe should be to orevent the 
further depletion of dairy herds. Where, on the other 
hand, the rsouiremer.ts are sought for desirable but 
longer ^anse 'objectives of agricultural rehabilitation 
or where the 'building up of such livestock as pigs and 
poultry would bring about competition for- supplies of 
direct value to human needs, ONRRA must insist teat bhe 
fulfilment of these needs must wait until there is no 
danger of a shortage of essential energy f^ds, The 
■Subcommittee would not expect that any ^^^unnl^s ?or 
could be granted in the first crop year to supplies for 
the feeding of Pigs and poultry. 

, * ^^o^'?,! that in their recom- 
-he Subcommittee v/oulo importance to 

mendations they have attached the utmost i liberation , 

the agricultural needs ^.^^XIUTb more satisfactory, 
Vhen the supply and i*P?rt s itu ? ti on l MJ ^ available 

and especially when f "^uantJ 1 3 es sufficient to 
and meat and fat imported ^ juairei physiological level, 
bring consumption to a setisfact o.j j bc put 

a longer term livestock recovery orogra 
into effect. 

Having regard to the stance of ^^^^ %on 
as a feed, the Subcommittee oons^ r ^ wh er^the 

of grains should have ^rior.t/ ^ isltes ox ist in tne 
necessary milling capacity ana 
liberated country. 



-119- 

(718) 



Similarly, the importation of ve-ebb 1p 
snould ha ve pnorxty over the manuf 

The Subcommittee further recommends that particular. 
; tcntion should be devoted to the production P S 
!ieta))les and pulses which have a hi-h r'roMn rZ • 
4- TVip nrndrrtinn «r 4- -> il P roxeln or Vj.tar.un 

con tent. ine production of potatoes and their use for 
•lunan consumption snould aiso be increased to the maximum 
^liberated countries Consequently it is recommeSed 
that a high priority snould be 3 ivon to imports of seed 
.otstocs ana to seeds of other vegetables such as cabba-es, 
savoys, swedes, curnips and carrots. 

■ t Tho application of fertilizers will in certain cases 
greet.lv increase food production in the early post-war 
period. For this reason the Subcommittee considers that 
everything possible should be cone to restore fertilizer 
plants to working order, and to resume importation of the 
most urgently needed supplies as scon as possible. 

Steps should also be taken to restore oilseed crush- 
ing plants in relation to the anticipated supplies of oil- 
seeds. This has particular reference to food for dairy 
herds . 

Tho Subcommittee also recommends the ro establishment of 
factories engaged in the production of pesticides. 

5, Tho provision of drying plants for meals and fertilisers 
should also be recognized as important in the immediate 
relief period. 

6, Tho problems of countries in the I^ar Last differ in 
naiSfways from those of Europe; it is to tho latter that 

tiie forogoino paragraphs arc principally directed, especially 
aa they would seem to be the more urgent in point of time, 
mere is evidence that in the Far -act there has oe en cata- 
strophic depletion of draught animals and this factor wj 
affect the suggested order of priorities for imports . A 
similar consideration may also apply uo the more heavily 
devastated areas of ^urope. 

Tho Subcommittee considers that UNRRA sh ould f orth- 
;ith consult with the supply autnoritios in or^cr o 

no time shall avoidably bo ^st in s o^uri ^ 
^cr.tl-.- needed supplies, further , s m^ " rehabilitation 
^•tain of the reouirements for agricultural jen pgrticular 
c *n cn3 
£ ttc-nt-j 
dire i 

:: *e comes. 




part II 

^^atin-_ Policies 



^^e^JLipios ^rams of rcquiro- 

•^o Subcormittee recommends that p - gubfflittod by 
"^° 3 tor agricultural rehabilitation 



-1;::C- 



7 



grams at regular intervals in the light' if mos^reconi' 
information. 

2. The Subcommittee recommends that national governments 
or recognized authorities provide for technical surveys 
in each area immediately after liberation. UNRRA should 
hold itself in readiness to provide technical assistance 
if invited to do so by the national ••.overnmont or recor- 
nized authority established within the area. The regional 
organization should collate these surveys in order to ensure 
that so far as possible comparable bases have been used. 
It will be possible by these means to have early verifica- 
tion or amendment of the estimates which have been prepared 
in the ore-liberation period. 

3. The Subcommittee recommends that as a result of these 
national surveys, and as soon as oo.?r,lble after liberation, 
national production programs should be developed by the 
national governments or recognized authorities of the 
acreages which will be sown with the various cro^s and of 
the output oxoectod to be achieved from agricultural and 
fishery production. National governments or recognized 
authorities should base their estimates of requirements of 
agricultural suoplies upon these production plans. 

It is the national authorities which can best assess 
the needs of their own countries, and the notional repre- 
sentatives, in collaboration with the regional officers 
of UNRRA , will be able to provide a realistic list ©^re- 
quirements and an appropriate recommendation on Priorities. 

4. Py these means programs for agricultural materials which 
fall within the scope of UNRRA will be related to . » de- 
tailed needs of each territory in relation ^particular 

o?°?ne nlfi^ 
olho*^ 

oTtho ^^^^^ S"3f 
UNRRA should agree to develop P^* for .H'^dto ensure 
ported agricultural materials m Such 
the fullest attainment of the pr potion program. Sue 
countries should also develop Plans for f^ f ; od njods 
tributing agricultural Products to ^ent 
of the area are met to the maximum extent. 

5. It is recommended that each national ^thority should 
bo nrmH^ hv UNRRA with sucn information .s 




J. ^5iuiic;x ^x^j — -TnY* 

wost suitable instruments 101 
coordination. 



-121- 

(720) 

g Tho task which UNRRA will 

fch0 appointment of technical offlrr^ ? ndcrt ^c will require 
quarters and regional offices and in%h« ±n , its hcad " 

^ s technical assistance * n the ? ? ( J f-3 f-^cld. In so far 
naU onal authorities, xmht 

an adequate staff of tochSiSES at SS"?}!** 10 ? Wil1 hav ° 
Sot so ^h retire ^.iS^o?,!^^^^^ 
duties, as for field officers who arc f ,, 

erltical^intorprotatlon of production isolation to ~° 
quircnonts. Jli *'° ro f 

7. The Subcommittee notes and concurs in the recommenda- 
tions made by Subcommittee 1 of Committee I to establish' 
a Standing Technical Committee on Agriculture v/ith regional 
subcommittees. Having regard to the importance of tho re- • 
habilitation of agriculture in tho immediate postwar period, 
the Subcommittee recommends that those committees be estab- 
lished and organized as soon as possible. 



-122- 



(721) 



REPORT 

Of the Subcommittee on Policies r 0 t ^ 
Rehabilitation of Such Industries ? lnS to 
and Other Services as are SSStiSl^Jgi 

Chairman: P. a. Kerstens (Netherlands) 

Vice ohairman: Joaquin K Hli.ald^ Uili.pine 

n . Commonwealth) 

Rapporteur: Baron Boel (Belgium) 

Secretary: John H. Cover 



The Subcommittee on Policies Relating to Rehabili- 
tation of such Industries, Transport, and Other Services 
as are Essential to Relief, having met and considered 
the matters referred to it, submits the following report 
to C emit tee IV, 

It has been stated in the preamble of the UNRRA 
Agreement that preparations and arrangements shall be 
made for assistance in the resumption of urgently 
needed industrial production and the restoration of essen- 
tial services. 

Committee II has interpreted this statement by decid- 
ing that rehab i lit ation supplies are to consist of mater- 
ials, such as "raw materials, machinery and spare parts 

-:ed to enable a recipient country to produce and 
transport relief suoolies for its own and other liberated 
territories; and that, within the scope of UNRRA, are to 
be included the rehabilitation of public utilities ana 
services, so far as they can be repaired and restored to 
w»t immediate, basic needs, such essentials as ligni 

p power, transportation, and communicatxons. ihe 
Subcommittee would assume that these needs would include 
junction of essential relief industries, such as 
th °se which provide food, shelter, clothing, medical sup 

*%8, etc. 

' On that basis, policies have to be established 

a) on the immediate and /"tur^pur ^ ^ 
of such raw materi-is, * x 

parts, and processing mm> 

b) on the use of the ?f» c %l*]lt^ r w materials 
orated areas, towaras pro- ^ and 

or manufactured |^ d "^m S elvos and other 
rehabilitation, : or ^ tly the po~si- 
liberatcd areas concurre j y 
billty of obtaining supplx sregardcd); 
countries should not 



I 




-123- 

c) on the questirmo (722 ) 

tion (by land Sr water)? 2 inland ^ansporta- 

xhc raw materials can be supplied .ui , , 
ra ted country in which the industry ^ he f < a > b ? th * 
S!h the materials are to be used M i S altua ted and in 
5£ try , or (c) by any other country* S* the * liberated 

0 n in cases (a) and (b) shall be Hn S S ^? f the Adt ^is- 
£raw material producing industry C a ^abxlitotion of 
^struct ion materials industries, etc??.)? ' mineral mines, 

ovor- 
opriate 
ncces- 

allocation and procurement of supplies, so that there 
m be created as promptly as possible, reserves that shall 
be available az the request of the director General when and 
nherever the need arises. 

The same principle would apply to spare parts, each 
country giving to the Administration necessary explanation of 
the number and types of machines generally used and the number 
wd types of spare parts which might be purchased beforehand. 
So far as machinery goes, the rehabilitation of industry 

J. res two types: normal • and soecial typos of machines. 
It is suggested that a certain stock of the normal type of 
aachine tools be b ilt up so as_to permit their quick trans- 
portation to liberated areas. it is also suggested that a 
pool of mobile power units should be acquired. Certain pro- 
cessing materials should also be stocked in time. Among those 
should be some mobile and other maintenance equipment 
[f&ldlng units), lubricating oils, greases, belting, etc. 

If the existing home production exceeds home consumption, 
the government concerned is expected to take ©J 1 s tops in 
order to enable the excess of production available in tms 
atry to be put at the disposal of other liberated coun- 
Woa which may need such supplies to cover their deficits. 

It should v^e the policy of USJRRA to help those countries 
^rehabilitation goods urgently roquirod in otnei 




i^Wn-ctferative authority in a 

. kabor governments having aaminis &nd the 
>tod area will keep the Director 
JWoppiatc regional co-nmitteo luW • 

^PXus r^n time to time ^^nbilltation 



of supp 



;'.; : : ofc » when 
•^^requirements of 

at ion industries producing rex 



-124- 



( 7° 




.arrangements already made. 



UNRRA should work out In nftrt'qnU-** 
national governments and any iSS^tiSS Wltl \ thc 

hority which may fee ■•stabii^h h o 1 co °rdmation 

liberated countries in puttinVtnn ?J noana ° f assisting 
good working condition Ksoto n Slf E*g^ 
equipment, repa,r shops, work shops, ship ySlaf and so 

A policy of procurement of proper and sufficient 
transportation equipment, both fixed and mobile, should b 
aravm up-. ' 

A pool of transportation equipment should be created 
cither from stocks manufactured overseas or in allied or 
neutral countries. Equipment vhich has been the oroperty 
of the enemy may also form part of the pool.. 

If international organizations for Europe and/or the 
Far Last for inland transport are not set up in time to 
operate at the moment of liberation, it should be the 
task of UNRRA to participate in conjunction with military 
and other authorities in the organization and coordination 
of the transportation of relief and rehabilitation supplies 
during the relief and rehabilitation period.. 

Supposing the needs for inland transportation (rail, 
road, inland waterways, coastal shipping, and air) to be 
covered by the suggested pool of inland transportation 
and port cauipmont, the needs for raw materials, machinery, 
snare parts", and processing materials as stated hereabovo 
should bo established within each, individual country, with 
a definite order of priority taking into consideration: 

a) technical factors such as, on the one hand, the 
necessity of restoring public services (gas, water, elec- 
tricity) and, on the other, the order of pri.rioy given 
in each country to the needs of various types of con- 
sumer goods » 

u\ -on f* a «fnr.a such as the necessity of providing 

b) social fetors suon as largely from country 
reemployment. This problem ..ill /ary 1 , J ^ 

0 country and from area to. area . Not onxy ^ ^ 
have created unemployment xn c^r^ prompt action 

of thousands of deported n rorkoi ?s wij ^sponsible for 
•n the part of the authorities l-o oalA * a dusQ . pu r- 

irder. Putting such men back to wor the liberated 

Pose: activation ^f industrial employ^ ^ ^ 

**oas can be of groat help to tne ^ rosump tion of 
Prosecution of the ^ r >^^1 hGr , aUi d areas can be one of 
industrial activity m rc lief and rehabilita- 

te most efficient means of aioi ^ ^ ^ upon 
•tion in such areas, and ?f M^- U tics which UNRRA will 
Aerials and transportation Qf rchabi li tation. 

.^counter in accomplishing w ^ 



-125- 



(724) 



c ) temporary 



certain raw materials in • 3 such Qs scarcitv «r 

..rated areas with * n? M?8 policies for ° f 



Activity ,Jio^^; t O b Vj^ 
Dl raw materials are in Scarce unn :° k °l that * number 
caso especially as lone- as th? «« Pply ' ™ s be the 

the first months after l?berati^ c °*tinucs and during 
undertaken. During tLt tilt w ^\ rchabllit ^ien S is 
dcviso-a moans of usimr, with the 5° aary to 

sources of that typo of Supplies ? cc ° no ^> the 

Urn. Shipping and economic consiV^*-' 3 a tcchn ^al prob- 
ighed against BociaTLd^StoSfiiT Wil1 havo to 
up bo each government to find ^f° n0a ' and U wil * 
solution eliminating the greatest !S^^SSS^ST 

or'crprforJt^f 1**^1^^^ 
Les essential to relief w i f ' ? f thosc indus " 
tration (regional or ^izat ions rl?v DCforo J ho Adminis- 
East) tnc records and bases of their decision? 

This task of rehabilitation must not be considered 

Bth^JlrT 1 ? 8 f£ ro J 0 3»^*ioni - it is coterminous 
with relief. In the mind of the Subcommittee no new con- 
duction or reconstruction work. is covered bv its con- 
clusions, but only rehabilitation as defined in the 
preamble of the Agreement. Subsidiary problems, such as 

;mployment, are important, but not determining factors. 
They arc consequences and, at the same time, motives of 
action, but UNRRA cannot be called upon to help restore 
continuous employment in the world. 



SHELTER 



Any general rebuilding policy in the areas to be 
liberated is in the sphere of long-term reconstruction 
and does not therefore come within the purview of UNRRA. 

In the relief period priority in the rehabilitation 
of essential shelter or accommodation should be given to 
requirements for repairs in the liberated countries to: 

hospitals and schools; 

accommodation for homeless persons, 
e soe ci ally for workers engaged in 
essential" oublic services and in 
industries having high priority m 
relief, as well as for farmers and 
agricultural workers. 

Tn ,nn,r cases it may be essential, however, to import 
In some c as ~ s ,™ buildinp- supplies and equipments 
construction hand tools, ouiiain. ^i equipment not 

including excavating machinery, should this equip 
be found available or be in short supply . 

~r cv-lfpr for displaced per- 
As regards the problem of ^"oJnoorary accommodation 
sons, which fells into two PJ" t± - s • and accommodation 
•* collecting points and at J at>lly final character, 

•fa more permanent, tnoug-i i. 



.126 . 



jersons who cannot be p P h lw , ai , 4 

h °™* ^ve boen U X^ r ^ e ^J either- 
^ in territories still occupied ?l -cause these 
; ; , si ble existing buildings, ca^s b^l e ? em * ' wherever 

ether public buildinrs shS\ a ' ks ' hospitals 
J can be made suitable. Sh ° Uld be us ed as they are 

here possible, because of the sno^ 
aitaryhuts, as used in the Armies Soni ? * crec ^ on > 
. connection with refugee cbll^tiSi i d e suitab l© 

a similar pattern to be available again*? £n 
urgency situation. Arrangements should where possible 

? ' ir H^ a of ° r U ^ ° f l0Cal -Aerials In "Ke con! 

stion ot temporary accommodation so that in countries 
iiere timber is not available, alternative methods of 
•onstruction involving relatively small overseas shipments 
■■; be adopted. ^ 

fhe attention of UNRRA is drawn to the service which 
jrt-fabricated hutting for camps for the accommodation 
:f large numbers of displaced persons or factory workers • 
m be made . .here pre-f abricated hutting is a specialised 
industry in any of the territories of the U1TRRA i. ember 
Governments, the importance of making these supplies 
wailable as part of the contribution of these Governments 
should be recognized. 



here, in some enemy occupied territories, extensive 
enemy colonisation has taken place, and where consolida- 
te:! of holdings and construction of military installa- 
tions has been accompanied by destruction of farmhouses 
sad buildings , it may be necessary to provide camp accom- 
modation for farmers and agricultural workers on return 
"-their own country. So far as possible farmers and 
^icultural workers should be housed in existing 
wildings or in available accommodations in neighbouring 
:35ns, -ny larfre scale permanent reconstruction of 
sidings and the rebuilding of farmhouses and builamgs 
'IH not be the task of UNRRA but should proceed as 
*idly as possible thereafter. The need for special 
-vision or prompt creation of pools of 

»that advance arrangements can be * a ?° *or t^eacconmo 
:Uon of farmers and agricultural worker shoul d be 
^luded as parts of the ; es sent 0 ?l£*„! 
• r 'icd. In connection with tne rei.-uj. ± th 
Rations the Sub -n-mittee reco^end. ttot^ 
Elaboration of the I.L.O. snouia — 
Dvernment concerned be mvioeo. 

. . Aithou S h Priority should £e given to housi^repeirs 

4 indicated in paragraph 2, d by military opera- 

action of Particular areas c^eo y on the 

-■•3 or of a deliberate " s ° 0 ^ e " Nation or shelter 
gt of the enemy ^^roLsfiSHndas tries should* 
" -. hers m the iouu ^ 
■'■ hiAh oriority: 

, ' th . t ,rrangements should with 
! It is of importance that ar * be Kade for an 

* consent of the government 



-127- 

(726) 



pr* assessment or this i 

& r& te specifications ft f ? nage ' so that d©+« ri , 
instruction of f^? S °* the ec l ui Pment reSSiSj ! d , and 
fUnts and the fe^E* 1 *** •"£ti^£ a ** 
*ers erased in thesf{ndusL?r° lnm0dation of the 
early ? date as possible ? ay be obtained at 

tod,- if possible, durir* J? 0 that thi ^ work can hi 
|sibility for ei^^-^e Period of muftary ^ 
purged that the Council Wo nd facilitation 
Kments thr.t the -i^i r /^~ d to its membeT' 
jse the administration to ?Eo 2 r " lea be invited to 
Military security, of condl?^ "J 8 * extent consistent 
ling civilian relief and rehaotlit^f to the 

plies, so that Planning and ^?^ ^ n re ^irements 
pate as possible. ' S estimating may be as 



-123- 



(727) 



rt 



COiailTTEE OK AD HOC COi::, ITTSS ' 

op this coi : v T rn ir . ^ . n ir\)i m 

(Reception No, .(262X-285)- . (■ 

Chairman: DeaA Acheson (United 

States) 

Secretary: Philip c. Jessup 

1. The Committee on Ad Hoes ro nw nf Q 
considered the question of L L^w £ a 7 in S »»t and 

on Supplies and of the eatahl?^? Slt ^n of the Committee 

U ttee on Fi nanol^ Son?ro"^i?f thfT?^^ ° f a 
|5 the Council. suomits the following repo 

wLht 0 ??;^! 6 was informed that Subcommittee 2 of 
committee III Procedures for ascertaining and meet-in* 
n supplies requiring importation including ^roceduS Tor 
Sealing witn the transportation of such supplies) had devoted 

^deration to the question of the functions of a supply com- 
sirtee. In view of this fact, Subcommittee I of Committee I 
(Organization of the Council and its standing Committee:!) had 
addressed itself to the composition of this committee or 
to the composition of a finance committee. 

3. The Committee considered the functions of the Com- 
sittee on Supplies as suggested by Subcommittee 2 of Committee 
III and without expressing an opinion on the details of the 
report of that Subcommittee, which at that stage had not been 
finally acted upon, was in full agreement upon the special 
importance of the Committee on Supplies and the role which it 
sould necessarily play in the operations of the Administration. 

4. The Committee also considered the role of a committee 
M finance and reached the conclusion that it v/ould be helpful 
to the Administration if the Council appointed a Committee on 
financial Control. The functions of such a committee would be 
SralTy To""~advTse the Council on all financial matters withiii 
the competency of the Administration, including budgetary mat- 
ters, other "than those falling within the scope of the Supplies 
foaciittee, and to advise the Director General on any of thfcse 
matters when he so requests. 

be S tc^e^^ 

6. To malce the coordination between Q ^^*l\* 
No two committees more ef f eotive , ™ itt0 - 0 draWn fron botr 
§ld be desirable to have ^ ra ^ r ^S% C ommittee to 

■-ittees, which would be -ppro pr rrninin3 v/hethor a 

friso the Director General relative x d in rjcct ion 17 

Eminent is in a position to pay, a. i 
lf the Financial Plan. 

~-Tni consideration to the 

7. The Committee devote car. the .Commttpeon 
Position of the Coi^ittoo on ouppx^ ovis . Paragraph 4 
feanc^fli Control having m rain u i tatcs that; Thf 

ptecTrr-sr the ^ — of the 

Pttttoo on Supplxoa ox «n» 



-129- 



(728) 



e of the Council, or the 
aeinber governments 1 

and r 



gals for relief 



fetch might not otherwise b r?2L e f eSts mid P oint s of 

on Supplies. 



c. The Committee 
^3 composition of 



the 
th of 



Committee 
the s e 




;son 
attend 

I .'.ministration 



were located. 



presented in the delibera- 
te Committee took the view 

sed of 
vail able 
dquarters of 



q 



rfhile the Committee is making a recommendation 
• the council concerning the original composition of these two 
.ding committees it recognizes that it" may prove to oe 

ble to make additions to the committees as the work of the 
Lustration develops as is contemplated in Paragraph * of 
ricle III of the Agreement. 

10. The Committee accordingly recommends to the Council: 



I. 



That the Council make the following appointments 
to the Committee on Supplies: 



The member o 
The member o 
The member o 
The . member o 
The member o 
The member o 

mittee of 
The member o 
The member o 
The member o 

Soviet Soc 
The member o 
The member o 



f 
f 
f 
f 
f 



the 
the 
the 
the 
the 
f the 
Nation 
f the 
f the 
f the 
ialist 
f the 
f the 



Council from Australia 
Council from Belgium 
Council from Brazil 
Council from Canada 
Council from China 
Council f rom the French Com- 
al Liberation 
Council from the 

Hew 
the 



Council from 
Council from 

Republics 
Council from 
Council from 



Ne ther lands 
Zealand 
Union of 



the United Kingdom 
the United States. 



II. That the Council establish a Committee to be 
known as the Committee on Financial Control with the 
lowing functions: 



the fol- 



To review the annual budgets and any sup- 

1. io review wi Director General and to 
Plenentary budgets of t^ Direc.O ng ^ ^ 

make reports, comments «nd reconra Article VI , 
Council on these budgets. Ugreeme-n , 
Regulations, section 4;. 

2. To receive *d«SSvf&°it^ and 

(Ho^atlo^ T^dton 11) and to -ports 
To °Sg SoSSS ro S ardin S thorn. 

regard- 



1?,* v,c frt the Council (Rogu- 
3. To recommend audi tor ^ Counc ure S a 

lations, section 



ing 



the scope 



>n 12; ana uu reports 
md frequency oi the r.ep 



to be 



-130- 



(729) 



»p^;^ f^^j-k^: anas 

any matters of substance which the audi tors ^ raise 
on examination of the Administration's accounts.. 



4. To make r e c ommend a t i on s to the Council re- 
garding the share of the administrative expense the 
Administration to be provided by each member govern- 
ment, ( 1 1 e gu 1 a t i on s , section 6 . ) 

5. To give attention to the effect, if any.', 
which the receipt and expenditure by the Administra- 
tion of local currency proceeds, referred to in Sec- 
tion 19 of the Financial Plan, may have upon inflation 
in any country in which the Administration may oper- 

bate, and make recommendat ions as to procedures in 
relation to such receipts cr expenditures which may 
aid in counteracting inflationary trends, 

6. Generally to advise the Council on all finan- 
cial matters within the competency of the Administra- 
tion other than those falling within the scope of the 
Committee on Supplies, 

7. To advise the director General upon any of 
the foregoing matters when he so requests. 

III. That the Council make the following appointments 
) the Committee on Financial Control: 

Tne member of the Council from China 
The member of the Council from Greece 
The member of the Council from ; exico 
The member ef the Council from or, ) 
mEn member of the Council from South ATrica 
ThQ memos? ox w fVinc11 trm the Union of 
The member of the eounexx. x wi 

Soviet Socialist Kepub r Co Unit ed Kingdom 

The member of tf£ I ^ Unitod States 

The member of tne eoon<--^- 

IV. That the Council approve the *PP o ^« 0 £L^ 
>e ^ZirZn of the Committee on ^pplxeo, c 

ion with the Chairman of ^ °o«mi than five members, of 
■ol, of a subcommittee of not now committee on 

bom a majority would be drawn f x o t from the 

appUes with the other memeer o o b ; r ^ g , 
tedttoo on Financial Control eo to advis, tne 

« considered the appropriate ^ whether a govern 
Sector General relative to a ided in Section 1/ 

is in a position to pay, 
f the Financial Pian. 



-131- 

(730) 




the Central CoraiiitW 
f won, or the Co:.raitt<7e"or^",?- COSSar y ro G arc to 
:-cy appomtnents between io^fS 1 *',^ to erne*! 
appointments to continue SnS!i*i£? 8 °V he c °«ncil, such 
Council, r uniu tilc next session or the 

VI. That the Council ru'-hn^ ~ - (1 
toBEKo any further arrange 2 J« ° Contral Committee 
the work or the 0 0^^00^1*0^ ^SS^, to 
urgency appoirrfcaents between sesSon- o? f? 1 ™ d to raoke 
such appointments to continU 2? f tho council, 

fcho Council. -o^tmae until the next session of 



I ~ 132 - (731)- 

OF. Tllx C WiTTTiilB .ON at. H OC COl FITTTS 

Reception No: 331 i 

Chairman: Dean Achoson (United 

o . , etates) 
oocrctary: Philip C. Jcssup 

1. The Coimaittoo on Ad Hoc Committees havins mot 
$ considered, at the request or the Director General 

fixing of the salary of the Director Go nor al, submits 
$ followinc report to the Council: 

2. The Committee was informed by the Director 
Jcnorcd that in connection with his duty under Article VI 
jf the ^reorient to submit ar. administrative budget to 

gg Council, 'he would prefer nob to be in the position 

indicating the salary which would attach, to" the 
8ifico of Director General and he accordingly requested 
;-.c Co-.r^nittoo on aci hoc Corrr.ri ttoos to take the matter 
aider consideration, 

3. The Committee orapov/orod the Chairman to appoint 
rSubcoinmittoe to consider this question. The Chair 
ippointod the following Subcommittee: 

Mr. Jean I.'onnct {French Committee) 

Dr. T» F. Tsians (China) 

I r. ?. a. Kerstens (Netherlands) 

far', V. A. Serr;eev (U.S.S.Rj 

4. The Subcommittee presented the following report: 



"November 22, 1943 



"'•7 dear Mr. Chairman: 

t *.4i~, ^^mnsod of the members 
••You asked a subcommittee compos oa oi 

-China, the Netherlands, u.o.S.n. una m y 
&a recommendation relative o vj salary 
doctor General of the Administration. 




public mind roil.ci wo . ^ boon awaro 

office of ^r^fL'S^S^ch in the past years 
pic of the public discussion 



-133- 

(732) 



• j surrounded the nn-c..- • 
%m officials ofTo^'i^c^ , th ° Salario * of the 

U* it is most irnpfrtan'i ?^^?? al „ or Sanitations- 
, si ion should not bo involved In su^b R " liof *«*ini.: 

u such controversies. 
"Wo havo not b_^n ignorant „<• « 
States Administrationrti? 3° that the 

contributor to tho IrXtlLP OBV T^7 bo the 
'"fclnistrativo cantos™* 1 Fund imd to 
"Thus wo havo had in 4-i • 

»» fix0 ? «*• -fl.ot Propor^X 3 ^? f h0ttW 
,fthc realm of any discussion and to til* 2 tak ? n out 
adopted b y one of tho p^i^i^^^ 

fcoraS salar/to aS oho ^1^!™ th ° ^-tor 
*.ct of the President of ^no^nitod^tatol ft ^orica. 

Sincerely yours, 

(Signed) Joan Monnet, Chairman 

(Signed) Dp. Tsiang 
(Signed) A. Kcrstens 

(Signed) v. a. Sorgo cv," 

5.^ Tho Committee accepted the report of tho 
Subcommittee, It was understood that tho administrative 
ridgc-t would provide appropriate sums to defray the 
fficial expenses of tho Director General. 

5. Accordingly, the Committee on Ad Hoc Committees 
scommends to the Council the adoption of the following 
-solution*;- 

A Resolution relating to the 
salary of the Director General 



•SOLVED 

That the salary of the Director General be the salary of 
(Members of the Cabinet of the President of the United Stat 
• ^norica. 



Reception iic. 552 
oyribol: I/P/5/.: 0 . X2 



P ^ TI ° iIS RKLIE? ^ REHABILITATION ADKINISTRAT 

flffi RESOLUTIONS OB POLICY 
F 0F THE FIRST SESSIOH 

OP THE COUNCIL 



IOM 



deception Ho. 3*7 

i A / 2 i; Ko . 4 



notic: 



•ion 



L c texts of all resolutions on L^ Ut int ^ction and 
by the Council. The rcsoln??^ 1Cy P rcsc nted for adop- 
general headings and have ! US a J° arranged under 
C^has been no chan c ^^;:r v C ; n n 2-^ consecutively. 

ted m the Journal of November 28 at page 486! 

(b) There has been inserted in Resolution No. 17 (A 

^y; C ^i n S *? Pr ° ccdures Ascertaining and Meet- 

-Sf Supplies Requiring Importation, Reception 

,298), on page oo, the following now paragraph 3: 

3. In determining what requirements he should pre- 
sent to the inter-governmental allocating agencies in 
respect of countries for which the assistance of the 

'inistration has been requested, and what recommenda- 
tions or objections he should malce' in respect of require- 
ments presented by member governments directly to such 
agencies in order to obtain a fair distribution of re- 
lief and rehabilitation supplies, as provided in para- 
graphs 1 and 2 immediately preceding, the Director Gen- 
eral shall pay due regard to the degree of urgency of 
particular relief and rehabilitation requirements and 
to the extent of damage suffered by member governments 
in a part or the whole of their respective areas as a 
result of hostilities or of occupation by the enemy. 

This oaragraph was drafted by the Committee on Ad Hoc 
dittoes' after reference of the matter to that committee, 
7 the chairman of Committee IV (Reception No. 33o). 

Ic) Tn ^r^olution No . 12 (A Resolution Relating to 
mil wi?h R Rospecr?o N ?Ao Rehabilitation of Such Musses 
Sasport and Other Services as are Essential ^oRelie^ Rc^ep 
: °Mlo. (316) 325 > on page 21, the Paraph following the 
* "Resolved" has been changed to read as follows. 



;ct 



and 17 of th is Session, zno ^""^J* 11 v;ith rosp0 ct to 

statement as a guide ^activities wit . ^ 
the rehabilitation of such indus tr tr , 
other services as are essential to roiie 

4+.4-«/ 3 nn Ad Hoc Committees 
» change is suggested by the Committee on^^ { ^ 

chairmen or rapporteurs of tn ^ para , 

*der the review Procedure pro vided before 

of the Rules of Procoduro), 
Council at its meeting on ,Ionaay. 



TA BLE OP C ONTENTS 



PRODUCTION 



GENERAL POLICIES 



Res. No. 1 Relating to the scope of the activities . 

the Administration. 
Res. No. 2 Relating to non-discrimination 
Res. Wo* 3. Relating to assistance from member 

governments 

Res. No. 4 Relating to Administration publicity 
Res. Mo. 5 Relating to the relations of the Admin- 
istration with intergovernmental 
agencies other than those established 
to deal with supplies, shipoing and 
related questions. 
Res. No. 6 Relating to collaboration with regard 
to economic measures 



II RELIEF AND REHABILITATION POLICIES 



Res. No. 7 Relating to relief distribution policies 
Res. No. 8 Relating to health and medical care 
Res. No, 9 Relating to welfare services and vol- 
untary relief agencies 
Res. No. 10 Relating to policies with respect to 

displaced persons 
Res. No. 11 Relating to policies with respect to 

agricultural rehabilitation and other 
means of increasing food essential 
to relief 

Res. No. 12 Relating to policies with respect to 
the rehabilitation of such indus- 
tries, transport and other services 
as are essential to relief 

Res. No. 13 Relating to policies with respect 
to shelter 



FINANCES AND SUPPLIES 



Res. No. 14 Relating to a financial plan for 
the Administration 



Res. No. 15 Relating to insurance 

Res. No. 16 Relating to taxation of relief and 
rehabilitation supplies 

Res. No. 17 Relating to procedures for ascertain- 
ing and meeting deficits in supplies 
requiring importation 



ORGANIZATION AND ADM IN I STR AT I 



ON 




B68 



gages 
55 -_77 

35 - 36 
ast 37 



) committees oi cno re spoct 
* No. 41) Relating to relations 

to expenditures arid *eceip™ 



38 



plating to the functions o- tZ n E& 
mittees of the Council ?L L Con " 
the Far East l0r - uro Pe and 

^ N0 ' 21 F of sSppUes° mp0SitiOn of tho Committee 
9S , ho. 22 Relating to the functions of the Com- 
mittee on Supplies 
np S . No, 23 Relating to the appointment of a 
Subcommittee of the Committee on 
Supplies 4 ^ 

-, :s . No. 24 Fixing the composition of the Committee 

on Financial Control A o 

c eS . No. 25 Relating to the functions of the Com- 
mittee on Financial Control 43 

5es. No, 26 Relating to the creation and composi- 
tion of standing technical committees 44 

Pes. No. 27 Relating to the functions of the Com- 
mittee on Agriculture 45 
Res, No, 28 Relating to the functions of the Com- 
mittee on Displaced Persons 46 
Res. No. 29 Relating to the functions of the Com- 
mittee on Health 47 
Ess. No. 30 Relating to the functions of the Com- 
mittee on Industrial Rehabilitation 48 
b;s. No. 31 Relating to the functions of the Com- 
mittee on 7/vlfare 49 
Pes. No. 32 Relating to facilities and immunities 
for the Administration, its Council 
and committee members and its staff oO - 51 
Res'. No. 33 Relating to immunities and priorities 

for transit goods ° 
Res. No, 34 Relating to official correspondence oi _ 

the Admini s t r a t i on 
Re*. No. 35 Relating to communications witn 

neutral governments / tH 
Res. No. 36 Relating to travel facilities for the _ ^ 

staff of the Administratis 53 
Res. No. 37 Relating to personnel policies budget 
Res. No. 58 Relating to the a^i s ; ! Jg^ 

and the allocation of aamini* &g _ 6Q 

expenses - ,.- hr . 

Res. No. 39 Relating to the salary oi one .31 

Director General .procedure of 

Res. No.. 40) Relating to the rule florj standing 
) the Council and the rules 
.^ttflfls of the Council 



62 - 77 



ihe Administration 



- 1 - 



THE RESOLUTIONS Oil T>OLlcv ran 

Hffi COUNCIL OF ^™ SESSION OP 

REALISATION AD 1( ^g^**** ^ 



On November 9, 1943, fortv-fm^ n - 
, fci ons signed the Agreement es^hv 1 u ? ltcd - and Associated 

ef and Rehabilitation A^lni^a?^ the ^ited Hations 
>eatat.ives of these nations ^et a ?^^ Th ! ne ** *V the 

the First session of the Couno il esLwJ^ K 01 ^' N ™ Jersey, 
provide for tne organization of tv ? f 0 by the Agreement, 
: ;-;3 the broad policies to guide its activities^ 10 * 1 ^ t0 lay 

•They had before them the task of + i • 
£ke effective the determination of th* £^ t 5 e first ste P s to 
.population of arras liberated h v ?S 10 rty-iour nations that 
; t ed" Nations shall receive aid and J^*?*?* forces of the 

food, clothing and shelter aid in ttf tr ° m their s^fer- 
Alence and in the recove^f of tl L«ni PP f J?" 0 " ° r 
preparations and arranpeuenta SrT? ^ 5 e :;;COple > and 

prisoners and exiles to their homes nd f^! f °V he return 
.resumption of urgently need^agrLSllura? and^noustrSl 
.vctionand the restoration of urgently needed services! 

This involved consideration of the scope of activities to 
undertaken by the Administration, the procedures for obtain- 
l supplies and distributing the burden as equitably as oos- 
de, the methods for assuring equitable apportionment- and 
stribution of supplies, as well as other questions relating 
re particularly to the administration of relief and rehabilita- 
3ii measures in the field and to relations with other govern- 
2ts and organizations. Finally, rules wore required to govern 
: conduct of the Adninist ration itself, so as to secure of f go- 
to representation of the interested nations in the formulation 
the policies of the Administration and to facilitate the 
•rations of the Director General in carrying out these policies. 

;Ihe results of the deliberations of the Council arc embodied 
•the resolutions which folio-./. 



-2- 



PART 



1 ~ GENERAL POLICIES 



RESOLUTION NO. 1 



A Resolution relating to the 
scope of the activities of 
the Administration 



(Reception No. 299) 

LVED 



That the following shall be the broad policies of the 
Inistration with respect to the scope of its activities: 

I« AREAS IN WHICH THE AD: INISTRATION a ILL OPERATE 

The exact geographical areas in which the Administra- 
will operate and the kind of °P^at i°ns it will ^nerll 
:: in each case must be determined by t£j J*** 0 t?mo bPthe 
u- thr u^i. nr rftl1 H es laid down from time to time by tne 
in trie light of policies x^xu u ... -> w ith the consent 

:oimcil) only after consultation w th, and wi n 
>f, the government or authority (military or c^i^ ^ 
prcises administrative authority in the ar . ob , ectlves 
Ration's activities to seeking to achieve ^ up 

•• : icrrod to in the preamble of trxo ^ 
?i U be governed as follows :- 

4.^ «r»ea in which a govcrn- 
1, In the case of a li^ated a c doos not ye t 

ment or recognized national author ^ A<tolnis _ 
exercise administrative author! , ^ for such 
tration will operate from such 0n the military 

purposes as may be agreed upon subjc ct to such 

command and the Adminis tration, f± ^ necessary, 

control as the military co.^n &g circumstances 
The Administration shall, f ^ he government or recog 

permit, seek the advi conc crno.d. 
nized national authority 



2. 



:^?^ dm : ni 5 1 rat ion will 



within the 



3. 



If it appears necessarv f 

operate in an enemy or Vv L C Adm ^istrat ion to 



operate in an enemy or *Z c Sinistra 

the purposes of the ^ ~ cncm y area in ca 
from such a time P t ^! Cmon . t » [t »iU do 



irrying out 
so only 




tration of the area on j-v^ I reco 6n**ou aumuus- 

tration cn the other anrt ofK ? nd and thc A <iminis- 
the military command'or thl ^?«£-i?V^ Ch contrcl as 
authority may find nccossary'^Svilof tha°f ?h°c 
Council approve the scale arid nature of the opera- 
tions it is proposed to undertake and the standard 
of provision, and that all expenses connected wSh 
such possible operations in an enemy or ex-oncm 
area should be carried by the enomy^or economy 
country concerned. Th,- Director General will consult 
witn the military command or established control 
authorities having control of enemy or ex-enemy 
areas with a view to securing information as to 
any surpluses of supplies fro:- time to time avail- 
able in such enemy or ex-enemy areas from which 
relief and .rehabilitation import requirements of 
liberated, areas might be met. 

Nothing in the above should be taken as preventing thc 
Ministration from carrying on activities in other areas in 
::•:<? to perform thc tasks laid upon it in the Agreement, 
provided that the government or authority (military or civil) 
Mrcising administrative authority in the area concerned 
agrees, 

II. THE RANGE OF S ERVICES WHIC H THE ^^DJOWISTRATICN 
'-•ILL IklOVIDE 

■ The supplies and services of which thc Administration 
«I seek to ensure the provision, fall under four heads. 

1. Relief supplies : essential consumer goods to meet 
immediate needs , such as food, fuel, clothing 
shelter, medical supplies. 

2. Relief services : such as health and ^ ^> ords 
assistance in c aring for, an dfflJinU 1 thc - control G f 
of, persons found In \ roaS on of war have 
any of the United Nations «o Jf agreement 
been displaced from their uo,c m hitary author- 
with the appropriate government , thcir rcpatn- 

ities or other annexe , in ^ ical L scrv iccs as may 

ation or return; ^ * U ^J£*ea. 
be necessary for these pur,- 



-4- 



< su ? h as 3l ^rrT^tTnT^^ materials 
equipment, machinery and ■*£i* Pa * materials,, fishing 
enable a recipient countrv P ? ° parts) no ^ed to 
relief supplies for its 1 ! Produce and transport 
areas, and such technical L* n ? othcr liberated 
sary for these purposes! Sorvicos Gs may be ncccs- 

4. Rehab ilitation of pvKMr> „+«u4.j 

far as ^ncy~can"" ^e^i^7 , 1 • r llltl :- i. s — ^ services : so 
immediate needs: such as lLS£ ros I° rcd to ™ct 
power, transport, t*moora£v ° r ' san itation, 

and assistance in procuriS ma^T* co ™ications, 
the rehabilitation^^ for 

T^ : TTFS JIM I I J/ !u l^ l? L ' „ . J. . . TC g rpATa T T | EB '.0 OVA L WITH 

1 The activities of the Administration in bringing assistance 
to the victims of war will bo so conducted that they d o not 
inpede the effective prosecution of the war. The nrosccution 
of the war demands that scarce supplies and shipping tonnage 
shall be carefully controlled and allocated in order to assure 
not only that the supplies and shipping requirements of the 
inaed forces are fully met, but also that a fair distribution 
if supplies is made between the civil populations of the various 
u?cas having due regard to their actual or potential contribu- 
tion to the war effort. It will therefore be essential, both 
for the conduct of the war and in ord.r to promote a fair dis- 
tribution ' of supplies between the inhabitants of areas with 
rhich the Administration is concerned and those of othcr areas, 
that demands upon supplies and shioping presented by the 
Ministration should be co-ordinated, with other demands through 
" use of the existing intergovernmental agencies . concerned 
»ith the allocation of^ supplies and shipping. 

2. It will be an essential part of the functions of the Admin- 
istration to secure a fair distribution of goods which are in 
short supply and of shinning services to and among the various 
areas liberated or to bb liberated. For this purpose the 
Administration must have full knowledge of all the relief and 
rehabilitation import requirements of such areas, -whatever 
^angemcnts may be contemplated for procurement or finance. 
IWeror member rovernracnts shall keep the Administration 
^lly informcf of Ineir^equirements and programs of ^tended 
Phases. The Director General may P r ^^ c ^J^ns or 
^arnmcntal allocating agencies such ^t^^r c^strihn- 
ections as he may deem necessary to obtain a fair distr 
to and among both liberated and to b. lx^r 
^Director General will present before th ^.-^ iof and 
; ocating agencies the overall requir 6me nts for in 

^bilitation of all areas U^atedand th.se needs with all 
::* c:r to permit a global cons io era uio icular requirements 

.- ^ needs. He may also present the p ^ Administrat ion 
.V^y country for which the assi^wnc - } Diroc tor General 

:; 3 , teen requested. It is anticipated t-- on .Supplies, 

' '-re necessary, the Chairman of the 



1 



r 



-5- 



#111 be fully consulted bv the i^ r „, 

Ancles when any matter tou^lS 2^7°?^!^ S Xlocatin 8 
^ration is under discussion. interests of the Admin- 



consultation, whore necessary Kfci'th.^S^tSS^Sr?*^ 
governmental agency will make use whorevol possible of the 

CSt ^f ftor^o n «i/?° nCi0S conc ^^ d with the procurement, 
m t ^'wh^h 5^S n ^- ns P° rt of supplies. The member govcrn- 
ra eiits to which such national agencies arc responsible would 
cg rcc on their part to put the services of such agencies at 
the disposal of the Administration. Such additional responsi- 
bilities would form part of those already undertaken in 
prosecuting the war effort of the United Nations. 

IV. RELATIONSHIP OF THE ADMI TTISTRATTON WITH THE MILITARY 
CQMf.'AND ' ' 

1. Before an area is liberated, the Administration will,, when 
requested by the military authorities, 

(a) consult with them in the planning of supplies 
for the relief and rehabilitation of the area 
during the period of military control; 

(b) arrange for the advance procurement of such 
supplies as may be agreed, on to supplement 
supplies to be provided by the military 
authorities . 

2, During the period when a liberated ar;.a is under military 
control, the Administration, insofar as the Director General 
deems practicable, will, when requested by the military 
authorities, 

(a) arrange for the procurement of supplies to supple*- 
mcnt supplies being provided by the military 
authorities ; 

(b) furnish expert personnel and services, and advise- 
on the conservation and utilization for relief 
purposes of stocks and productive resources; 

(c) assist in the carrying out of policies with regard 
U) t*e repatriation or return of displaced persons 

' as formulated in paragraph II, abovo, 

(d) undertake other relief and rehabilitation activities; 

(e) assume responsibility in whole or in part for such 
activities . 

r rhrsc functions the Administration 
. in undertaking any of ch ^ s £ t£Vt seek the advice of the 

sc far as circumstances P«™£» J™ concerned. 
•>'--mrxnt or recognized national „u thorny 



6- 



Tt is recommended to the mc-n^™ ~ 
Ministration be kept inf earned so f K afT^ that the 
ftfc operations of the civif a f?alS b^SfS^ 16 
^itary command and control authorities, in order that tho 
Sroctor General may make the necessary preparations fov 

provision of -t«xff and facilities so that a smooth 
£ansition from the period of military control may be 
ensured and the flow ol supplies maintained. 

, it is recommended to member governments that the 
transition in each area from military to civilian relief 
0$ rehabilitation operations be consummated at the 
earliest date that military considerations permit. 



RESOLUTION NO, 2 



A Resolution relating to 
non-discrimination 



(Reception No. 299) 



RESOLVED 

1 That, in any area whore relief and rehabilitation 
operations are be ins. conducted through the employment, in 

part, or the Administration.^ 
ana rehabilitation in *11 its a^f£ h f^ at ![ ve noe dfl of 
or dispensed fairly on the bas J° ^ ™: discrimination 
the population in the area, and without discrimma 
because of race, creed or political belief. 




during^its occupation of the area. 



-8- 



RESOLUTION NO. 3 



A Resolution relating to 
assistance from member 
governments 



(Reception No. 299) 

RESOLVED 

That the Council recommends that member S^ergments 
take such steps as may be necossa^ano ^° w ^ hin 
facilitate any operations of ^he Adminis u ^ &tipri 
areas under their control, a ^;^£v and pcrS0 nnel as 
in obtaining such services, jollities ana P arrans in S 
maybe required to carry on such ^ at i on , s expendi- 

to the extent possible that the ^"4, equipment, and 

turos for services, facilities. JWPg^jJS gy be devoted 
personnel be minimized so that its res oui 
directly to relief and rehabilitation. 



-9- 



R3S0LUTI0N NO. 4 



A Resolution relating to 
Admini s trat i on public i ty 



(Reception No. 299) 

RESOLVED 

That the Council recommends that member govern- 
-ts, consistently with such ^^^o^r 

afford the Administration opportunity ^ s ^/ that thoy 

nation with regard to its operation ♦ tl on 

permit the use of spc iax l.uls oi furnished by the 
supplies and equipment belonging 
Administration, 



-10- 



RES0LUTI0N NO. 5 

A Resolution relating to 1-hr i„4.- 
Administration wi tg iSto^ovor^en?al° f th ° 
agencies other than those established to deal 
with supplies, shipping; and related quost?ons. 

(Reception No. 299) 

RESOLVED 

1, That the Council reaffirms the principle of 
cooperation between the Administration and other inter- 
governmental agencies as set forth in the report of the 

orary Committee on Admission of Observers adopted by 
the Council on November 12, 1943 



to . 



2, That the Council invite representatives of the 
League of Nations Technical Organizations, the International 
Labor Organization, the Intergovernmental Comr.iittoe on 
Refugees, and the United Nations Interim Commission on Food 
and Agriculture (or representatives from the Permanent 
Organization for Pood and Agriculture now represented by 

the Interim Commission), to attend as observers and to par- 
ticipate in the meetings of the Council, its committees* 
Slid subcommittees, and In the meetings of regional commit- 
tees and technical standing committees ^.ff^ d ^^ c ^^ 
appropriate provisions in the Permanent Rules oi Procedure. 

3. That the Director General avail himsolf of the 
organizations mentioned in paragraph 2 above as the na . 
of the work and other circumstances maKc appropriate, 

. 4. That the Director ^^^J^SSSSatS J5° 
Principle set forth in paragraph 1 a ?° v ®' do £ m desirable 
such a degree and to such extent as he may ^ 
*thc interests of the Administration ^ spccializcd 

^governmental agencies whose °P^ stration> including 
ffrvices may be of value to J^^Tls observers to the 
^sending of his representatives as od &g woll as 

J*tlngs of other intergovernmental 
th °s e mentioned in paragraph 2 aoov 



-11- 



RESOLUTICF NO. 6 



A Resolution relating to 
collaboration with- regard 
to economic measures 



(Reception No. 299) 



RESOLVED 



That the Council recommends that member governments 
consult with the director General with a view to avoiding, 
so far as possible, the subjection of the funds, supplies, 
equipment and services of the Administration to economic 
measures which might diminish the el 'f octivcncss ^ such 
activities or impose financial burdens on the Administra- 
tion t 



-12- 



PART II - RELIEF 



a?:d f^iabilitatioij policies 



nissoLurjc:; :to. 7 



A Resolution relating to relief 
distribution policies 



(Reception No. 311) 

R2S0LVED 

That the Council approves the following statement as a 
guide to activities with respect to relief and rehabilitation 
distribution: 

1. That at no time shall relief and rehabilitation 
supplies be used as a political weapon, and no discrimination 
shall be made in the distribution of relief supplies because 
of race, creed or political belief. 

2. That in general the responsibility for the distri- 
bution, within an°area, of relief and rehabilitation supplies 
should be borne by the government or recognized national 
authority which exercises administrative authority in the area, 

'Phat rlistr-'butxon should bo so conducted that all 

cUs^s of tha^puIaSS Respective of their Purchasing 

fmr, shall receive their equitable ^^S^lcL 
com 

2h 

in the ^pr ice "structure of the areas. 

' -p „,vipf and rehabilitation 

4. That distribution of r el ^*: ±v , rationing and price 

jupplies should take place "f^^f^ko.s should not be left 

Controls. The suppression of blacK m a>loVL i& be the sub- 

\° general pronouncements ana^.ec^o«, vigorously 

^ct of active measures of enforcement appx 
and unremittingly. 




-13- 



5. That the government or r>* 

,., ich exercises administrative af^S OS ? ized national author^, 

fcpi bution within a .Liberated terrl?,> lt lns °far .us the dis- 
\ it aticn goods is done through privaL°£ relief rlhabU' • 
unearned by private traders for SJ? trade ' thc 

, is fair and reasonable. nelr services is no more 

6. That use should be made to *> 

,-,tent of normal agencies of cUstriW? ma * iim;mi Practicable 
: e rcial, cooperative), to the Par tim,l ^ ( government al > corn- 
elation and restoring normalTconomic "aStftitS C °^f tin 8 
principle, however, cannot be pursued a* ?>£ lt7 ' This 
Measures found necessary under^ergencv condl^^n ° f - 
?n adeauate control of the dist-rlS^ y c p onauions to insure 
direction to the appropriate 1 cons^ers! SUppUos and thsir 

7. That if the Administration is called on by the mili- 
tary authority to furnish distribution services through 'its 
W organization and personnel in a liberated territory in 
which a government or recognized national authority does not 
yet exercise administrative authority, the Administration 
should, subject to the general provisions governing the re- 
lation of the Administration to the military authoritv and 

the government or recognized national authority concerned, 
make the fullest possible use of local authorities and of 
local organizations. 

2. That the Administration be prepared to render direct 
assistance in distribution v/henever , because of unusual cir- 
cumstances the government or recognized national authority 
concerned requests such aid within its territory. Vfnorevor 
as a consequence of such request, the Administration is 
directly concerned with internal distribution, it should 
folio?;, in cooperation with the national or local authorities, 
the sane general principles as those recommended above. 

9. That the Director General should be kept fully in- 
formed concerning the distribution of relief and rehabilita- 
tion supplies within any recipient areas, ana under all cii 
^stances there should be the fullest working cooper lion 
between the governments or recognized national authorities 
concerned and the Administration for this purpose. 



-14- 



RSSOLtTTIOK NO. 8 

A Resolution relating to 
health and. medical care 

(Reception No. 312) 



IgSOLVilD 

1 That tho Council urge its members, when nominating 
atornates for membership or tho standing technical Committee 
m Health, to designate as such alternates accredited and 
technically competent representatives of their respective 
national health services, 

2. That the Council recommends that governments and 
recognized national authorities cooperate fully with the 
Administration in establishing at the earliest possible date 
regional and other emergency agreements and arrangements 

for tho notification within the limits of military security, 
of diseases likely to become epidemic, uniformity in quarantine 
regulations, and for other measures of prevention. 

3. That the Council recommends that governments and 
^cognized national authorities, whenever so requested by the 
Ministration, offer all facilities in making available to 
the Administration suitable personnel for its health organi- 
zation, including the temporary loan of technical experts, 

snd the -services of 'scientific institutions. 

4. That the Council recommends the cl °^ s ^^^! _ 
Jonat the earliest possible time between J^g^J £ 
ion and the Allied Military ^^*^!^oSiS^lSln 




Verities. 

to fh"t governments and 
. 5. Tha t the Council ^? omm ^never so requested by the 
Agnized national authorities ^neu ssib le the assign- 
^istration, facilitate * n ° vo ** ILiod countries for 
£ of their nationals from the oceupioa ts f medical 

Restraining especially in the » ?/bopo such gaining is 

"anitary sciences in tho countrx, roqU ost be filed ^ 
^blo; under the condition th-t 
government concerned. 



15- 



RSSOLUTION NO. S 



A Resolution relating to 

welfare Services and. voluntary 
relief agencies 



(Reception No. 313) 



iCSOLVED 



i. That welfare services administered by or in coopera- 
tion with the Administration shall be provided without dis- 
crimination because of race, creed or political belief. 




i • v, mwi'm voluntary relief 
. o. That the extent to whicn foreign J and 

J^cios shou i d be used for assistance should be 

^ilitation of distressed people ^ ^ caun^ y consul - 
ffter to be determined by the Director a anor authority 
U °nwith the government or recognized na 
Pernod. 

, ~r its total program and 
,,. 4 « That within the framework or 1* hoal th, v/olfaro 

closest collaboration betweqn tn Admini stration 
5L° «** appropriate organization units^ sorvic es for 
vS dmGko specific provision for i«u dron , expectant ^nci 
,-:?s of war - in particular for * d# 
^Smothers, the a*ed and th. ai 



-16- 



5. That in general, welfare o - 

stored, as far as poisiblSf -by SI T should b * ad " 
d national authority concornol and S£°3SSSLt?atlS 8 " 
make its resources available to the a pprow^t ° 
Clonal governmental agency in accordance vAth pirns asreo. 
: n on between ishc Administration and h^., P . -Sr. 00 ' 



ip0 n between mo administration and the national , ncy. 

Continuous cooperation should be maintained and infor- 
mation exchanged between the government or recognized 
national authority concerned and the Administration. 

6. That the Administrate ion should b; prepared to ad- 
Lstcr welfare services directly, cither in part or in vholc, 

ihen called upon by a government or recognized national 
authority, which for .any reason is unable itself to administer 
those services . 

7. That because of already prolonged suffering due to 
war and because of critical needs, tho Administration should 
arrange to provide, as promptly as possible, the necessary 
rclfare services, to be available when countries are liberated 
or occupied by tho United Nations . 

8. That welfare services should be designed to help 
people to help themselves. IThcrevor possible constructive 
work opportunities and measures for self-help should be pro- 
vided to permit those receiving relief to produce ~t least 
some of their own basic requirements. 

tho magnitude and comploxaty^of the 




\ 



-17- 



RESOLUTION NO. 10 



Resolution reXafcing to policies 
with respect to displac- 



(Recent ion No . 314 ) 




countries, or stateless person-, 

" '. nMttla nds that member government s 

2. That the Council ro °f^° +h.c Director General in 
consult with and give full aid to r n coord inate, 
Wcr that he may,- in concert w J™ n ™tration of orderly and 
Minister or arrange for the ^in ^ ^ ^ Qf prisoncrs , 
Active "measures for the return to thox 

-lies and oth.r displaced persons, 

fHat member governments 

3. That the Council recommends that ^ carrying 
insult , vith the Director- General for^ iat . on or return of 

J* measures with respect to the r ? Cj , pc r son, o 6 

placed persons; end that ^ Q C in paragraphs 5 and ;1 
•r^triatod bo those refoir- a Cojaml ttoo IV. 
^ r.^ort of Sub com attec - .riven by 

a . w , assistance to displaced 

4. That the question of as s ^dx^P 

5 Administration in the ali ty who ha Nations 

f/sons of onomy or «*-onong £ tlona ls of the t0 issue 

; r -a into homes from which ^ nsidor od ^JUons .of P»a- 
S been expelled should t£ J j th the prov 4 of Co:a _ 

dealt with in accordance suDC ommitt 
. ras ii c . nd 1C of the report 



-13- 



closost coopcra- 



5. That stops be taken to ons^ 
tionv/ith the Committee on Health no V? 
S ion al health authorities or the vLIo^ aS "P* tho 
" n cd, with a view to pro vont ing and wbwff£*° 3 con " 

des which may be expected to aril \n ol - Un - 
| ^riation of large G roups o? dls^acSd^ersons; ^ 

6. That the Director General take stops to ensure tho 
closest cooperation with such annexes as tho International 
across and the Intergovernmental Committee n ?1 ' 
ffld ray other appropriate todies of suitable standing Whoso 
assistance may be oi value, with a view to invoking their 
collaboration in the work of the repatriation of displaced 
persons ; 

7. That tho Director General should establish the 
Barlisst possible contact with tho military authorities of 
the United Nations with a view to concerting plans for deal- 
ing in a uniform and closely co-ordinated manner with any 
largo groups of displaced persons which may bo found in any 
liberated or occupied territory on tho entry of the forces 

of tho United Nations into that territory. 



- 19 - 



RESOLUTION NO. 11 



A Resolution rol-.ting to policies 
with rospee-t to ^gi? {.cultural 
rehabilitation end other moans of 
increasing food o s santial to relief 



(Reception No. 315) 



fHo rounc ii aprsrovos tho following statement as a 
paat tAo ooil.cu np-r^ cultural rohabilita- 

Tuido to activities with respect to ..gr^cuiL.-i . relief 
tionand other methods of increasing food oasentiax 

.,^^.v. r -ftor liberation in any 
1. That for the first crop J?» £*?ktwai rohabilita- 
arca tho Administration, through its Agfow ity to 

lien and food production progra^, ^'^consumption. For 
tho production of food for dir °?J in liberated areas 
that yoar the. war production P'-JJr 1 ; , is up0 n maximum out- 
should generally be continued with cmpn certain areas, 
put both from the soil and from be undertaken where 
however, modification in this poljc 7 - £ ^ roS ults in a dis. 
J continuance of the war pro duct ionp^ ppovidod ea^ntial 
proprotionato sacrifice , if 
foods arc otherwise available, 




to carry out tho production proprom- nnr. ^ ^ 
they can contribute to the soluiM™ '-,5° thc extent that 

itablishing o^rimontal^t^ 

,,,1 institutions, organizationf^tv^os! 1 ^ SStS?' 
the necessary technical surveys to determine * gricul?ura! 
requirements and to lay tho basis for production proems. 

. J'' ^\^S ha l\S° T no P oli °y of the Administration 
to integrate to the fullest possible extent its short-run 
agricultural rehabilitation and food production efforts with 
tho longor-run reconstruction objectives of the United Nations 
Organisation for i^ood and Agriculture, and to shape its 
policies so as not to hamper the achievement of those ob- 
jectives, which call for the progressive realisation in all 
countries of diets adequate both in quantity and quality. 

4, That since priorities between various agricultural 
items will vary from area to area, such priorities shall be 
determined by tho government or rocognizod national authority 
concerned in conjunction with tho Director General in accord- 
ance with the general policy outlined above. In determining 
such priority for agriculture and fishing requirements tho 
tost should be applied whether the supply of these require- 
ments will bring early and large returns in the form of 

crops and fish for direct human consumption, 

5. The Administration should be prepared when requested 
by a government or recognized national author ity to ^ assist 
thorn in making technical field surveys in wstabiisning 
priority on the need for supplies in making available £f *£ a 
tion concerning production surpluses in nearby «£QB, und in 
providing such other technical assistance as is required, 



-21- 



RESOLUTION NO. 12 

A Resolution relating to policies 
with respect to the rehabiSa! 
tion of such industries, tr*ns- 
poro and other services as are 
essential to relief. 

(Reception No, (316) 325) 



SHEAS 



The preamble of the Agreement states that preparations and 
arrangements shall >e made for assistance in the resumption of 
urgently needed industrial production and the restoration of 
essential services, it is therefore 



- - ~i 



iOLVED 



That, subject to the provisions of Resolutions l-'os. 1 and 
1? of this Session, the Council approves the following statement 
-.s a guide to activities with respect to the rehab ill to. tion of 
such industries , transport and other services as are essential 
to relief. 

1. Rehabilitation supplies are to consist of materials, 
such as raw materials, machinery and spare parts needed to enable 
areciDient country to produce and transport relief supplies for 
Us own and other liberated territories; and, within cae scope 
»f the Administration, the rehabilitation of puolic ot.h^Les 
«* services, so far as they can be repaired and ^stored to 
jeet Mediate, basic needs, such essen tl^- J-^f ^JuS ' 
m*, transportation and communication, inese 
rehabilitation of essential relief indu.tr — . 

shorovide food, shelter, clothing medical suppue 

(a) the liberated 
and in which the 




"^•ju naveriaxa j.nuut> ^ » 

j j. be ifflnorted from 
3. If the raw materials required must • Administration, 
>**B t It should be the resnonsio - ° J tal agencies, 

Ssh the appropriate national or £* c £ oouro *ont ^ supplies, 
Sgjnge for'necessary allocation an . ^ poeslole, re serves d 
t ^t there may be created as pw Direc tor general 
tJ» bailable at the request of tn 

" eve * the need arises, ^ Qf materials 

H J; It 1. roco^naed that Pool, b. g^oMXe Powe^f ts, 

^.cim typDs, and spare par*! 



- 22 - 



5 It is recommended that in 
npe te Home consumption, the Kover»t£«S * e homG Production 
^ r 0 rity concerned should takl Xr^Kj or ^cognized national 
£?£Js of production avaSab^in f count™ E*i t0 e ? ab i e 
^sposal of other liberated areas Sh<S Y t0 ° e put at 
to cover their deficits . WhlCn " f " ay ncod such SU P" 



oil"* 



ft. It should be the nolir-«r n f 4-k,= * ,i • - ■ 
„J^ir>q whft<?« i-,X,lf Administration to hclo 

those countries whose industries can bo rehabilitated for pro- 
duction of relief and rehabilitation goods urgently required 
Inothor liberated areas it is recommended that in attainment 
0 t these objectives the following be considered: special allo- 
cations of raw materials, machinery, and spare parts, by plac- 
ing at the disposal oi those countries, at the request of their 
-overrents, an experienced staff, and by providin- special 
priorities for the return of skilled personnel awaiting' 
Repatriation. 

7. It is recommended that the Governments or recognized 
national authorities having administrative authority in- a 
liberated area will keep the Director O-oneral and the appro- 
priate regional committee fully informed as to any surplus of 
supplies from time to time available in such area, to meet, 
±on circumstances permit, relief and rehabilitation import 
requirements of other liberated ai'-oas. 

8. It is recommended that the- Administration should, in 
consultation with the governments or recognized national author- 
ities concerned and the appropriate international coordinating 
authority, assist liberated areas in restoring the transport and 
coakmications system to satisfactory working condition; it 
should also help to restore equipment, repair snops, ™r« ?hops, 
stewards otc. T t is recoiamended that a pool of transportation 
ffit'tofe fixed and mobile should be created either from 
shocks manufactured overseas, or in Allied 

trios. Equipment which has been the property of the enemy mc.y 
also form part of the pool. 

portation of relief and ronnbi ligation oty* 
relief and rehabilitation period. 

" 10. It is recommended that the -^^^1 
trials, machinery, spare *>arts a» a definite order ox 

b < established within each country a ;^ -.'deration: (a) tcchni- 
Priority be established taking into co.i& m - scrv icos (gas, 

^ factors, such as, on the one ^^/W necessity of re- 

electricity), and, on ^ ^ on5Vja ,r goods; (b) social 

3 >in S the needs of various Riding reemployment; c) 

^tors such as the necessity of pi J of certain raw 

horary economic factors such as ^ir 

Aerials and shipping. oor sidereci as 

, U. The task of rehabilitate^ 

^beginning of reconstruction, ^ wor v is contemplated 
^ construction or reeenstracti^ , oX of the vAg ^ 

^.rehabilitation as defm-a i impor bant, jut no 
^o, 18 , such as unemployment, arc » ^ f^Z^t upon 

^factors. They aro oonsoqucn cannot be call. 

f^f of action. The Admxnistraj ^ ^ , or ,d. 
- -lp restore continuous .mpioym 



- 23 - 



RESOLUTION NO. 13 



A Resolution relating to 
policies with respect 
to shelter 



(Reception No. (317) 326) 



RESOLVED 



That the Council approves the following statement 
as a guide to activities with respect to shelter: 

1. That any general rebuilding policy for the areas 
to boiiberttod is°in the sphere of long-term -construc- 
tion and docs not, therefore, come within the purvic. of 
the Administration . 

, 2. That in the relief period priority in the reha- 
bilitation of essential shelter oi accoraou 
liberated areas should be given to, 

hospitals and schools; „ PT , aonSi especially for 
habitations for homeless P^boxi > - s ©rviees 
workers engaged i\ GS ?^°^ h P priority in relief, 
and in industries havln f„ ^ acric-ultural workers, 
as well as for farmers and agi 

„ro<-irv, however, there 
u 3. That where it may ^^^Is ^ch as hand tools, 
^ouldbc imported construct on t o excavating 
Elding supplies and equipment, xnO fl and 0 q U ipment not 
finery, should essential ^ter supp ly. 
Z available, or be m she ^ 

«™ nf shelter + w nn ^mfflodf 



, ¥>tn -oroblem oi shei-^or acco mmoda 
4. As regaras tne oroo - temporary oda 

fsons, which falls into two y frontiers^ and 
°*at collecting points not necessarily 

of a m ore permanent, **°"gj t bG returned 
factor, for persons who canno 



n0S cither because their homos havo W» a -. 
; jCaU so those are in territories still r>l d ? s ^ ed or 
% m wherever possible oxis^nfbMldiSgf "caSs^ 
barracks, hospitals and other public buSdfnPs Should 
bo usod as they are or can bo made suitable. should 




bo 

promptly created so that advance arrangements can bo raado 
for the accommodation oj? farmers and agricultural .workers. 

6. Whore prefabricated housing is a specialized indus- 
trv in any of the territories of a member government, the 
toortanco of making th^se supplies available as a part of 
the contribution of thuSo governments should be recognized. 

7. That where there is widespread destruction of par- 
ticular areas caused by military operations or of a delib- 
erate "scorched oarth" policy on the part 01 tno 

although priority should be given to housing rcpai r as 
indicated in paragraph 2, accoimaoaatxon o * J^****^^. 
wkcrs in the food processing industries snouia - i 

nts should 

8. That it is of impor I^^^.^^ ^onc.rn.d, for 
bo made, with the consent of tnegov.rnmo dctailod and 
an export assessment of this «e, ^ ^at ^ ^ 
accural specifications °V ; o vidii^ essential relief 
^construction of facto /^'^o^aodations for the 
requirements and the shelter or acc ^ obtained at as 
workers engaged in those in ^strx — that this work nay be- 
early 
%rto< 
Ability 

?fip<anaonds to its member b---- . tl /^minis > - - 

authorities be invited to advis.J^ socu rity, of con- 
gest extent consistent w ^Vtnir civilian relief and 
iitions found in the area afi-c e g ^ 
^abilitation requirements ana w 



-25- 



PART III « FINANCE AND STJPP 



LIES 



RESOLUTION No, 14 



A Resolution relating to 
a financial plan for 
the Administration 

(Reception No. 293) 

RESOLVED 

That the following Financial Plan for the Administration 
be adopted: 



ADMINISTRATIVE BUDGET AND PROGRAM OP OPERATIONS 

Se ction 1 . Program of Operations . The Director General 
shall prepare as soon as possible, and submit to the next ses- 
sion of the Council, a program of operations covering proposed 
activities of the Administration in connection v/ith reliei and 
rehabilitation including the care and transportation ox dis- 
ced persons. This program may cover the entire period of 
;jntemplated operations of the Administration, °r any part 

*eof. The operating program sha ^rve as aju *| 
ftivities of the Director General, out, excepx; a« P hi 
;;;icle IV, Paragraph 2 of the _ Agreement, shall not | q 

Hon when the situation requires P 1 ^*^^ council rev i- 
.fe, the Director General shall s ^**%*o|r am which expe- 

0fl a of, or supplements to the operating progr 
•lence may show to be desirable. 

i • r« Rndrret. The Director 
Section 2. Annual Ato^tj^ve esti _ 
■STSEairprepa^^ for a calcn- 

administrative expense of the Aomini p explanation 
The budget shall be _ accompanied ^ proposed^budget 

ive expend! - 




receipts. 



26 




The 
the Coun- 
not pro- 

C CONTRIBUTIONS 

SeetionJ.. general^ Contribute &. ^ 

.,,'tSTor the contribu tion or each tno amount and 

^•ncd by its constitutional bodies government, to be 

:7 V of the Agreement, the CoSno?? Provided fo1 " in 
government whoso home terrSESi hlV* 0 ™?*^ 3 that cach 

shall make a contribuSon^L^L?? 2±5jSoS°2?JS2 * 
•v; of the Administration, approximately oqui valent to o n 
;: tof . t hc national income of the country f oT ?he year ?ndin° 
,30, 1943 as determined by the member government? ° 

The Council recognizes that there are cases in which the 
■aaaendation above may conflict with particular demands aris- 

from the continuance of the war or may bo excessively bur- 
^soiBo because of peculiar situations, and therefore recog- 
ijes that the amount and character of the contribution recom- 
' is subject to such conditions. 

Section '5. Char acter of C ontribution , Subject to the 
•ovisions of "Article V, paragraph 1~, of the Agreement the 
racil recoinmcnds that as wrauch as possible, but not less than 
. ;rcont , of the amount contributed by each member government 
".oimondod in Section 4 hereof, shall be in such form of 
ffency as can bo expended in areas outside of the contribut- 
3 country and that" the balance thereof shall be in the form 
:a credit in local currency which shall bo available for tnc 
%so of the contributing country's supplies and services. 

Section 6. Contributions toward. "^^t^fSL??^" 
SglovorrrnionlT a av troaFTEs-"iEaro of the aim .: native 

jsos/as determined by the Council under -ole Vl^f ^he 

•-^ont, as included in its contribution maac 

-•i 5 hereof. 

men. rr11 t— — - - ^ XTTfffl ft 

-.Council recommends that member goyornwo * v/hich are 

^government referred to ^ Scctio^. hci^^^ f<>p f 
ftj contribute to the work ox t ic (in addition to 

• : "-iitation outside its own ooi i ^ t± v0 expenses), 

:.f*al contribution for allocated admi 

m do so. 

i -, Member Governments, 
•^ITKionimeM^^ . ^ Sovornmon^ ^ Section 4 
■^tions in addition to tnoso rcco, 

■ 8 aould do so. i/nts an d 

m *«bcr Govei^montsaga 

lotion 9. Contributi^^j5?^^5iT?52^^^ 
^pgnta ^St^bT^SS Council A drainistratxon f rom^ 

, b,r~o~Cd— o the work £ ^ sources. Sue * 

£j<* governments or non-ffovo.nm^ r ^^ c Sity with 

may be accepted in accox ^ al in con! or. 

published by the P^^^tion. 
Policies of the Administrax, 



j^ fttion 10 . Action on Conl -.ii u-M 
; s -th^t "each member govcrnSSnT'TSP^ The Council rccom- 
, such constitutional budgetary aSw?«r"5?° !r arlicst possible 
; vo stops as may be necessary to ^ ^f bratlvo > or logis- 
3 n needed for the purposes of * tho Ad^in?stratSn° n ***** 




taidin the nature of relief and rohSiiiiaiion in addl. 

*?° "S 1 "^o ?f?L^" ^ ^istralion/shalfdo 
:rw r alter prior notiii.ca-.ion and consultation with the 
actor General.- 

Scction_12 ; - Immo d i a to .Adninist nati ve Exp ensos. In order 
sect immediate administrative expenses, the Director Gen- 
1 may ask sucn of the member governments as may be in a posi- 
, n to do so to make immediate advance payments in the amounts 
>essary, vd th appropriate credit towards the general amounts 
nded in Section 4 and 5 he-roof. 



EXPENDITURES : ADI.IIiriSTRATIVS AND OPERATIONAL 

Secti on 10 . R ate of C ont ributions, The Council rocom- 
nds that, insofar as is consistent with efficient operation, 
ntributions of all member governments for the work of the 
-mis tr at ion shall be called upon at an approximately equal 
.te, 

Section 14. A.cmini strativ o Expens es. Tho Director Genr 
- ^r-cur 'obligations and maize ' expenditures f or adminis- 
•aUve'purposcs from the general resources of tnc Adminis tra- 
ion, in accordance with approved administrative budgets, 

Section 15, Use of^Curroney. The Direct or General may 

ration as ho may deem necessary 1 or . r *Jl"£ rom local cur- 
3d operational expenses which cannot be -^/^any country, 
r*? credits. Such expenditures may be f ^r g^verrunent. 
fethor or not tho government tho £°°* 2 s bG secured for the use 

consent of a member government ^st °^ ndit uros in any 
f any of its local currency to finance ^ 
%p countrv. 

K' - DISTRIBUTION 

... Section is, Governmon^^ fl£o° 
mJ^ roTForcd^^o^ ^: . _ :J?TnbIo resources for tnc 
Ra tion not to d eplotS ^ s J£f;£ 0 se government i* in a 

and rehabilitation of any a ^ U £ orol gn exchange, 
-ion to pay with suitable moans o ^^J^ 

,^Uon 17, I^m^^ 

J - S . n f reSeral, in 
govcrm gnt considers t Dira ctor Genera ,^ 

ijf ^ m the foregoing se ^ v e?nment involved and 
Ration with the member 5 ^ ^ or subcommittee ° is 
& * the appropriate comm.ttee^ me nt or 

- l > shall determine whetnei 



.in a position to pay for relief 
Services, In case of disa*reerw>£+ eh abilitation supplies 
or the Director General may rt} *?? ae ^v r 

J roiGr the natter to the 

Tn waking the determination the anni^o ■ 
^assets and its sources of foreign ^?f t?S fo r ei ^ ex T 

■^count. Although payment for re!?e?tn" n ^ h S|^ t ^. taken 
..... afiwlfifls snnii k~ * . 1J -r . anct rehab xl j. cation 



•The Director General, from tine to time, shall review such 
^termination m tne lignt of changing circumstances. 

Sect ion 16 , Policy on Relief Debt Burdens, It shall be 
Jllcy of the Admini s t r at i on that, an applicant government 
S'ail not, be required to assume the burden of an enduring for- 
;-', n exchange debt for the procurement of relief and rehabili- 
tation supplies and services. 

Section 19. Siipplic s and Services for Vihich ilerber Gov - 
J;s ArTTTo't i:i a position to p ap v; i:.:h SuitaVl e hoaa s of 
~~~ -c'-an^e. The Council recoi.miends that governments not 
position to oay in suitable means of foreign exchange for 
Pessary relief "and rehabilitation supplies or services make 
Mailable to the Administration in whole or in part tne local 
rwency proceeds from the sale of supplies furnished by the 
E lation, It sh: be the policy of the Administration 
meany such local currency for relief and bisons and 

**, including the care and movement of displaced P^ s ^ r ^ d 

such other W-s as ^^^^^^^o^^ 
aft, Programs for the utilization ?\sacn 10 government 
a formulated by the Director General and the memoes ^ 
-"'.•Dived. 

r> in v.vrnr-' The Coun- 

Section 20, EsagnggL^^ of the 

In^^o l^c T insofa r as possioio all e. t h< 



-1 recomends that insofar as possio^ ^ borne by the 

anistration within a- liberated ar^a w Io0 ol currency 

:*eriment of such area, and shall W P & Qr derivG d from 
-available by the government ol une - 

* proceeds of the sale of supplies? 

J nnTd or ConvertibleCui^^n^ 

Action 21. DistrpiUit^ 
«T15 r — cTrTumstances shall a ^ by th Adminis- 

;?T^onvcrtiblo currency ^ s ;^ C ^vornmont except for par 

a to any member or non-:ncmbor o 
M ** of essential supplies and. scrv 

t*irtfl«to 0? F T Ji^ s 
CUSTODY ^ dfl alld currency^ 

•:^|£2tipn 22. Formo£&*22Hl regained, insolar^as^^^ 

^fprm-kdnl^^^} h they arc received u 
• i8 ^lc, m the. form in whxoh ~ x sha ii 

rtta The P^9*2S vemment, select 
P^lon 25. Pj^caa^2||; iat o go vo roqUxr0f 

•%°^tatT3H with bho ^"^nistration a- - 
-fiscal agents for the Adrnmi 



-29- 



Acpo\in_t in-- . 




require all 
at ion to comply 

Section J5. ^ Audit . All financial transactions of the Ad- 
oration sna,i oe audited annually by an Auditor selected 
bhe Council upon one recoririendation of the axjoropriatc con- 
tflp of the Coiuicil. 



RESOLUTION NO. 15 
A Resolution relating to insurant 
(Reception No. 298) 

FM.VED 

Kiat if it appears to the Director General conducive to 
jient and economical discharge of the business of 
io Administration, the Administration may carry its own 
risks without insurance except as may be otherwise directed 
the Council. 



-31- 



RESOLUTION No. l6 



A Resolution relating to fcp**+« 

of relief and ronaSii?t£S£n 10n 
supplies 



(Reception No. 298) 

-SOLVED 

1. That the Council recommends that all member govern- 
ors make appropriate measures according to their const i- 
fitional procedures to insure that relief and rehabilita- 
tion supplies and services furnished by the Administration 

lot subjected to taxation in a manner which reduces 
-resources of the Administration; 

2, That in so far as may be required for the attainment 
3? the above purpose, the Council recommends to all member 

nments that, inte r alia , 

a, export taxes on supplies to be furnished by the 
Administration to a member Government for relief and 
rehabilitation be waived, or other equivalent action 
taken: and such supplies bo exempted from any new or 
additional export taxes. The Council recognizes tnat 
such action on existing export taxes may ^iiStlL 
to a Part of a member Government ' s general °°^fg^ on 
under Section 4 of the Financial Plan, but urges that 
such contribution be made under Section 8 of bhe said 
Plan; 

, n! . rn where the necessary 
lb, appropriate action be ta ^ A t " h ^ vidc that sup- 
arrangcvionts do not already f^f^*'-? through a member 
Plies of the Administration xn ^a, burden of 

Government's country arc not subjected to 5 
Nation; ^ ^ ^ 

c. relief and rehabilitation suppXios^urn^s 
Administration be not sub j ec t od^ & manner - whic 
to the burden of any form oi Ministration^ 
Educes f.hn .sources of the Admim 



^ Administration bc^not subjeaca^^ a banner' which 
\thc burden of any 
"duces the resources 

of the Counca 

S That the appropriate Committee ^ and t 
^ith the relationship ^^llitatlon^o^^^ 
■ grated areas to relief an< V oration of re com* 

' of the problem and the P^epara ^ Councx i u 
Shaken for the ^ture guxdanee 
^ ^ relief and rehabilitation 



Council concern 
thcr taxes 
an cl that 



- 32 - 



RESOLUTION NO. 17 



A Resolution relating to procedures 
for ascertaining and meeting def- 
icits in supplies requiring im- 
portation 



(Reception No. 293) 

RESOLVED 

That the following shall be the policies of the ^min- 
istration with regard to procedures for ascertaining and 
meeting deficits in supplies requiring importation: 

A, POLICIES RELATING TO PROCEDURES FOR ESTIMATING AND 
MEETING INPORT REQUIREMENTS 

rtV over-all requirement 
I. Preparation and present ation_of_o*^^ 4 

; ¥ ^ rounc^l for Europe arid the 

1. The Committee P-f tne Counci ^ re 

Committee of the Council for -^f c i es to be adopted by 
mend, from time to time, as th0 committees 

the Council whatever^ ^for parts of their res- 
think appropriate l or 

rpective- 'areas. rec o !m enda- 

2. The Council ^"^^te^ne the polio es 
Uons and, from time to ^ ^ „ over-all esti^ 
to be adopted, on the °^J litat ion jequiremen 

Kates of relief and rehabiii 

te made, • Tuition v.ith the 

. tor r-eneral, in f^^ute estimates 

3. The Director te will co. &r&&s n 

appropriate regional coaml* SpSbve.d by the 

of over-all requirement si p0 iicies apj 
conformity with the base 
Council. 



- So ^ 




.requlreTttenf.Q 



rt n-epara t i on andn r q t n . T ^ 

R' - — " ■ + — ^ [;A Unn of ^ 



1. The Director Genera] ^ ' ^^H^ 

^omental allocating agencies th^f^. to the ^ter- 
J ents of an: country for which the L??^ 1CUlar re Huire- 
jaainistration has been requested tance of the 



rover 



2. In cases 
intended purchase 
governmental alio 
country liberated 

s in advance 
Director General 
programs. The Di 
agencies such rec 
of these re qui re in 
s ary to obtain a 
ilitaticn supplie 
rated or to-be- li 



where requirements or 
s are presented directl 
eating agencies by the 

or to-be-liberated, su 
01 their presentation, ' 
fully informed of such 
rector General may pre a 
ommenda t i on s or ot> j e c t i 
.ents or programs as he 
fair distribution of re 
s to and among the vari 
berated. 



programs of 
y to the inter- 
gc-vernment of a 
ch scvern- 
shall keep the 
requirements or 
ent to these 
ons in respect 
may deem neces- 
lief and rehab- 
ous areas libe- 



3. In determining what requirements he should pre- 
sent to t he inter- governmental allocating agencies in 
respect of countries for which the assistance of the 
Adsdnistration has been requested., and what recommenda- 
tions cr objections he should make in respect of require- 
ments presented by member governments directly to such 
agencies in order' to obtain a fair distribution of relief 
and rehabilitation supplies, as provided in paragraphs 
1 and 2 immediatelv preceding, the Director General shall 
pa; due regard to the degree of urgency of particular re- 
lief and rehabilitation requirements and tc the extent of 
damage suffered by member governments in a part or tne 
-hole of their respective areas as a result ox hostilities 
W of occupation by the enemy. 




4. It 

fully consul' 
■' •-n any matt*. ; 

under discussion, and where noce.-., ^ consu ltod. 
*b Committee on Supplies will likewise 



^•occdures 



for nhtM-^P; supply 



■ i t nara-raph 2, of tne 
1. Subject to Article I, P a £j^ r consultation 
dement, the Director General, a. - ^ governmental 



%n necessarv 



ZZ' smoropriate 1 » 00 %°I He 
v/itn the appi"* possible of 




;^nt any dislocation oi 
■;:-'r r> :/ resulting from procur 
Ministration. 

A The Eiroctor General will t s 



• Ac>r * ±t one 
con *iii through 



of 



eek, 



f f Wan dTosV important l nte p~&oj**£^ nd pro- 
.'/ .vropriate nation*! and. i allocations d 



sn- 



to 

^ Un ii, so that there 



arrange 
of supp 



for necessary 
their 



lie; 



in a 



toraf^^ 5 :^ promptly 



shi 



,11 be 



. r oa 



tod as 



-34- 



as possible balanced reserves w>h a , 

at the request of the Director S ? a11 bo available 

wherever the need arises. ' nftral v/henovor and 

5, Member ^ovorracni- <? v CT • 
ity in a liberated area wil 1 ^ " S .^? i ^r at ive author- 
and the appropriate regional coSittee r»°rt°* 5° n °^ 1 
as to , any surplus of supplies ^t&^%J*«g& m 
able in such area to meet, xvhen circuinslancerpormit 

^^^^ tion ****** *«<m*<^f^ 

4. The Director General will consult with the 
military command or other established control author- 
ities responsible for enemy or ox- enemy territories, 
with a view to securing information as to any surplus 
of supplies from, time to time available in such enemy 
or ox- enemy territories, f rom which relief and rehab- 
ilitation import requirements of liberated areas might 
be met* 

RECOmSNDATIONS RELATING TO PERIOD OF MILITARY RESPONSI- 
BILITY FOR CIVILIAN RELIEF AND REHABILITATION. 

With regard to the period when a liberated 
.litary control, the Council recommends to memb 



area is under 
r govorn- 



that : 



1 -hP military authorities bo invitee; to Advise 
L - ? i-ii In fullest extent consistent 

the Administration, to ttiw. ^ — — found in the 

with military security, "^^^^JbUitation re- 
area affecting civilian £ Planning and ostimat- 
ouiroiaents and supplies, ^ 
fife may be as accurate as possiolo. 




national government or i ^ - «=> 
cone o rnodi 



35- 



PART IV - ORGANIZATION wn. 

NATION AND AD; II K I STR AT 1 01: 



RESOLUTION NO* 13 



A Resolution fixing, the composition of 
the Cornrriittee of the Council for 
Europe 



(Reception No. 522) 



— !Ei lS 



In paragraph 5 of Article III of the Agreement there 
established a standing Conaiitteo o. ohe Council .or 



rope and, 
EREAS 



, 4-Viflt the said Committee 
he Agreement further provides tnaj ro rncil or their 
LI consist of all the members ol ™ territorics 
•Wtes, representing member & ov f y' momb crs of the 
;^in the European area and such otn. direct ly concerned 
ficil represent in G other e ;ovornrn.nw n - n t j c • 

the problems of relief ana rohabxli^ CounollJ .i a nd, 
^opean area as shall be appointed o? 

nrc o" are not defined 
b The terms -Europe" and "European <• 
111 Agreement; it is therefore 

of the 



an area" 



VtD it tec of th- 

¥yx& committee 

1. That for the purposes £ and "Europe.^ 

•-fl Tor Europe, the terms £ oStlro cjn*gS* a in the 
Cjbe construed to i lAClu i° lrn d, ^ d alX 
the British Isles, Icoa- 

lto *ranenn. 



-36- 



That the Committee ~ef i-Ti^ r^,„ ^ 
if the members of tho no^„?? U *24/? r Eu rope *all 

-heir alternates 
French Commit toe 



con sist of the members of the Council or t 
presenting Belgium, Czechoslovakia, the 



countr 



fc hc members ot • the Council or their alternates representing 
Brazil* Canada, ana the United States of .^crica. 

3, That the Central Committee is authorized to appoint 
odditional members to the Committee in cases of emergency 
between sessions of the Council, such appointments to con- 
tinue until the next session of the Council. 



37- 



RESOLUTION NO. 19 



A Resolution f ixing the coiroo-it- 



• ion 



(Rocopticn No. (282) 322) 

V.f'EHEAS 

In paragraph 5 of Article III of the UNRRA Agreement 
there is established a "Commit too of the Council for the 
Par East"; and, 

ffi REAS 

- The Agreement further provides that the said Committee 
n e v< f il consist of all tho monitors of the Council, or their 
altornates, representing member governments of territories 
within the F-~-r Eastern area and such other members of the 
Council representing other governments directly oor^rnod 
with the problems of relief and rehabilitation in the Far 
Estcrn area rs shall bo appointed by the Council J and, 



The terns "Far East" and "Far Eastern area" are not 
defined in the Agreement; it is therefore 

RESOLVED 

«-r f>e Committee of the 
1. Thr.t for the purposes of Baj|t ,, aria "Par 

Council for the Far East the includo eastern con- 

Eastern area" shall be construed * Islands, Aus- 

tinontal Asia, the Bast Indies , ^1^ PP ^ east om 
tralia, N,w Zealand, ana .ho 1 ^ 

Indian and western Pacific ^ ^ 

East shall consist of th,- m^m china, the * hepl<roda> 

tetos, representing £j£ lon , India, the A^ 

Jonuittee of national Commonwealth, - d 

»« Zealand, the PhiliPP^° tos of America, a> 

Kln 8 e«, end the United B t.t £Utho ^cd u 

3. That the ContraX C^ttoo 
«Wtat additional members to ^ Council, ^ Ooun cil, 
<**goncy between sessions sess ion 
K«ts to continue until th 



-58- 



RLSOLUTICII 110. 20 



A Resolution relating to the function 
pf the Committees of the Council ?o 
Europe and the Par Last 



(Reception No. (2G2) 322) 

RESOLVED 

That the functions of the Committee of the Council 
for Europe and the Committee of the Council for the Far 
East shall be : 

1. In 

and the Far 

special subcommittees as may be created, to recommend f: 
time to time, as policies to be adopted by the Council, 
whatever basis or' bases for overall requirements the 
Ccnrdttees think appropriate for the whole or parts of 
their respective areas; and to advise the Director General 
with respect to the computation of overall requirements 
for their respective areas in conformity with the oases 
and policies approved by the Council ; 

2. To advise the Director Gene ral * 
the fair and equitable app or orient oi .. /ithin the 
rehabilitation supplies avanaole to ar g the 
European and Far i^asteiu re u J - u . *>-<•'■ st him in secur- 
idiaini strati on may operate; an-. t_ ^^ n „ e c f any surplus 
ing the maximum product_cn anc in » ~ x \^ in each region, 
supplies which can be made avai^-^ V nter _ governmental 

by prolactin;- appropriate nat,o. - ts . 

action on the part of nemoer .^ovcr 

p-'iodic reports 
To receive and discuss the pex ministration 

and. activities ox ^ tQ advise 
^ - ; t. respec.tiyex^, measUre s to 



fc- Europe and the Far East rc-p- ^ r maasures to 

the Director General on ^ / ^ coordination^ ^ abili . 
^ist' displaced persons anu^ other relifj ana 
ftion in regard to » ea i ca ^ region; and 
tation problems common to - re p a bilitaticn 

iio*, relief ana * lv . to 
4. Generally to consider last, respective^ , ^ _ 
policies in Luropo and the * a |. jch polxtx^..^^ or his 
Emulate recomraendaticno - the Dxr « ; datio is t o 
c ^ such recormacndations x such recci.me Comlcil and 
JPPesentative ; and to tr J- .' tr:lbu tion to 
*e Director General for 
t:ie Central Committee. 



N 



-39- 



RESOLUTION NO. 21 



A Resolution fixing the composition 
of the Committee on Supplies 



SOLVED 

li That the Committee on Supplies shall consist of members 
Council or their- alternates representing Australia, 

+■ ion 8.1 

ct 
es 




• teeri 



ca: 



, p* -. n '*.4-L a ■}« oiithorized to make cmcr- 

. Phat the Central Comr.rn.ttce i fg^g^unoil. such appoint- 
anointments between sessions of the Ogaojlj^ 
to continue until the next session oi 



-40- 



RESOLUTION No. 22 

A Resolution relating to fchr> 
functions of the CommUtec 
on Supplies 

(Reception No. 298) 



Article III, paragraph 4 of the Agreement provides that 
v ae Committee on Supplies shall consider, formulate and recom- 
... r i to the Council and the Central Committee policies designed 
to assure the provision of required supplies," it is therefore 

SOLVED 

That the functions of the Committee on Supplies shall be: 

1. To advise the Council, the Central Gor.inittce, and the 
;iroctor General on general policies ro^ardin.n; the provision, 
financing and transport of supplies, 

2. To discuss with the Director General broad programs 

for securing the provision of supplies, as such programs affect 
supplying c oun t r i e s . 

3. To cooperate with the Director ^^^S&I 
lished inter-governmental supply and snxppx b ndations 
lag supply policies and, when necessary, ; ^k- agsuro thc 

•o supplement the actions of such agencies 
^lability of required supplies. 

4- „ r'r- ni* rsi and the cstab- 
. 4. To cooperate with the Rector J p^ 0 " ncios in efforts 

*d inter-governmental and ^ovorn^ q£ stippli0 s. 

■° increase production ana. thu avax 

DlreetoE Oonorjl^nd the xnter- 

;/ ---;i-.tal sur/ol;/ ana ^o^thoir'supplief a . d 

^botween contributing count3 f^ie manner; and that a 



5. To cooperate with the Direct. conco rned, so h 

ntal supply and pipping agency supp iios and ^ ^_ 
n contributing countries, ncr; and that any 

51 be drawH upon in an equitable^ ^ ^ arranged, 
^/financial adjustments amon 0 - t ifi-blc differences 

; 6. To consider whether there ^i^i^J^SJS^S the 
-Evaluations placed by ^ °o or m adc ,av - ding 

£. su PPlies and services P^^e recommendations ^ wQuld 
Juration, and make f^cssarj These recede 
^stmcnt'of such valuation. to country 

:.r d0 ^tor having given due r b thc con triD 
c Pc s Scd by th0 representative 

"kerned. 



-41- 



RESOLUTION NO. 23 



A Resolution relating to 
tho appointment of a 
Subcommittee of the 
Committee on Supplies 



RESOLVED 



That the Council approve the appointment by the 
chairman of the Committee on ^upplioa, .^J^Sal 
tionvdth the chairman of the ~ore than five members, 
Control, of a subcommittee 01 noi th0 Committee on 

of whom a majority woula bo cra^n J- pB dravm from the 
Supplies with tho other member °* that thiG subcom- 
Committee on Financial Oonti ox, subcommittee to 

aittoe be considered the appr op* determining 
advise the Director General rcl^t^ ^ pay> as pro- 
whether a Government is in a p ^ pl£m# 
vided in Section 17 of tnc - 1 



/ 



-42, 



RESOLUTION NO, 24 



A Resolution fixing the 
composition of the 
Committee on Financial 
Control 



SSSOIiVED 

1, That the Co^ittce on Financial ^J*^.. 
consist of the members of the Council or v ^ 
representing China, Greece , — £°f icpub llcs, the United 

, Union of Soviet S ocia lis * ^ ft . 
Kin;:cc4 and the united States of Amen . 



2. That the Central Co^ittoc^is au^ 
urgency apnointments bctv/oon .cj - rcxt session of 
such appointments to continue until 
the Council . 



-43- 



RESOLUTION i-ic ■. 25 

A Resolution rolatinc ^ +-i 

the Committee on FinanVio? ^-^iona of 

- x*i«xiciai Control 

HZ30LVED 

1. That the functions of the Cown-+ 
Control shall be: Cn ° GoinmittG o on Financial 

a*. To review the annual budgets and any sup- 
plementary budgets of the Director Genera 1 and to 
mkc reports, comments and recommendations to the 
Council on tnese buagots. 

b. To receive the auartcrly reports of the Di- 
rector General on Administrative expenditures and 
receipts and to mr.::e reports to the" Council regarding 
them. 

c. To recommend auditors to the Council and to 
advise the Council regarding the scope and frequency 
of the reports to be obtained from the auditors. 
Such auditor's reports shall cover, in particular, 
the system of accounting employed by the Administra- 
tion, * the funds expended in the purchase and received 
from the sale of supplies, the liabilities of the 
Administration and , " generally, any matters of sub- 
stance which the auditors may raise on examination 
of the Administration's accounts. 

d/ To make recommendations to the Council regarding 
the share of the administrative expense f f ^l^ mri ' 
tPfition to be provided by each member government. 

. „ effect, if any, v/hich 

e. To give attention to the " 1 Ad ^ nistrr . fc .ion of 
the receipt and expendi ture by U-o^ac ^ Soction 19 of 
local currency proceeds, roic^ ^ in fiation in any 
the Financial Plan, may navo upon x ^ operate, ana 
country in v.hich the Adminxstrutxo^^ ^ rolflt ion to 
sake recommendations r.s to h mfiy aid in 

&ch receipts or expenditure^ - 
*+ J, 4^1. +•. -? onary t r en 

.; i nn aD 1 f inan- 
Councll on , n1atra _ 



h receipts or expenditures w 
counter ac ting inflationary trena 

*. Generally to ^vi-^^^^f ^^jf 
1 matters within the compc ^ thc scope 



pal matters within one ^£ Vld thin 
li on other than those faiJ-i 
feiittec on Supplies. raX upon any of the 

^ g. To advise the D i^ c ^ r rcq uests. 

Agoing matters when h. y authorized to^ 

? i roimnitteo is /Vn regard to 

2 « That thc Central Com. ^ ssa ry J- n 



-44- 



RESOLUTION NO. 26 

Resolution relating to « 
composition or standiL ?° l' r ? at;ion an * 
committees. lng technical 



(Reception No. (2^2)322) 



SHEAS 



Many of the policy problems of the Council and of 
its rcgional committees arc highly technical in character! 

SSREAS 

In paragraph 6 of article III of the Agreement, the 
:rc^.tion of standing; technical committees is authorized; 
it is therefore 

sbsolved 

1. That the Council hereby creates standing technical 
conEiittccs on: 

Agriculture 
Displaced Persons 
health 

I ndu s t r i al R chab ilit a 1 1 on 
Welfare 

•, ~i I ^~~-i<-t of such members 
'2. That such committees f - al ^.^^or General their 
•-■c Council as indicate to the uxi . ^ comm ittee or 
Mention to participate in the wo ru. - h mcmbcrs of 
•^ttcos, or of alternates nominated oj rnatcs to 

•Council no shall elect to ao so sucn g roln ting to the 
Jf c ss special competence xn tn^ _ t nominated. 
n the committee to v/hich tnuj 

. Q >. r ebv authorized 
That the Central Commltt co Jj - ^ regard to 
l^c any further arrangements n c emergency appoi 
; »°rk of these committees rno ^ h appoxntmcn 

ft between sessions of the ^ c ^' tlic Council. ■ 
' Bo *tinuG until the next session 



-45- 



li^SOLUTIo:- i:o. 27 

A resolution re latin-- 4-v, 
functions of the fe r !°^ he 
on Agriculture 0am ^ t ^P 

(Reception tfo*. (282) 322) 



^SOLVED 



That the_ functions of the standing technical Com- 
mittee on Agriculture shall be? 

1. To advise the Council, the Central Committee and 
the Director General as to the nature of and scope of 
problems relating to agriculture, fisheries and food 
production and the rehabilitation of industries concerned 
therewith in areas in which the Administration will 
operate t 

2. Periodically to review; the programs of the 
Ainini strati on with regard to agriculture, fisheries^ 
food production and' related subjects, and consult with 
the Director -General thereon with respect to any sug- 
gested modifications; 

SB 3. To formulate proposals on teclmical policies in 
regard to agriculture, fisheries and fooa Pg^Shiwwlth 
fee rehabilitation of the industries ^^^^ritS uie 
«d related subjects, discuss ^P^SJ.^ftS^ 
Director General, and transmit such PJ°P°g" oll and the 
Rector General for distribution to the Counci-L 
Central Committee; and 

ni ■ u ° tion with the 
• 4. When requested by and in con ^ F East 

""stees of the Council ^or^^ope hereaf ter be 

he 

the 

Sector General in the region concer ^ the rc.^bil 

^culture, fisheries ana therewith ana related 

a {ion of the industries concerned 
Ejects. 



-46- 



RESOLUTION Ho. 28 

A Resolution rel - 

functions o?°fe^it^ 
on Displaced Persons 

(Reception No. (282) 322) 



RESOLVED 



That the functions of the standing technical 
Committee on Displaced Persons shall be: 

1. To advise the Council, the Central Committee 

and the Director General on the organization of the work 
of the Administration in assisting in the repatriation 
and return of persons who have been obliged to leave 
their hones as a result of the war • 

2. Periodically to review the programs of the 
A&rinistraticn with respect to displaced persons with 
a view te calling the attention of the Council to any 
features in those programs which in their view require 

ification; and 

3. When requested by, and in consultation with, 
the Committees of the Council for ^rope or icr tac 
Far Last or such other regional co^ W as may here 

after bo established, to ^P^ n *^f representative of 
the regional committee and ^^wi ^ ncd v;ith respect 

/the Director General in one ro t ,iu.i 
to problems of displaced persons. 



-47- 



RBSOLXJTIQN MO. 29 

A Resolution rd^-iv, *. 

functions of th n Q to thc 
on Health • Co:;inittGC 



(Reception (202)322) 

LsOLVED . 

That the functions of the standing technical Oommitto 
:-nXth shall be I 

1, To advise the Council, the Central Committee and the 
Sector General as to the nature and scope of problems 
relating to health, medicine, and. nutrition in areas in which 
ic Admini s t r a t i on v/ i 1 1 operate; 



c on 



9 



Periodically to reviev; tiiq programs of thc Adninis- 
ation in thc health, medical, nutrition and related fields, 
i consult with the Director General thereon with respect to 
i suggested modifications; 



3. T 0 formulate' oro^osals on technical policies relating 
.health, medical, nutrition and related fields discuss such 

Us with the Director General, and transmit such pro- 
wtLsto thc Director General for transmission to the Council 
id to the Central Committee; and 

4. «h=n requested by, and in consultation^ the Cem- 
Ittoos of the Council for the Far Ease or^J * Established, 
A other regional committees as aay -^cai^ ooran ittoo and 

; "Joint subcommittees to aaviso _ al ln the rcjion 

»*tar representative °f the proctor .er.. ^ problons . 

*W»4, with respect to health and reia 



-48- 



RESOLUTION NO. 30 

A r?^ t±0n rclat in 3 to the 
functions of the Committee 
on Incius trial Rehabilitation 



(Reception No. (282)322) 

RESOLVED 

That the functions of the standing t cchnical Committee on 
Industrial Rehabilitation shall be: 

1, To advise the Council, the Central Committee and the 
Director General as to the nature of and scope of problems in 
fields relating to the rehabilitation of public utilities and 
services, to the rchabilit ation of industries producing 
urgently needed goods, and to rehabilitation supplies in areas 
iavhich the Administration will operate; 

2. Periodically to review the programs of the Adminis- 
tration in such fields of industrial rehabilitation, and con- 
sult with the Director General thereon with respect to any 
suggested modifications! 



formulate proposals on technical policies relat- 
, w «io rehabilitation of public ^^i^TZlt^ 
tho rehabilitation of industries producing WVtod 



3. To 

to the r< 




;: ! ods, an 
os ais with 

a the Director Gcncr 
ntral Commit to 



a in consultation with the Com- 
4. Vihon requested by, and in ®°^2tSo Far "Cast or such 
Dittoes of the Council for »c o. ; o - ^ oata biishod, to 
^regional committees as ^ may hero ax ^ comittoo and the 
appoint subcommittees to adviso tno r ^ nora i in the region 
*4*£ representative of tho Director o £% iustria l rehabilitation, 
-••-corned, with respect -co proc — 



49 - 



RESOLUTION Mo. 31 
A Resolution r-li^v 

(Reception No. (282) 322) 

RESOLVED 

LSSo^Kf° n8 0t th ° Co.nittce 

1. To advise the Council, the Contra! Committee, and 
the Director General as to the natv.ro and scope of welfare 
problems in areas in which the Adminib tration will be 
operating: including the direct provision to vie tins of 
war of relief through other than normal economic channels 
of distribution^ emergency measures for the care of chil- 
dren, expectant and nursing mothers, the aged and disabled, 
and other victims of war ; and the measures necessary to 
secure the effective cooperation iji this work of voluntary 
relief organizations; 

2. Periodically to review the programs of the Adminis- 
tration in the above fields and consult with the Director 
General with respect to any suggested modifications; 

3. To formulate proposals on technical policies 
relating to welfare problems , discuss sucn Proposals with 
the Director General, and transmit such proposals to the 
Director General for distribution to the Council ana 
Central Committee; and 

a ., »nn suit at ion with the 

4. When requested by ft nd in cpnsux ^ Far East 

ftaitteoj of the Council for ^^/^s may hereafter be 
»Tor such other regional coinmttcos a ad £ iso the 
^tablished, to appoint s^cori,u« J OSC ntativo of the 
regional committee and trio c ^ c £ 0 ^ no d, with rospoc. to 
doctor General in the region concen 
,el faro problems . 



-50- 



RESOLUTION NO. 32 

Resolution relating to faclliti^ 
and immunities for tV- *2™Ji* Z > 

tion, its Councii r , n ^ cc SS?-^- 
mcmocrs and its staff 



(Rocoption No. (282) 322) 

V/HEREiVS 

The Council is desirous of ensuring to the Administra- 
tion and its agents the independence necessary for the 
efficient performance of the duties entrusted to then, and 
6| avoiding- the imposition of financial burdens upon the 
funds contributed by mcmbor governments to the Administra- 
tion; it is therefore 

RESOLVED 

I. That the Council recommends 

1. That the member governments accord to thc_ 
^ministration the facilities, pr i vi 1 egos, immune - 
ties, and exemptions v;hich they accord to each 
other, including 

a. E»niW fro,, suit and legal 

y ■> i n ^-p -i-Vir Administration, 
or on behalf of, tno i 

b. inviolability f^Si^^Sn;^ • 
and of the archives of Lb- -- d nl£ 

f , n , r f' rora taxation, including 

c. Exemptions iron* 

cu s t oms du t i e s ; 

1 1 i t - iO s m res— 

d. Exemptions from or^ac^^^ 

poet of foreign oxen^ng .^^ ^ 

.n-.-rnaonts talco nny_ - -,i. n istra- 

2. That member fovornm ^ tfcc Aa ^ 
thov may consider nocoss.*xv jurls dle**gn o 
tion-to'exercise wxthxnjho^ pppn ^. pn 1, • 

conferred on it oj — <■ 

Accent. , nts accord W.fgS*^ 

3. That n»»bcr ^^fen thcCo^c^f « 
tive's of noatJor c ovc^n i!as and <^ of the 
committees and to the oil c „ tt*£J. 8 nnd xr.,:n,n, 
Ministration- when ^llowinC.P^f 
.'.Ministration, the terra*"' - 

tics in their rcspooti 



-51- 



a. 

in r 



a. immunity from legal «.« 
jospoct of acts F^rffrmed Sv*^ ° f ^ 

official capacity and fail? y thcm in their 
functions as such; ailn S within their 

b. immunity from taxation « 
salaries, allowances or othoS n ? rric1 ^ 
reprosontativos, officii?! emoiumonts as 
Administration j ' ° r ° m Pl°yos of the 

c. the same immunities from immigration 
restrictions, alien registration an^Sn?* 
service obligations and the same facilities 

as regards exchange restrictions as are accorded 
to representatives, officials and employes of 
similar ranK of other member governments; 

d. any further privileges and immunities 
that the Director General may request as 
necessary to safeguard representatives, offi- 
cials or employes in the territories of any 
r.iomber government where they are engaged and 
particularly those engaged in field operations 
in the areas in which the Administration .-nay 
bo undertaking relief and rehabilitation. 




4. That the member governments make ^^"g! 
arrangements with the Director General foi bho appli 
cation of the foregoing recommendations. 

, o-t-Q t-hc Director General 
II. That the Council requests tnc uxz 

~ ¥ i - t- i ons wi th member 

1. To initiate immodi a ^^|^ts!±n*o operation. 
Sovernmcnts .to bring: such, arr.ah^m. 

as rapidly as possible; ^ ember 

2. Wherever appropriatp^WS^SSS^^ 
governments with a view to f s , \^^ C3 
above-mentioned facilities, g£J Xe to facilitate 

exemptions as may bo ^ 
the work of the Administration. 



52- 



RESOLUTION NO. 33 



A Resolution relating to immuni- 
ties and priorities for transit 
goods 



(Reception No. 299) 



BSS0LV3D 



That the Council recommends that each member govbrh- 
ikt expedite to the extent possible supplies and equip- 
ment of the Administration in transit, and that it exempt 
such supplies and equipment of the Administration from 
Averse legal action or seizure. 



RESOLUTION NO. 



34 



A Resolution relating to 0 f tt » 
c orro s p 6nd a n * « « / to .?**a.ci 

tration 



(Reception No. (232) 322) 

WHEREAS 

Tho Council recognizes the need for .>x«odit««n 
economy and secrecy in tho transmission of w t.i 
correspondence of the Adminis trationT it is Afford 

H5S0LVSD 

I. That the Council rccomraonds 

1. That the member governments accord to the 
official correspondence of tho Administration 

a. the .«?' ic treatment as is accorded by them 
to the official correspondence of other member 
government s , inc luding : 

(i) priorities for telephone and telegraph 
communications , whether cable or radio, and 
for mail transmitted by pouch or by courier. 



(ii) Government rebates for offici 
grams . 



ai yvAW 



pouc 



(iii) Diplomatic status for couriers and 
ic'hos of the Administration.. 



(iv) Under appr oprij- f ^ial corros- 

ion from censorship ^ 
ondence of the Administration. 



fUn nrrangomonts for tho u.c 
(v) Appropriate arrang^ for tho tole- 

of codes and of cable ad<^o ^ Ad , ninlstr ,.t: i .on. 
graphic correspondence 



b. Appropriate postal iacj.^ f^fas 
such franking privileges or rin tod stains 

use of specially printed oi 

may bo possible. n ,.. c o3snry 

H r rovernments na.o any } 

2. That the membox f.ov Gonora l ?™ 

pwangomonta with the emendations . 

Nation of the foregoing x - • 



54- 



II. That the Council rcau^i-, 4-v ^ 

requests the Director General 

governments*^ SrLg^uch^^ 60 ' 1 ^ 1 ^ 3 with ^cr 
Is rapidly as possible arr ^gements into eperatien 

2. Wherever appropriate, to annroaoh ««« ™,wh™ 
governments with a view to thoL grlnt I^S of ?hc 
above-mentioned facilities, privifeges, LmuniUes 
and exemptions as may be desirable to facilitate the 
work of the Administration. 



-55- 



R230LUTI0N NO. 55 



A Resolution relating to commun- 
i cat ions with neutral govern- 
ments 



(Reception No. 299) 

RESOLVED 

That the Council recommends that member government 
extend to the Director General technical facilities for 
communicating with governments neutral in the present 
conflict . 



\ 



-56- 



Rh SOLUTION NO. 36 

A Resolution rolatin C to travel facilities 
for the st*>.ff of the Administration 

(Reception No. (282)322) 

BHEREAS 

The Council has in mind the : inportence of securing 
t^c expeditious and 'unhindered travel of officials and 
employees of the Administration necessary to permit the 
prfcmpt fulfillment by the Administration of the urgent 
tasks entrusted to it; it is therefore 

RESOLVED 

I. That the Council recommends: 

V That the Director General issue to officials 
Yoyoes of the ^f^cSnn-SfyinS 

KM " f £ foy o S h^o^c Sondes 
of the Administration that ...1 approj 
be granted to the bearer. 

•i-o rrtvc full recogm- 

2. That all member S°J c ^^ct thoir diplomatic, 
ticn to such docVJiicnts and -ns sorvicC s and any 

consular, customs end linm £f^ncomcd to recognize 
eoaoux-j. , , „ ^ 0 conc-..-^ ,, ar)T:)ro „ 

other services ,;hlc ;Vf.;{, n „ the bearer to 

such documents ns entitling 

priate facilities. vlS as the 

3. That in re f oct to 



steps 

for" the tr.-.vcl of government 
on official business . n6COSSE ry 
travel, _ pt s make any ap piica- 

^ moW bor ,crovornment^ rnl for the I 
5. That the mem piroctor u nS . 
arrangements with the inmon d..t- 
tion of the foregoing 



-57- 



II. That the council rcauosts the Director Gcncr,! 

^v^Jrt-l^b^-T""' 0 negotiations with member 
r^as^&f ^ansomonta into operation 



2. 



forever appropriate, to approach non-mcmbcr 
governments v.itn a view to- their granting such of the 
above-mentioned facilities, privileges, immunities 
Mid exemptions as nay be desirable to facilitate the 
v;ork of the Administration. 



-58 



RESOLUTION no. 3 



37 



A Resolution rela+*„ 
Person policies 6 t0 



(Reception No. 



322) 



WHEREAS 



The Council desires to m» 
international civil service; and, th ° concc P t of a truly 

WHEREAS 




its administrative officers nnd VZJr V. . Wl11 bcco ^ c 
staff; and that the vestal; E^tS^^^S 1 ^ 
executive authority and responsibility in the Director 

tieral^ requires that he act with the greatest possible 
freedom in ohc selection of personnel and the establish- 
ment of personnel standards; it is therefore 



RESOLVED 



1. That the staff of the Administration should be 
of an international character, solo ctod upon the basis 

of individual competence, character and integrity, \ ithout 
discrimination on the grounds of sex, race, nationality 
or creed, and recruited uoon as wide a geographic basis 
as is possible, compatible with efficient administration; 

that salary standards bo established at a sufficiently 
Wgh level to make it possible for the. administration to 
secure the employment of persons possessing the nigne-st 
qualifications within their own particular field ox 

>avor; and that duo consideration should bo given to 
Especial problems which will arise £guso of the^ 
v ^ing salary standards that will prevail in tne 
Entries in which the Administration will operate. 

2. That the Council recommends 

„_ n f S endeavor to make 

a. That all ^-mbor sovernmc nt^e ^ 
available to the Aamini strati on mj tc 
om civil service 'as the ^^ trrtion; and to take 
to join the staff of the ^ ig* s e , tablisho d rights 
proper stops to ensure that t bo ;ln n o way adversely 
and status of such P^'^ y employment by the 
affected by their temporary 
■'administration, 

b. Th 

the s amc 
as may be 




-59- 



RESOLUTION NO. 38 

A Resolution relating to tho adminis- 
trative budget and the allocation 
of adtnini s tr at i vo expens c s 

(Reception No. 322) 



RESOLVED 

1 That the annual budget covering the necessary 
R dministr"tive expenses of the Administration for the 
licndrr year 1944 and the unclapsod part of tho year 
iSS submitted by the Director General in the amount of 
'10,000,000 is hereby approved. 

2. That the total amount ot r gLO 000 .O^ngg* 
in the preceding paragraph is ^°^*2 a . 
governments in the following proper ..on. . 



/ 



-60- 



Australia 
Belgium 
Bolivia 
Brazil 
Canada 
Chile 
China 
Colombia 
Costa Rica 
Cuba 

C zc cho s 1 o vak i a 
D okiri i c an R e publ i c 
Ecuador 
Egypt 

El Salvador 
Ethiopia 

French Committee cf !!• • ..-nal 

Liberation 
Greece 
Guatemala 
Haiti 
Honduras 
Iceland 
India 
Iran 
Iraq 
Liberia 
Luxembourg 

sxico 
Netherlands 
New Zealand 
Nicaragua 
Norway 
Panama 
Paraguay 
Peru 

Philipp3- ncs 

Poland <fri - C o 

Union of South Xric 

U.S.S.R. 

United Kingdom 

U.S..'.. 

Uruguay 
Venc zucla 
Yugoslavia 



Percentage 

1 . 56 

1.00 
.10 

1.50 

3 . 00 
.20 

5.00 
. 30 
. 05 
.20 

1.00 
.05 
. 05 
.70 
.05 
. 05 

4.00 
.50 
.05 
.05 
.05 
.05 

4.00 
.10 
.10 

♦ 0l* 
.05 
.70 

1.50 
.50 
.05 
.50 
.05 
.05 

• ■- ■ ' 

. 05 
1.00 
1.00 
15.00 
15.00 
40.00 
.20 
.10 

iToo 



-61 



RESOLUTION NO. 59 



A Resolution relating to the 
salary of the Director Gtofeoral 

HESOLT 3D 

A . , n?v ,.. fn „ iiono^ai bo the salary of 
That tho salary of ^ J^gf ^ 6 tidont of the United States 
A Wbops of tho Cabinet ox the irosia 

of Aaac'rica 0 



-62- 



RESOLUTION NO. 40 



Resolution relating to the 
rules of procedure of the 
Council and the rules of 
standing committees of the 
Council 



SOLVED 



(Reception No. (286)322) 



That the Rules of Procedure of the Council attached hereto, 
together with Annex I thereto, Rules of Standing Committees of 
the Council, shall be the rules of procedure of the Council and 
the rules of Standing Committees of the Council. 



RESOLUTION NO. 41 



Solved 



A Resolution relating to regu- 
lations with respect to expendi- 
tures and receipts of the Admin- 
istration 

(Reception No. (289)322) 



That the Council adopts the regulations 

Annex II to 1/1X0 



shall be considered 
'%e of the Council. 



as 



attached hereto 
Rules of Pro- 



63 - 



Article i 
• S ° Ssioi H or the Counc il 

h In accordance with article ttt <^ *. ■ 
the Agreement, the Council shall ^ " ' so ^ t ^ on 2 » of 
session by the Central Co^itoo St^i^tSiSfr 

ri J Ti^fr^^} 11 — session whoever 
the Contrrl Co-mnittoo shell doom necessary, and sh.il 
bo so convened within thirty days nfter the request there- 
for by one-third of tho members of the Council. Such 
request shall bo communicated to the Director General 
who sh^ll transmit it forthwith to tho Central Committee. 

2, The Director General, after consultation with 
the Central Commit too , shall fix tho time and r>lace of 
the first meeting of orch scission of the Council end 
shall notify the member governments* not loss then sixty 
days in fdvpnc 3 of a ro;.--ul-"r session "and not loss than 
three weeks in advance of a sooci^l session. 

3 -'3 a general rule, the plenary meetings of the 
Council shall bo nubile, but tho Council may decide th-t 
cn y meeting shall bo held in or i v.- to. 

a kli decisions of the Council which may heve 
boon taken a.t a Private mooting shall be announced et an 
early oublic meeting of the Council. 

Article II 

Officers of the Cotfnc. il 

»«h eossion of tho Council, 

1. At the opening of ^ fc he Council has 
the Director General shall ^ 
elected a Chairman for tho . 

-, a ftAT- consideration of the 

2 Th e Council shall , eft £ J^na ol8C t a Chairman 

r.oort'of th. Committee on ^minations. Chairman 

^ throe ^'ico-Chairmon ^3 until ^^lt 
™d Vice-chairmen sn u 9l f ct ??i«tv of the Chairman 

the session at which tney ineoility 01 tod for 

:th 3 death, rosighfition or o chflirmrn snail ^ 
to complete his term, 
tho unexpired term. 

4. ti is used in those 

Rules of Procedure end^j of thu 
construed to moan f ; plJ ^ or ity. 
r rrflvernment or -- 



- 6 4 



3. In addition to hi 

the Chairman by those Rules o?^ ^ ovriVS conferred uoon 
gaolara the owning rnd oloslL ^^ ' ho ^ il ° n 
Council, He shell direct the fi^ 6r ? h ^ting of tho 
Insure observance of these 3; n ClScussi °ns of the Coimc'n 
the right to address tho GouSc?? ° f Ucord ? 

Council, and announce the rG<mT7l ^ ^©stions to the 

8U * ta 0j - all votes. 

4. In the absence of tho nw< 
or any ofirt thereof, one of ?• ? during r meeting, 
rotation according to the ^,v b H- fc *« fc* 
governments which they roorasenf 12 n -, °* der of tho 
ChairmPn acting as Chairman shsli h^\£ r ° s3dG ' - VIco ' 
grid duties rs the Chairman tn ' s ' r ' tn - bowers 

5. The Chairman, or a Vice-Chairman nct3nc PS 
Chairman, shall not vote but any appoint an rltfrn*t to 
net as the reorosontative of his glvernmen? on ?Se CouncU. 

1 

Article in 

The Director General 

1. Tho Director General or his representative may 
attend Pnd address any mooting of tho Council rmd of its 
committG3S rnd subcommittees rnd rar-y or ■rticior.tc in tho 
discussions, but may not vote, 

\4 

Article IV 

IS 

Th e S o o retar 5 g t_ 
- — 

1. T„ aocordfinoe with article IV, Section 4, of tho 
Agreement, the Dir ector Oenor, ,1 or uoon his r.uthor 

tlon the Deouty Directors. General, sh.ll supo-^af 
secretariat and other st^ff rnd tocludlae 
required bythoo™ rnd ^ c °^ litoos , 
ions'l commit to-.-' 

-» ^ fl n v>o r»o sponsible for 

2. Tho Director ^^^^f ^societarint of 
the organization and direction ox the - 



tho Council* 

„ , +u<* Secretariat to 

3. It shall be the duty of th- re 

^onslafce rnd district. committees; t< 



* > 

I j! 
i:- 



Hi 



I 



H 

u 



and its committees, to 0 Council - perform 

mendetions of commit t^s Committee, -nd 

to tho Council nnd tho Con^r^ .^ aU r , q u.r,, 
such other work as ' _ member govern- 

. w ««t shall districut. » t th0 Pgi mda ., 
■ 4 . The secrotsrirt S ^ '^Sfible in advance 

ments orooos.ls f . oth^;^ M 
of any session ol en- se , ssi on, 
of tho ooening ot sucn 



f': 



- 65 ^ 



Article v 




2. The time and nlace of 
Central Committee shall be fit 5 ! meetings of the 
after consultation with the m«™>Lv? t] l e Dirs ctor General 
Committee. he ******* of the Central 



held 



3. 

in 



The meetings^ the Central Committee 
orivste unless it shall, by 



shall be 



decide that any meeting shail oe ZblT™™* ^ ' 



4. In accorda 
the Agreement, the 
oarticinat ion of th 
ment at those of it 
interest to such £o 
invite the oarticip 
as Chairman of the 
at those of its mee 
provision ot sumoli 



nee with 
Central C 
e rerrrese 
s meeting 
v eminent 
ation of 
Committee 
tings at 
es are di 



Article III, section 3, of 
ommittee shall invite tJ 3 
ntative of any member govern- 
at which action of special 
is discussed. It shall 
the representative serving 

on Supplies of the Council 
which policies affecting the 
scussed • 



5. The minutes of each meeting of the Central Com- 
mittee shall be sent as soon as possible to members of 
the Central Committee and to the representatives of 
these member governments participating in such meeting 
of the Central Committee, who shall, within forty-eight 
hours, inform the Director General of any corrections 
£hich they may desire to have made in the record of their 
^ remarks. 7 Am corrected, the minutes shall be m«a 
with the Director General and communicated oromo.l} 
each member government of the Administration. 



6. At each 
General shall render a 
Central Committee since 
Council . 



p Rnuncll. the Director 

session of the Councix, 

full report on the wor 

the ore ceding ses»j>y" 



■Comm 



1. At th 
shall elect a C 
eleven members 



Article VI 

,, oH bn of the Council 
ramittee 0r£a£iza£i22 — ~ — 

opening of each 



sessior 



the Council 
consisting of 



3 opening ^ nat ions consis^ub ~; 

omSittee on Nominatio ±ttee shall 

■r Council? L t „ fhe offices of 

eleven members of the ions for the 01 

submit to the Council nomin Council, bod by 

Chairman and Vice f g^eral C^i^f e ^ h ^tanding or 
four members of the Gene * . men ts to eacn , nl)oln t. 



four members of 
the Council, end- 
other committee of 
merits may be required* 



for appointments^ whi£jh n; 



the 



'Council for 



tho: 



ttee 



Whenever the term 
Rules of Procedure, ^ f 
Cormnitt3o on 3upp3- ioS 



tending eoffl «^ tru . 
^ Council. 



0a0n °inol"c3 the 



to 



2. the onom*^ 

shrll establish , G i? f oach se Ss1n 
Chairman nnd Vice Ch»T~ Go ™mitw i ' tho Council 
of the Central Cornell** 1 ** ° f 8oS2S* at *ne ^ the 

by tho Council. Tho G q£' f? d four other i^5 e raQ ^er S 
tho concurrence of the at? ftl Go ^ittee ^ h ??? bers footed 
the Director General \^2 Uncl1 find in l }> «*Ject to 
of the Council, set^h^T^ orSS'g'** ^ With 

fix the time ? ,d olact 0 f ^ £ f *dJournmen? Q f U ?^ as 
decide wh»t matters I °f ch meet 5 Su-in *.£ he session 

n, SS ueon the erevL^n^° b ° con ^^o ^ n J e ■•••.ion, 
;.rticle VIII. of those gSLs g o? d S lft ^^rSLettitS 111 ^ 
the work -of all committees %? ^°2 edw **^o^Sdte- 
session and otherwise llciljta^e duri »S the 

of the business of the Council ^L*? 6 ord ^ly dispatch 
Chairman of the Council shn\ l Rd its committees. The 
the meetings of the General CoSSttSe ^ nreside at 

5, Subject to the orovisi 
Agreement, the Council shall "-? S ° f *" rticle HI of the 
report of the Committee on KomiwL C ° n 4 deration of the 
member governments to be reore^ed ™ J 681 ? 18 *! the 
Supplies, the Committee of the cSuncn r tae ^ Co ^ tt ^ on 
Committee of tho Council for ?h« £ f ? r durOTe ' the 
standing committees, o^l^ ^ 
mittees, as the Council may establish. ^ onniCfil com " 

fVl n 4 * f? accordance with ..rticle III of the agreement, 
the Council snail, after consideration of the report of 
the Committee on Nominations, appoint. the members of all 
standing technical committees which the Council may from 
time to time establish. 

5. The rules of procedure explicable to all •stand- 
ing committees of' the Council are set forth in ...nnox I 
to these Rules of Procedure. 

6. The Council may appoint, or in o articular cases 
authorize the appointment of, such temporary or special 
committees as may be required for advice or investiga- 
tion, or for renort on specific matters. Unless the 
Council decides otherwise, each temporary or social 
committee shall elect its own chairman and, if deemed 
necessary, a vice-chairman ^™^^^e£i.^ 

of these committees shall end when their r ^ ^ 

assignments have been completed or wnen 
cecidos . 

. oH( , ng r . ro submitted to the 

7. Even when nominations ere Ruleg q{ 
Council bv any committee pursuant jto ^J^rs of the 
Procedure and any i.nnex there w , imo osed by 
Council shall, within the ^^J;. the rig ht to^pro- 
-rticle III of the agreement, -^ X th&n those nominated 
^ose end to vote for persons ■ 

b 7 such committee. 

Article VII 
^^en^noe of O^ervers 

, fch e Central c <^*!£ 'organizations 
1. The Council and the , international org 

observers, or may lnvlt 1^^1*1*** * e ^tend all or any 
non-member governments bser vers, ^° tic ioate in 

agencies or others to send o eof or to pa under such 
°f their meetings or ^t- wifch ?^i Committee, 

such meetings or oarts ther- Central - ltat ions s^ 11 

Editions as the Council o aU sue 

actively, shall determi General 
b § tran^it-.Ld by the PAr e 



- 67 - 



Article VIII 
..g.end a 



1. The provisional arendri nf 
Council shall be propped by tL so ? sion of tho 

shall include Gne Director General, and 

(a) all items oroposod by the Council at anv 
orovious session- ""^u. eix: any 

(b) all items proposed by the Central Committee; 

(o) all items nrooosed by any member of the Council 
and transmitted to the Director General at 
least ten days in advance of the session; and 

(d) any item which the Director General desires to 
out before the Council. 

2. The provisional agenda shall be communicated to 
member governments as far as possible in advance of "nd 
not lass than three weeks before the ooening dry of the 
<e«s^on. Items transmitted to the Director General too 
late for inclusion will be at once communicated to mem- 
ber governments. 

m , „ • _ • ^„ - -i pCTftnds so communicated shr.ll 

3. The provisional. - S©naa so o submit ted to 

ooening of any session. 

4 . Th o Council m,, I**** or add t0 *? 
pgendr . 

Article IX 

^ Pn^rril Business 

v^r»«?«l which may 0» f - rmP i action by 
1. Every involves form,..^ .^ 

Council by a member and wn r;p sh,U i aOT ro- 

the Council on any -torn of Councxl to ^. ^ 

be referred by th ® ^Jwut ees . No »°™2 ftl until a 
oriate committee or commi^ such proposa ^ 

be taken by the c o^\ommitta3 or h f f the Council, 
report theraon by such |^ ^ members oi determine 
presented and circulated Tar bs practicable, 

unless the Councxl » u In ^o r the 

otherwise. Such report s ^ nour^ ^ votos 

be circulated at ^ s £ ounC il takes 
meeting at which an- 



ther eon. 



- 68 ■„ 



2. The chairman or p^-^, 

be accorded Preference for^t-C r a com ™itt>o- shall 
defending the report of the. cowS.it tee* ° f QXDlp ' inin S or 

3, During tho discussion na 

bcr may move the previous quo*t?~n ? !S J^ 3S tion, any mom- 
.,y such motion shall ^o^^l^t^^ ' 

' Tf m ^?L«S rt - r ' ny time ™>™ the closure of the 

deoate. If rpnli^tion is made to speak against tho 
closure it may oe accorded to not more than two speakers. 
If tno Council decides in favor of tho closure, the Chair- 
mcn shall declare the closure of the debate. 



Article X 
Voting 



1. majority of the members of tho Council shall 
constitute a quorum for any formal action by the Council, 
exceot that for any proposal to amend the .'groomont 
three -fourths of the members shall constitute a quorum. 

9 Each member government represented on tho Council 
or on any of its committees or subcommittees shall have 
only one vote. 

3. Shan any roop^nt.tlvu is unrbl. to *ttono one 

or more mating* of tb o Couaci ^^^g^Jhlll be 

by en »»»t'. h l h ; o t£e Council, 

communicated to the on* 

4. Except as otherwise ^*^J&&Ztf 

or by these Rules of /^ejur*, «g^s£it, vote of the 
Council shall require an ami 
members present, 

^ be by show of bands exceot as 
5 t Voting steal 1 Dy 
hereinafter provided. _ ^ ^ vo to 

6 m case of doubt^s to W & r3Cord vote 
b. in c.o chairman sn.-iJ- 

by show of hands, tno 

to be taken. all cases where 

, „^ 0 shall be taken i _ cnfc . 

7 record vot<- wj J - by fc^e -g roUl 

a special majority " * on any quos- 

. vQt<J sh a.ll r.lso do - thfln five mem- 
o , record vot- ? , by not 1( 7* lrm?n in 
tion if requested in p ^ S^'to t ? of hands, 

bers of the Council "^j^dlat* 3 * 

advance of the vo$e or filing uoon 

be tak-.n W vornm ents 

members in the ei.^ 
which they r >prosQn*i 



60 L; 



10. The vote of Qac h rr u 

record vote shall be inserted i ?® rt;ic bating in anv 
of the meting. ^ in the ve^tim^ooort 

11. On decisiors rel ? t^ +- 

ballot shall be taken whenever 12 individv- l s , a secret 
ct least five members of the Council! ? iu Writi " r -S by 

Article XI 
Languages of the Counci l 

Council .na 8 itf coSi,to b ! a : he °" 5 ° iSl »r t h e 

2. Unon the request of any member of the Council tbflt 
the final recommendations and resolutions of th< moil 
and its committees shall bo rendered both in English end in 
his ov/n language, it -shall be sc provided. 

Article XII 

Records of Proceedings 

1. A verbatim report of all plenary meetings held 
during each session of the Council shall be prepared by 
the secretariat and filed with the Director c al. 
Such recort shall be made available to any momber (-,ov-.;rn- 
r.or.t ur>on request. It shall not otherwise be distributed 
or wblishod unless the Council shall decide to the con- 
trary . 

2. The secretariat^ 
session of the Council woicb sha.l d- 
culatod to member governments ana *^ t «g 8 sha ia be 
public. The minutes oi all vv iva ^ ^ r governments , 
printed separately, distributee oo gc 
£td kent confident! a 1 . 

-i ,.. nn o and formal deci- 

3. The texts of all 'cSSci! shall be 
sions adonted at each session ^ ._ t oach member 
transmitted by the Director C-^r.i adjournment 
government as soon as practicable ? 

°f the session. 



- 76 m 



Article Xlii 
^^fes and Recel ots 

1, Emulations with respect *-i 
axnendituros and receipts of t-v>o &2 . 7 0 ad ™inistrat ive 
forth in Annex II of those RuSa^ ^ m £ ni *tration arc sot 

lu+ua °x Procedure-. 

Article xiv 

Suspension and Amendment of Rules of Procedure of the 

Council — 



1. Any of the foregoing Rules of Procedure- may bo 
susoended by a two-thirds majority of the members of the 
Council present at any mooting. 

2. Amendments thereto may be adooted by a simolo 
Uiajority of the members ore sent at any meeting subject 
to the proposal having first been reported, upon by a 
committee of the Council. 



Article XV 
Transitory Pr ovision 



1 TbP adootibH of the foregoing Rules of Pro- 
1. The aao ^j° n . UJ - , ro ndP*ion of the apoolntmei 
ceduro shall constitute a ^^^uncil made at its 
of all standing committees of the Councx-i. 

first session. 



Annex i 

Rules of Standing Conmitt] 

°A She Council* 

ARTICLE I ' 

and Tonurs 

1, Subject to tb< 



Agreement , the^Councli sha^I^af?^ Articl « "I of the 

after consideration ^ 
; » aoooint th 
the Council. 



report ol the Committee on Komi*** con si deration of tho 
members of the standing ^om^ nons ' anoint the 

* anu ' JS of the n.-v^^-. 

2. Such apoointm^rts *-v>i 
on Sullies, the standing region?? C8S3 Qf fche Committee 
other standing commit too* otW +1 committees, and such 
committees, as the Gauncil shpii J standing technical 
made by designating tho mamW Lf S taoll8h '» shall be 
sentatives or altoSftSS-*!?^ governments whose repre- 
committers. ' S 9ha11 Sdrve ^s mombors of such 

5, In the case of *fcandir,fl technical n™ <4 -4- ao 
such appointments shall be t h7 r?I committees, 

.-. , ^ *r ^ maa ® o/ n amine members of 

tho Council or alternates nominated by such membe-s 
Decause of soocial comn^nce in their respective fields 
of .work. 

4. Except in the case of appointments made by tho 
Central Committee in accordance with Sect: on 5 below, 
tho appointment of ••embers of the Committee on Supplies, 
the standing regional committees and such other standing 
committees other than standing technics! committees r.s 
the Council shall establish, shall continue until changes 
or replacements therein are made by the Council. The 
appointment of members to the standing technical com- 
mittees of the Council shall be made at each regular 
session of the Council. Until such appointments are 
made, the membership of such committees shall continue . 
lumbers of all standing committees shall be e^igiolo 

for reappointment . 

i - *r»tlol HI of the Agreement, 

5. In accordance with Ar ?i,,„ nv authorized by the 
the Central Committee, if °^^ vl ^iLnts to any standing 
Council, may make emergency ^^vnch Such appoint- 
committee between sessions oi™ r3 guier or special 
ments shall continue until the rioxu i 0 - 

session of the Council. 

6. Members of standing ^ f a ;; s , jr / 5nd assistants,, 
PanUd to the meetings ^"^Ssioaa under such conoi- 
who may participate in the d but sha il not do 
tions as the committee shall pre 

entitled to vote. mora bers of the 

a ^Y"n3V exoonsos u± j p advisers 

% J- Th» travel and t £°£„ a?1 i . °£^v er nments 
standing committees ex born e by the me/n 
end assistants, shall^e . ~ 
which have nominated 

fche Council. 

r^tee on SuPPl 1 -- 

including the Committee 



- .72 



ARTICL E tt 
feetingg of Standing co-ti* h- 

____ ^ojio^ttoos of the Council 

1. The Director General oKoti V • 

C f the first meeting of 22 .hs?^}* 1 * th " tim ^ and placa 
?. e wnT "»aetit8tivP tv>_ii ~ standing committee pnd ho or 
hl s rem sent n ivc shall preside at the meeting until the 
eemmittee nas elected its chairman, 

2. Subsequent meetings of each standing committee 
Shall be convened by the chairmen at such time and nlo.ee 
as may be decided uoon by the committee, provided that 
ilieetings of the Committee on Supplies., the Committee on 
Administrative Finance, and all technical standing com- 
mittees of the Council shall, in addition, be hold as 
far ss oossible at the same time and ola.ee as each regu- 
lar session of the Council. The chairman shall convene 
meetings of a standing committee whenever requested by 
at least one-third of its members. 

3 The meetings of each standing committee shall be 
private unless the committee shall decide by a two-thirds 
Lfe of the members present that any meeting shall be 
Sblic "-nv standing committee may invite observers, or 
^ invit'e other nubile international organisations, non- 

any of its meetings or u i without vote, under 

in such meetings or pa rtjjh-w °J > - determine, 
such conditions as the commits .. 

ARTICLE III 

r ct^dinr n^itt^. 2l _*£ Council 
Offi cers of Standing — _____ 

standing committee 

1. At its first ^^ti v_c, -chairman, a second 
sh.il elect a chairman, a *f nocOSSa ry one or^ 
-vice-chairman Jja, i ^ vie , -chairman sball 
raouorteurs. The chairman^ ^ ^ olnc3 . 
office until a row -J^c - v < PO _chairnon of 

any sending committee sn^L ^ Section, th^ 

of not less than V .hit ovont , the _o . of , 0 n 

shall so ^oeide. ^ tbis e o ^ , f£%e-el*^™> 

at the next meeting oi c li&i bX - 

^tndina; committees s.~H inability to 

3. ^« f f c ;of anf «t^s boated ^ b, 
serve of any °_f-j i ^ a o vacancy thus 
election to f3 ;:h c ;.hle. ,, nab iij.ty 
*s soon as practice ,_- flt _ori, or the 




4 

sorve of 
first vie 
vice-chairman , 

new chairman i s ,J 



- 73 ^ 



§. The chairman, or t 
rhginnan, shall have the* 9 - ^' 0 e ~ ^^irr^an acnv- 
reject of committee meetings and ^ti^ in 

Chairman of the Council in Articled? P S° Vided for the 
5, of its Rules of Procedure. 6 11 ' Sections 3 and 

A£e_nda 

1. The provisional agenda for each 

each standing committee of the Council sha!? S S ° f 

by the Director General or a Denrtv nti n P re P^red 

(a) all items proposed by the committee at any 
previous meeting ; 

(b) all items proposed by the Council, the Central 
Committee, or another standing committee of the Council: 

(c) all items proposed by any member of the com- 
mittee and transmitted to the Director General at least 
five days in advance of the meeting; and 

(d) any item which the Director General desires 
to put before the committee. 

2. The provisional agenda .shall be communicated 
to the members of the committee as far as possible in 
advsnce of the meeting. Items transmitted to the 
Director General too lato for inclusion i* the provi 
sional agenda Shall be at once communicated to the 
members of the committee. 

^.■v, -AA -t- n t^e agenda. 

3. The committee may revise or add to tn ,. 

ARTICLE V 

p PftTnmi-tfeo'e Business 

Prnc.eriii™ for the Conduct^f^toZ^ 

" ' ! " onch standing com- 

1. A majority of the members of action 
*ttee shall constitute a quorum i or 

such committee . pll 

... provided by J^ 6 ?* 5£e an affirma- 

2. Unless other-vise P^ovx u require a 
^ci S i 0ns of a standing coi^xtt-^ cnt at tno m 

tive majority vote of the mom ( db ad hoc 

• may estabi-x^. ui - 

3. Any standing co^xttoo ^^ttoe shall, 
^comittees as it consider^ of the cor.J chair 

Jtion of its work, The chaa£ t shali report 

! ^ h the approval of ^ .uch subco^ittop, 
** and members of each sucn 



- 74 ^ 



m l 7 to the committee which establish^ r 
of need, the chairman may opoo^rt 11 • In easa 

£ hoc subcommittees with tS ^thSJiSSl^of^ 
majority of the members, subi -t- u tf,v I a 

at)oroval by the committer " ° Subse ^ nt fo ™ al 

4. Any request from a regional commit tea to any 
technical committee for the establishment of a technical 
subcommittee to advise the regional committee shall be 
transmitted to tne Director General, who shall forthwith 
inform the chairman and members of the technical com- 
mittee concerned. The chairman of the technical com- 
mittee shall, with the aonroval of the committee, anooint 
the chair nan and members of each such subcommittee. In 
case of need, the chairmen may proceed to anooint such 
technical subcommittees with the authorization of a 
majority of the members, subject to subsequent formal 
annroval by the committee. 

5 Any subcommit J : e e so p^nointed shall reoort to 
fha regional committee coivorned through the aporopriate 
J r .sentativo of the D*r«*c-or General, who will trans- 
^copies of the reoorv t, ^e Direct o^ ^-J^-- 

^S R ti^ictl 0 Mt1i•5 S «- , to any other standing com- 
mittee concerned. 

6 . ,ach standing J^^^/^^^^ 
governing the conduct of its ^ istort wit h the Agree- 
its subcommittees «s a. ? C duftfeil^ : ?ow.eJl, 

and any Annex thereto. 



ART XCLjS V3 



and in g cou- 
th; 



Rooords^iSSS^ of sts 

1. All report, ^oo^nca^. . - ^. ^ 

record of the conclu s irm an, ^ distribute a ^ 
"hen annroved by 1} whe fciiQ Admin is 

ffitl] fchG Director ^ government; d , 
thSeof to >sch merrfber 6 ^etings f s f do cides 

ra nort Of tne cC . mnl tt^ s al and 
3. A verbatim reP^ if tne ^ cire ctor * ^ 
ing committee shall d wi v3 m^^ 0i not otherwise 

Such renort shall bo ^ mb .^ go shaJ i no 
made available pd qtt;«*» 
tratien unon sP ^^infrad. 
be distributed or 



Article vh 

Amend ma nt- o r » 

~--^i~i-£_Amiex__l 

1. The rules contain-H • 

to all standing committees of ^v^i 5 Anns * shall aMlv 
Central Committee. 5 ° f ths Council but not f L 

2. The rules contained in « « . 

by the Council in the same manner nneX ma ^ bG amended 

amendment of the Rules or Procedure £ rovided for the 



Regulations 



^■KUiatlon s With P - 

X, The fiscal year of the Mm^- " " 

vendor year. *° Admxnis.tr^ion shall be the 

2, The Director General shall submit * 

... riD gular session next procodinr- th- tho Counc U at 

endar year an annual budget cotoriL ° f thd 

Etivo expenses of the Administration^ or tn s * lmat ^ adminis- 
£feet for the calendar year 1944 snail inclulo IIS* * 5° 
Sinistrative expenditures for the year ?94 4 anl fof « ' d 
^lapsed part of the year 1943. The budget shal^oe accom- 
ijd by a statement of the estimated rpceipts7a sLKmcnt 
> the actual expenditures through the end of t L quarter 
preceding the submission of the budget, and by an explana- 
tion and justification oi tne amount budgeted, 

3, Tho Director General may submit to any session of 
t hc Council supplementary budgets or a budget amending a 
previously approved budget. 

4, The proposed budget or a supplementary budget shall 
be referred for consideration to the appropriate committoo 

of the Council for report, comment, and recommendation for 
action by the Council. 

The approval of the budget or a supplementary budget 
~~ - ~ Director General 




yea 

therein but not exc 



*.«•,- cii may be required for 
i±a&>a* ion _ mica ^ -j * amount 



shall bo allocated for the y 



tho yaar 1944 *?^„ f adopted by the 
«n I-n.^Z^^Bud^c? and tho all*- 




locations hitherto adopts ^ 



- sac Administration. th ^ s according 

Thc allocation to & d iff -r^J ° mino d. 

J°ar shall bo adjusted for ixy det.n 

Clonal allocations ana uno» a momber, 

f a government - ^ p°^ un cii: 

, f Upon the admission ox - - bo ^£ t Co of the paun 

f administrative expense ^ c0 miaitt . ^ 

^ondation by the fcpproP sub f^tr^^ 

, V. 3 , ch .ember £ r ^t ^ ■ 

^tv 0 yxpensos so d^turmi - 



- 77 - 



-cat its- share of the administr^t- • 

J s general contribution f or paS??^° 0X P*ns© as , n . 
g Administration, ^^icxpation ln ?£ 0 ™ d 



cd in 
k of 



8. The Director General shall 
; 6r setting up and maintaining accoim? eSC f ibc th ° 
operate 




ion for tho 



mcnt of i 
trativo e 

9, The Director General shel] maVr ^ - 
bonding of employees to insure the AoSni S ?SIt? 
loss by their acts. ministration against 

10.. The Director General shall dosi^naf, *i 
otm funds held in the name of SMJ^^ 0 - 1 * 0 ^ 

11 The Director General shall, in consultation with tho 
appropriate member Government, select such fiscal agents for 
Administration as he may require. 

12. The Director General shall submit to the appropriate 
coamlttec of the Council, quarterly reports of operating and 
cinistrativc expenditures and receipts, and copies thereof 
furnished to each member of tho Council. 

15, Upon nomination by tho appropriate committee of 
Council the Council shall appoint a person or firm to 
aakc annually an independent audit of the accounts arid records 
or the Administration, and a copy of each auo.it snail do 
furnished to each member of the Council. 




