FILIPINO DEMOCRACY AND THE AMERICAN 

LEGACY 




BY JOSE VELOSO ABUEVA 



Reprinted from The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 

Vol. 428, (November 1976) 
Printed in U. S. A. 



Annals, AAPSS, 428, Nov. 1976 

Filipino Democracy and the American Legacy 



By Jose Veloso Abueva 



Abstract: The American legacy in the Philippines rests 
upon an indigenous Filipino culture — a humane social tradi- 
tion with a respect for powerful leadership — and the influence 
of authoritarian Spanish rule for over 300 years that never- 
theless introduced the values of Christianity. Led by Emilio 
Aguinaldo, the Philippine Revokition liberated the Philip- 
pines from the Spanish in 1898, with the assistance of the 
United States, but the U.S. annexed the islands, determined 
to make of it a democracy in the American image. Promises 
were made and kept to withdraw in 1946. Over the years, 
several political and administrative changes were made that 
came close to meeting initial objectives. Economically, 
however, the poor remained poor, and wealthy elites 
dominated tlie country. The Japanese occupation was a severe 
blow to democratic trends. After the war, Filipinos also 
found themselves isolated from the rest of Asia, in part 
because of their dependence on the United States. Martial 
law, introduced by Ferdinand Marcos in 1972 as a form of 
''constitutional authoritarianism," lays stress on internal 
order, economic growth, national security, and better relations 
with Asian and socialist states. At the moment, many demo- 
cratic practices of the past are suspended, although the con- 
centrated power of Marcos is moderated by the values of 
Christianity, liberal democracy, and Filipino tradition, most 
of which were encouraged during the American period. 



Jose Veloso Abueva of the Philippines took Jiis Ph.D. from the University of 
Michigan and has been engaged in academic, developmental, and administrative 
work in Southeast Asia for a number of years. Currently, he is Project Specialist 
with the Ford Foundation in Manila and Bangkok. Among his more recent 
writings are hi.s political biography of Ramon Magsaysay, his edition of Filipino 
Politics: Nationalism and Emerging Ideologies, and Popnlation and Develop- 
ment in Nepal. 

The author is Project Specialist on Asian Studies, the Ford Foundation, but this paper was 
written in his capacity as a social scientist, and not as a member of the foundation's staff. 



114 



Lv _„ k 



Filipino Democracy 



115 



IN HER role as an imperial power 
in the Pacific at the turn of the 
century, America decided to make of 
the Philippine Islands — her only 
colony — **a democratic republic in 
the American image. Impelled 
clearly by military, economic, and 
world-power desires in this colonial 
adventure, the other side of Amer- 
ica's ambivalent nature caused her to 
embark on a political, educational, 
social, and economic transformation 
in collaboration with the Filipinos. 
This experiment in democratization 
had its profound impact on the 
character of life and institutions 
on the islands, but understandably 
it produced mixed results uniquely 
Filipino. These outcomes reflected 
the contradictions of American colo- 
nial policy and, more importantly, 
the various responses of the Fili- 
pinos whose indigenous culture, 
social system, and way of life sur- 
vived and transfomied implanted 
American ideas and institutions. 

The Concept of Democracy 

In evaluating the development 
and practice of Filipino democracy 
since its beginnings about a century 
ago, we need a working definition 
of democracy that transcends varia- 
tions of time, place, and specific 
institutions. Stripped to its essence, 
democracy has been defined as "that 
system of community government 
in which, by and large, the members 
of a community participate, directly 
or indirectly, in the making of 
decisions which affect them all.''^ 
In its ideal form, it is 

one in which the citizen takes part in 
government not merely in helping 

1. George E. Taylor, The Philippines and 
the United States: Problem of Partnership 
(New York: Praeger, 1964), p. 71. 

2. Carl Cohen.Deinocracij (New York: The 
Free Press, 1971), p. 7. 



choose [between competitors for office], 
but by doing what is reasonably within 
his power to identify issues, formulate 
proposals, weigh evidence and argument 
on all sides, express convictions and 
explain their grounds, help to nominate 
party candidates — and in general to 
foster and to strengthen deliberation. 

In Abraham Lincoln's felicitous 
and memorable phrase, democracy 
is "government of the people, by the 
people, and for the people," indicat- 
ing not only popular participation in 
governmental affairs, but also on 
whose account and for whose benefit 
and welfare government exists. 

This participatory concept of de- 
mocracy^ has three dimensions 
which can be used to measure the 
degree of democracy being practiced 
at any given time. One is the quanti- 
tative breadth of democracy as 
"determined by the proportion of 
those in the community affected by 
a decision who do or may partici- 
pate in the making of it.""^ Another 
is the qualitative depth of democracy 
as "determined by tlie fullness, 
the character of the participation 
that does take place."^ A third is the 
range of democracy as detemiined 
by "the kinds of questions upon 
which the voice of the people rules, 
and the restrictions upon the author- 
it}^ of that voice, if any. . . ."^ 

Our concept of democracy also 
avers that democracy has its pre- 
suppositions, conditions, and instru- 
ments, all of which bear upon, but 
should not be confused with, the 
substance of democracy which is the 
people's participation in making 
decisions that affect all.^ Democracy 
presupposes the existence of a com- 
munity within which it may be 

3. Ihid., pp. 8-27. 

4. Ihid., p. 8. 

5. Ibid., p. 17. 

6. Ibid., p. 22. 

7. Ibid., pp. 41-202. 



116 



The Annals of The American Academy 



operative and the rationality of the 
people in that community. The 
degree of success of Filipino democ- 
racy, like any other, depends upon 
conditions which may support or 
restrict each other, namely: (1) 
material, (2) constitutional (political 
freedoms and liberties), (3) intellec- 
tual, (4) psychological, and (5) pro- 
tective (against external and internal 
threats). Finally, democracy has two 
crucial instruments of decision mak- 
ing whose institutional manifesta- 
tions may vary: representation and 
majority rule. 

Spanish Rule, the Philippine 
Revolution and Democracy 

When the Spaniards came in the 
sixteenth century, there was no 
nation or national community. Lack- 
ing this first presupposition of 
democracy, early Filipinos lived in 
scattered or communities 

of 30 to 100 households, based 
largely on kinship. These were led 
originally by hereditary datos and 
subsequently by chieftains who 
were chosen for their ability and 
prowess. The chieftains exercised 
all powers of government. Tradi- 
tions, usages, and orders were strictly 
enforced by the nobility upon the 
other members of these feudal-like 
communities which consisted of 
the maharlikas (warrior-class of 
freemen), the aliping mamamahay 
(commoners or householders who 
served a lord), and the aliping 
saguiguilir (slaves who served their 
lord in his house and farm and who 
could be sold). While two or more 
barangays might be joined by kin- 
ship or friendship for mutual pro- 
tection, feuding chieftains settled 
their differences by trial of battle 
or ordeal. In peace, they kept "a 
rough and ready sort of justice 



within their communities."^ The 
chief as judge was assisted by a 
council of elders as jury in adminis- 
tering justice. Social class made a 
difference in the sanctions imposed. 

In the absence of unity among 
early Filipinos, the military supe- 
riority and political organization of 
the Spaniards enabled them to sub- 
jugate and colonize the former. The 
Spaniards assimilated the barangays^ 
except those in the Muslim south, 
by the appointment of the former 
chieftains as cabezas de barmigay 
Sind gobernadorcillos , the only posi- 
tions open to the Filipinos. These 
petty local bureaucrats functioned 
as middlemen, representing the will 
of the colonizers, enforcing their 
power and authority among the 
Filipinos, and protecting the colo- 
nizers from the anger of the towns- 
people: "there was no real participa- 
tion nor representation even in the 
municipal governments."^ The 
people did not elect the gobernador- 
cillos. Real power in the localities 
was exercised by the Spanish parish 
priest or friar. 

During more than 300 years of 
colonial rule, the Spaniards un- 
wittingly laid some of the bases for 
the Filipino and American experi- 
ment in democratization. The far- 
flung islands and barangays became 
a national entity under a centralized 
and theocratic Spanish colonial ad- 
ministration. Roman Catholicism 
gave the Filipinos a common bond 
of Christian and humane beliefs, 
as did their emergent nationalism 

8. Horacio de la Costa, Readings in 
Philippine History: Selected Historical Texts 
Presented with a Commentary (Manila: 
Bookmark, n.d.), pp. 3-6. 

9. Teodoro A. Agoncillo and Milagras C. 
Guerrero, History of the Filipino People, 
4th ed. (Quezon City: R. P. Garcia, 1973),' 
p. 87. 



Filipino Democracy 



117 



expressed in cumulative grievances 
and numerous revolts against Span- 
ish abuses, racial discrimination, 
and despotism. The exploitative, 
iniquitous, and oppressive law-and- 
order colonial government in the 
islands, in contrast to the political 
systems that educated Filipinos 
{ilustraclos) read about or observed 
in Spain and in other European 
countries and in America, gave 
them alternative ideas of govern- 
ment. Improvements in agriculture, 
communication, and industry, and in 
the education of a new Filipino 
middle class, limited though these 
were, laid the foundations of a 
national economy and increased 
contact with the outside world 
with its liberal and revolutionary 
ideas. 

Several ilustraclos who organized 
the Refomi Movement, notably Jose 
Rizal, Lopez Jaena, and Marcelo 
H. del Pilar, imbibed in Spain 
and propagated in the islands the 
liberal ideas of the Enlightenment 
which had provided the philosophi- 
cal basis of the French and Amer- 
ican revolutions: democracy, popu- 
lar sovereignty, liberty, and good 
government. While also believing 
in the ultimate right to revolution, 
the ilustrados pressed for Filipino 
participation and other liberal re- 
foniis within the Spanish colonial 
system, until Andres Bonifacio, a 
common man, launched the Philip- 
pine Revolution in 1896. 

In 1898, having liberated the 
countryside from Spanish rule and 
bottled up the Spanish forces in 
Manila's Intramuros with the aid 
of Admiral Dewey, the Filipino 

10. Cesar A. Majul, The Political and Con- 
stitutional Ideas of the Philippine Revolu- 
tion (Quezon City: University of tl'e Philip- 
pines Press, 1957), pp. 19-198. 



revolutionaries, now led by Emilio 
Aguinaldo, believed that they had 
sovereignty over the islands in 
which a national political com- 
munity finally had been formed. A 
degree of Filipino political paiticipa- 
tion in basic decisions affecting them 
was being achieved amid the exigen- 
cies of revolution and the increasing 
threat of colonization by yet another 
Western power represented by Ad- 
miral Dewey and steady reinforce- 
ments of American troops. Indepen- 
dence from Spain was proclaimed on 
June 12, 1898. A dictatorial, then 
revolutionary, and finally a republi- 
can government was established. 
Local elections were held in several 
provinces, although suffrage was 
restricted to the gentry. Revolu- 
tionaiy intellectuals prepared various 
constitutions leading to the so-called 
Malolos Constitution for the Philip- 
pine Republic. All these documents 
embodied the ideals of Western- 
style liberal democracy: indepen- 
dence, popular sovereignty, populai 
participation and representation, the 
political freedoms and governmental 
institutions designed for the prac- 
tical realization of those ideals, and 
the uplift of the masses. The Filipino 
revolutionaries believed that they 
had crossed the threshold into an 
independent existence along demo- 
cratic lines. 

They did not reckon that **the 
Mighty and Humane North American 
Nation (Declaration of Philippine 
Independence from Spain)," whom 
they regarded as an ally in the war 
against Spain and the protector of 
Filipino sovereignty, soon would 
replace the overthrown Spaniards as 
the young nation's colonial master. 
In good faith or with naivete, 
Aguinaldo and his fellow revolu- 
tionaries assumed that the world's 



118 



The Annals of The American Academy 



largest democracy, which was born 
in revolution and had just freed 
Cuba from Spain, had reached across 
the Pacific to help liberate the 
islands, and would not violate its 
own creed of freedom by forcing 
its rule upon a freedom-loving 
Asian people who had just thrown 
off the yoke of Spanish imperialism. 
Shortly before the Spanish- American 
War that brought the Americans to 
Cuba and the Philippines, President 
McKinley had said that "forcible 
annexation . . . cannot be thought 
of, [and] by our code . . . would 
be criminal aggression. As Agui- 
naldo told General Anderson: "1 
have studied attentively the Consti- 
tution of the United States, and I 
nnd in it no authority for colonies, 
and I have no fear.^^^ j^^^j^ j^^^j. 

would reminisce: "We were in our 
own country upholding to the death 
the sound and sacred Jeffersonian 
Pnnciple that government should be 
with the consent of the governed.'^^'^ 
^etrayal and disillusionment, 
^^ong with admiration and awe, thus 
were among the Filipinos' first 
impressions of the Americans. The 
human cost of the Philippine-Amer- 
ican War (1899-1902), which the 
Americans belittled as an ''insur- 
lection demonstrated the serious- 
ness of both the Filipino defense 
ot treedom and the American colo- 
nial design: the 30,000 or so Filipino 
troops sustained 16,000 casualties, 
and some 100,000 Filipinos died of 
tamine and disease; the United 
4,234 dead and 2,818 
wounded among the 126,468 officers 

11. Taylor, The Philippines and the United 
States, p. 54. 

12. James H. Blount, American Occupa- 
tion oj the Philippines: 1898-1912 (Quezon 
City: Malaya Books Inc., 1968), pp. 58-9. 

13. EmilioAguinaldoand Vincente Albano 
Pacis, A Second Look at America (New 
York: Robert Speller and Sons, 1957), p. 100. 



and men deployed, in addition to 
those of the navy.^** Both sides 
showed valor and brutality. More- 
over, President McKinley did not 
bother to inquire into the conditions 
in the islands or the Filipinos' 
readiness for self-rule. In fact, he 
kept the American public unin- 
formed about his intention to buy 
the islands from Spain and did not 
seek approval of Congress for his 
decision to colonize the Philippines 
until it was time for ratification of 
the Treaty of Paris. Based on hind- 
sight. President McKinley's actions 
regarding the Philippines seemed to 
presage America's blundering into 
Vietnam some 60 years later. 

Democratic Tutelage under 
American Colonial Rule 

If America succumbed to the 
lobbies of naval strategists, busi- 
nessmen, Protestant missionaries, 
and the lure of great power politics 
in annexing the Philippines, Amer- 
ican imperialism differed in "that 
almost from the beginning it was 
seen as a self-liquidating enter- 
prise, an ambitious experiment in 
controlled and planned political 
growdi."^^ Despite the foiixiitous 
convergence of the imperialist forces 
favoring annexation, the Treaty of 
Paris was ratified in the U.S. Senate 
by a majority of only one vote, and 
the Bacon Amendment which would 
have defined a transient American 
presence in the Philippines was 
defeated by the vice-president's 
deciding vote. 

The terms of democratic tutelage 
of the Filipinos under American 
n.ile were prescribed in the Instruc- 
tions to the Philippine Commission, 
the Philippine Bill of 1902, the 

14. Taylor, The Philippines and the United 
States, p. 43. 

15. Ibid., p. 50. 



Filipino Democracy 



119 



Philippine Autonomy Act of 1916 
(Jones Law), and the Phihppine 
Independence Act (Tydings-McDuf- 
fie Law) of 1934. Altogether, these 
organic acts and their implementa- 
tion established a pattern of progres- 
sive Filipinization and increasing 
political participation of Filipinos 
in all branches of government under 
a rule of law and political freedoms, 
a process of decolonization cul- 
minating in Philippine independence 
in 1946, after barely 50 years or two 
generations of democratic tutelage. 

If the powers of government 
ultimately were to be vested in the 
hands of the governed, their educa- 
tion was essential to the wise direc- 
tion of that government. Besides, the 
Americans believed almost with 
magical faith in public education 
as a ladder to social mobility and a 
means of inculcating the values, 
attitudes, and sentiments conducive 
to modernity and democratic be- 
havior. Specifically, public school 
education sought to introduce the 
core values of democracy, along with 
honesty, industry, thrift, sportsman- 
ship, and patriotism. 1^ For these 
reasons, American colonial policy 
established, maintained, and ex- 
panded a public school system from 
the primary level upward, and the 
Universit>' of the Philippines was 
founded in 1908. The positive 
response of the Filipinos matched 
tlie educational zeal of the Americans: 
school enrollment grew to 610,500 
in 1910, to 943,500 in 1920, and to 
1,204,500 in 1934. Literacy rose from 
the 5 to 8 percent in the Spanish 
period to 8 percent in 1903, to 49 
percent in 1918, and to 65 percent in 
1935.^^ Filipino students were sent 

16. Lewis E. Gleeck, Jr., American Insti- 
tutions in the Philippines: 1898-1941 (Manila: 
Historical Consen'ation Society, 1976), p. 29. 

17. Agoncillo and Guerrero, llistonj of the 
Filipino People, p. 424. 



to American universities, and upon 
their return they taught in the 
schools or worked in various gov- 
ernment offices. Civil service exam- 
inations (based on recruitment by 
merit and achievement) became a 
means of access to public service. 
Democratic socialization also was 
being extended and reinforced by 
American Protestant and Jesuit mis- 
sionaries, the YMCA, Rotary, Boy 
Scouts, and a host of other religious, 
civic service, and fratemal organiza- 
tions. The English language and 
improved media fostered national 
unity, facilitated official and busi- 
ness communication, and popular- 
ized American life-styles among 
educated and urban Filipinos. 

Under the American economic 
ideology of free enterprise, the 
agricultural export sector improved, 
and so did infrastructure, transporta- 
tion, and communication. Foreign 
trade grew faster than domestic 
commerce over which Filipinos had 
only 25 percent control, against 50 
percent by the Chinese, and 20 per- 
cent by the Japanese. Wages of 
skilled labor increased, a middle 
class of government personnel and 
schoolteachers and business em- 
ployees expanded, and the position 
of women further improved. The 
national income increased five times 
over, but population also increased 
from 7.6 million in 1903 to 16 million 
in 1939. Standards of living rose for 
the middle and upper classes. 
Modern public health and welfare 
controlled epidemics, lowered mor- 
tality, improved sanitation, and re- 
lieved misfortune. However, pros- 
perity based on free trade made the 
Philippine economy heavily depen- 
dent on the American market. The 
condition of the common man, who 
formed the mass base of society, 

18. Ibid., pp. 426-28. 



120 



The Annals of The American Academy 



was barely alleviated vis-a-vis the 
wealthy classes who reaped the most 
from economic development and 
political participation. 

Political participation during the 
Philippine Revolution and the first 
Philippine Republic was severely 
limited by time and circumstances. 
This republic and its parliamentar>' 
system were designed by consei*va- 
tive nationalists who dominated 
them as an ''oligarchy of the in- 
telligentsia," not the "oligarchy of 
ignorance'' of the lower-class revolu- 
tionaries.^^ Under American rule, 
Filipino democracy increased rap- 
idly in breadth and range, although 
much less in depth. Compared to 
Spanish times, however, there was 
greater opportunity for upward mo- 
bility in the new social structure. 
From the outset, municipal and 
provincial officials were elected by 
the people. The first chief justice 
of the Supreme Court was a Fili- 
pmo, and so were most judges in 
the lower courts. Filipinization of 
the civil bureaucracy was carried 
out with such speed that "in less 
than two decades the staffing and 
control of the administrative appara- 
tus of the colony had been turned 
over to the subject people."2o Filipi- 
nos shared in exercising legislative 
power in the eady years. From 1907 
only Filipinos were qualified to be- 
come members of the Philippine As- 
sembly (until 1916), of the Philippine 
Legislature (1916-1935), of the 
National Assembly (1935- 1940), and 
of the Congress of the Philippines 
to the end of American rule in 1946. 

19. Bonifacio Salamanca, "The Philippine- 
U.S. Relationship: History," in The Philip- 
pine American Relationship (Manila: 6th 
Annual Student Leaders Seminar, U.S. Em- 
bassy, 1974), p. 47. 

20. Onofre D. Corpuz, The Bureaucracy 
in the Philippines (Manila: University of 
the Philippines, Institute of Public Adminis- 
tration, 1957), p. 202. 



Although thePhilippines was under 
an American governor-general until 
1935, from 1916 all members of his 
cabinet were Filipinos, except the 
secretary of pviblic instruction who 
was also the vice governor-general. 
The Philippine Commonwealth es- 
tablished in 1935 was headed by a 
Filipino president and vice-presi- 
dent, both directly elected by the 
people. Although all laws enacted 
by the Filipino legislature were 
subject to the veto of the governor- 
general and ultimately to the author- 
ity of the U.S. Congress, in practice 
the Filipinos enjoyed substantial 
autonomy. 

Political participation also ex- 
panded with the incoi-poration or 
cooptation into the political process 
of various interest groups in a 
modernizing and increasingly com- 
plex society: agricultural groups, 
such as sugar, coconut, and abaca 
planters; business groups, such as 
the Filipino, Chinese, and Amer- 
ican chambers of commerce; pro- 
fessional groups, such as the Philip- 
pine Medical Association and the 
Philippine Bar Association, and 
associations of teachers, engineers, 
accountants, and scientists; and the 
various religious and voluntary bod- 
ies. On the fringes of politics were 
peasants and laborers who had 
formed the National Peasants Union 
and the Philippine Labor Congress 
and many smaller unions. 

Public participation in politics 
and policy making was enhanced by 
an electorate that grew with the 
population, the removal of property 
qualifications, and women's suffrage. 
Political parties were formed, but 
these came to be dominated by the 
Nacionalista party led by Manuel 
L. Quezon and Sergio Osmena, and 
these were essentially parties of 
politicians, not mass parties. Their 
members were mostly contestants for 



Filipino Democracy 



121 



elective positions belonging to the 
wealthy, landowning families de- 
scended from the principolia, ilus- 
trados, and caciques of the Spanish 
era. Other so-called party members 
mostly were kinsmen and allies 
linked to politicians in a patron- 
client relationship. The paramount 
issue after 1907 was independence, 
and this issue came to be monopo- 
lized by the Nacionalista party. 
Since party politicians belonged to 
the nation's elite and privileged 
class, few issues of principle, policy, 
or interest divided them; their 
power rested on wealth, the size 
and loyalties of their personal fol- 
lowing in their localities, as well 
as on their political skills. 

Political freedom encouraged mil- 
itant labor and peasant leaders into 
fomiing the Socialist party and the 
Communist party to mobilize the 
lower classes, especially the tenants 
in Central Luzon who had felt 
exploited since the Spanish period, 
and to agitate for reforms. The 
merger of these two parties of the 
left in 1938 made the peasants and 
workers of tliis region a sophisticated 
and potentially potent force. For 
various reasons, including tlie pater- 
nalistic patron-client relationship 
between the rich and the poor in 
most parts of the country, the revolu- 
tionary parties and unions did not 
have wide appeal, but the agrarian 
unrest which they inspired late in 
the American period set the scene 
for the full-scale rebellion of the 
Huks and Communists in the late 
'40s and early '50s. 

Following the provisions of the 
Tydings-McDuffie Act, die Filipinos 
elected delegates to a convention 
that drafted a constitution approved 
by President Franklin Roosevelt, 
and ratified by the Filipinos in a 
plebiscite in May 1934. After the 
election of Manuel L. Quezon and 



Sergio Osmena as president and 
vice-president, respectively, of the 
commonwealth which was to be the 
country's transition government 
from colony to republic 10 years 
afterwards, their feuding factions 
coalesced. With an overwhelming 
party in power and no effective 
opposition, a virtual one-party sys- 
tem became entrenched under Que- 
zon's towering leadership. In the 
wake of labor uprisings and agrarian 
unrest in Luzon and parts of the 
southern islands. Senator Juan Su- 
mulong warned that the masses had 
*'no voice nor vote as minorities in 
the formulation of government poli- 
cies, because the majority and 
minority parties represented almost 
exclusively the intelligentsia and 
. . . the . . . plutocracy. Alarmed 
by rising discontent and inspired by 
Roosevelt's New Deal, Quezon ini- 
tiated several progressive policies 
and programs aimed at social justice 
for poor and disadvantaged citizens. 

On the eve of die commonwealth, 
in 1934, the last American governor- 
general, Frank Murphy, told the 
Philippine legislature: "Free educa- 
tion, constitutional principles, free- 
dom of conscience and opinion, 
material progress, economic devel- 
opment, stable finances, responsible 
government — these essentials of a 
sound and enduring democracy have 
been established in the land."^^ 

Five years later, American High 
Commissioner Francis Sayre also 
claimed several "salutary and out- 
standing accomplishments," and 
then admitted: 

neither a sizable independent middle 
class nor an influential pubHc opinion 
has developed. . . . Maldistribution of 
property, of land, and of wealth in many 

21. Agoncillo and Guerrero, History of 
the Filipino People, pp. 406, 416. 

22. Gleeck, American Instittitiojis, p. 300. 



The Annals of The American Academy 



forms continues. The gap between the 
mass population and the small governing 
class has broadened and social unrest 
has reached serious proportions.^^ 

The Americans lacked "a philoso- 
phy of radical improvement. In 
the early years, American adminis- 
trators emphasized education, public 
health, and public vi^orks, and de- 
emphasized politics, believing that 
economic stability was of primary 
importance for self-rule. It was 
believed, further, that only when the 
education of the masses was com- 
plete would they be able to chal- 
lenge the entrenched elite. How- 
ever, "by ignoring the sensitive 
agrarian problems, the United States 
allowed the traditional elite to main- 
tain its long established social and 
economic dominance. American 
colonial officials were relatively 
more influential in national adminis- 
tration and exerted little influence 
at local levels. "The democratiza- 
\ tion of the Philippines was carried 
out more by the Filipino leaders, 
operating within their cultural val- 
ues and their own conceptions of 
American democracy, than by the 
colonial 'supervisors,' "27 Contrary 
to the expectations of some Amer- 
icans, as Filipinization of politics 
and administration progressed, cen- 
tralization also increased — upon the 
instigation of Filipino leaders. 

23. Ibid., pp. 300-1. 

24. Theodore W. Friend, Between Two 
Empires: The Ordeal of the Philippines: 
1929-1946 (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 1965), p. 20. 

25. Michael Cullinane, "Implementing the 
'New Order': The Structure and Super- 
vision of Local Government during the 
Taft Era," in Compadre Colonialism: Philip- 
pine American Relations, 189S-1946 (Ann 
Arbor: The University of Michigan, iMichigan 
Papers on South and Southeast Asia, No. 3. 
Reprinted by Solidaridad Publishing House 
of Manila), p. 25. 

26. Ibid., p. 26. 

27. Ibid. 



On the whole, how did the Philip- 
pine economy fare under American 
rule? 

Overdependence on a few exports 
tenantry, indebtedness, low produc- 
tivity, corruption and inefficiency, under- 
capitalization, miserable working con- 
ditions — all symptoms of economic 
backwardness were present at the end 
of the American period as they had been 
at the beginning. Some of them had 
been mildly alleviated, others were 
much worse. 

Industrialization was not promoted 
because of the assumption of the 
Americans and the Filipino elite 
that the exchange of Philippine raw 
materials for American manufactures 
was equitable. Some FilixDino na- 
tionalists look back and accuse the 
Americans of exploiting and keeping 
the Philippines in agrarian depen- 
dency. But it may be that the Amer- 
ican failure to transfomi the economy 
was simply "a failure to see beyond 
the Filipino elite definition of the 
society as static, irrevocably agrarian; 
a failure as much of politics as of 
economics; a failure born less of 
exploitation than of inertia. "^9 

While permitting considerable po- 
litical participation, and while the 
bureaucracy, private business, and 
the press opened up channels of 
access for substantial numbers of 
persons from non-elite families, the 
introduction of American ideals 
and institutions by the Americans 
did not and probably could never 
have fundamentally altered either 
the indigenous power structure or 
the centralized political and admin- 
istrative system. Once it had been 
decided that the Filipinos were to 
be trained for self-government and 

28. Norman G. Owen, "Philippine Eco- 
nomic Development and American Policy: 
A Reappraisal," in Compadre Colonialism 
p. 55. 

29. Ibid., p. 57. 



Filipino Democracy 



123 



eventual independence, the Amer- 
icans found it necessar>^ and ex- 
pedient to form a tacit alliance with 
the Filipino landowning elite and 
retain the oligarchical politics and 
centralized administration which 
were part of the Spanish legacy, and 
to leave largely untouched die semi- 
feudal conditions in the country- 
side. By and large "at the end of 
the American period, the average 
tao lived where his grandfather had 
lived, was deeper in debt, remained 
without land title, and grew his 
crops as inefficiently as anywhere 
in the world."^^ The poverty, ig- 
norance, and dependency of most 
FilixDinos, especially in the rural 
areas, had made them vulnerable to 
manipulation or neglect by the 
ruling elite. In their condition of 
subsistence and dependency, they 
could not influence policy. 

The persistence of ancient famil- 
ism, personalism, and parochialism^^ 
failed to develop among Filipinos an 
idea of "social well-being or national 
welfare.'"' Having been long a col- 
onized people, their effective train- 
ing in democratic citizenship so 
emphasized "the assertion of rights 
that they almost neglected to develop 
an idea of duty they as individuals 
owed to a society, nation and state. "^^ 
An evident lesson of Filipino democ- 
racy under American guidance and 
thereafter is that no one but the 
Filipinos themselves, if they really 
wanted, could develop a political and 
economic system that would enable 
tlie people at large to participate in, 
influence, and benefit from the pro- 
cesses of decision making affecting 

30. Ibid., p. 51. 

31. Jose V. Abueva, "Continuity and 
Change in Filipino Political Styles," a 
paper presented at the 28di International 
Congress of Orientalists, Canberra, Aus- 
tralia, 6-11 January 1971, pp. 1-24. 

32. Friend, Between Two Empires, p. 72. 



diem all. Democracy requires the 
freedom and tlie abilit>' of its citizens 
to participate in ways that count. Nev- 
eitlieless, the Filipinos had gained 
some experience in democratic self- 
rule that few other peoples in the 
underdeveloped world had enjoyed. 

Filipino Democracy under the 
Republic ( 1946- 1972) 

When the Japanese invaded tlie 
Philippines in World Wai* II, die 
Filipinos realized, to tlieir chagrin, 
that they and their American guard- 
ians could not protect the countiy 
and its evolving democratic way of 
life from the aggressor. During three 
years of Japanese occupation, death, 
untold suffering, physical ruin, eco- 
nomic dislocation, and demoraliza- 
tion descended on the hapless 
Filipinos. On die other hand, Fili- 
pino resiliency, faidi, and ingenuity 
enabled the nation to survdve and 
finally, witii the retiirn of the Amer- 
ican forces under General Mac- 
Ardiur, resume life in peace. In die 
most inauspicious of times, the 
Filipinos regained their indepen- 
dence with the end of American 
colonial rule on July 4, 1946. The 
war taught most Filipinos the dif- 
ference between life under Japanese 
despotism and diat under the Amer- 
icans, and made them the more 
appreciative of the latter. At the 
same time, the Filipinos had to sub- 
mit to infringements on dieir sover- 
eignty when the U.S. Congress de- 
manded the retention of military 
bases in the islands under onerous 
tenns, and an amendment to the 
republic's constitution to allow par- 
ity rights to Americans in the ex- 
ploitation of Philippine natural re- 
sources and the operation of public 
utilities in exchange for individual 
war damage payments in excess of 
$500. Still dependent on the United 
States for her reconstruction, foreign 



124 



The Annals of The American Academy 



trade, and national security, the 
Philippines had to toe the American 
line in foreign policy and delay 
building ties with fellow Asian 
countries. The image of an Amer- 
ican satellite in the Cold War era 
was part of the continuing American 
legacy of the Filipinos through the 
early 1970s. 

American aid to the Philippines 
after the establishment of the Peo- 
ple's Republic of China, and through 
the Korean and Indochina Wars, 
sought not only to help bolster re- 
gional security, but also to strengthen 
the national economy and establish 
political stability by helping im- 
prove education, foster trade union- 
ism, institute agrarian reforms, and 
improve public management, as if to 
continue helping the Philippines in 
her and America's unfinished demo- 
cratic experiment. In these efforts, 
as in colonial times, American pri- 
vate and philanthropic assistance 
Played significant roles. To date, 
the Philippines voluntarily derives 
benefits from U.S. military and 
economic assistance as part of 
regional security arrangements and 
^•S. global strategy. 

From 1946 to about 1968, the legiti- 
^^acy, stability, and responsiveness 
ot the Philippine political system 
appeared to have passed a series of 
tests. Except for the Communist- 
Huk rebellion, there was little 
serious challenge to the authority of 
the national government. Political 
and governmental processes operated 
within constitutional bounds, re- 
strained by the press, civic organiza- 
tions, and the Supreme Court. Twice 
the vice-president succeeded to 
office upon the death of the presi- 
dent. Voting turn-out averaged about 

33. Hernando J. Abaya, The Untold Philip- 
pine StoryiQuezon City: Malaya Books Inc., 
1967), pp. 13- 180. 



80 percent and was notably greater 
in rural areas. The two-party system 
made possible the alternation of 
major parties and the defeat of four 
incumbent presidents. The turnover 
of legislators and local officials 
suggested a highly competitive and 
responsive politics. The bureaucracy 
and the military were subordinate 
and responsible to the Congress and 
an increasingly powerful president. 
Although criticisms of the malfunc- 
tioning of Filipino democracy were 
common, various public opinion 
polls showed its general approval by 
the people.^'* 

Beneath these manifestations 
lurked other realities. The popula- 
tion increased from 19 million in 
1949 to 37 million in 1970. Although 
GNP and per capita income in- 
creased steadily, the country re- 
mained underdeveloped and in- 
come and wealth became more 
concentrated. Poverty clearly wors- 
ened and no meaningful narrowing 
of the gap between rich and poor 
occurred.^^ Economic underdevel- 
opment and rising income inequality 
increased pressures on politicians 
to provide jobs and economic se- 
curity. The expansion of national 
government activities, the institu- 
tion of import substitution policies, 
and economic nationalization made 
the government more centralized 
and powerful. At the same time, 
greater economic power was con- 
centrated in fewer and fewer 
families. 

The president correspondingly 
was becoming more powerful as 

34. Jose V. Abueva, ed., Filipino Politics: 
Nationalis7n and Emerging Ideologies (Ma- 
nila: Modem Book Company, 1972), pp. 
14-15. 

35. Development Academy of the Philip- 
pines (DAP), Measuring the Quality of 
Life: Philippine Social Indicators (1975), 
pp. 12-13. 



Filipino Democracy 



125 



national political leader and patron. 
National and provincial political 
considerations dominated local ones. 
The autonomy of local leadership 
declined. With the shift in the bal- 
ance of power from local elites to 
national elites, and especially the 
president, the traditional bargaining 
and exchange beKveen them became 
more of a hierarchical relationship 
between subordinate and superior.^^ 

Political participation changed 
with the decay and displacement 
of traditional institutions, greater 
economic insecurity, and social in- 
justice.^" The Hukbalahap, the anti- 
Japanese army of the Peasants Labor 
Union during Japanese occupation, 
felt an injustice in the unseating 
of its leaders in Congress, in its 
harassment by the constabulary and 
the landlords' civilian guards, and 
in the tenancy of the peasants or 
their displacement by mechaniza- 
tion under absentee landlords. Ex- 
cept for short-lived compromises 
with the government, the Huks, 
which came under Communist lead- 
ership, engaged the amied forces 
in guerrilla warfare that threatened 
the capture of Manila and overthrow 
of the government until the govern- 
ment's campaign under Ramon Mag- 
saysay broke the back of Huk resist- 
ance in the eary 1950s. For all the 
sacrifice of the Huk rebellion, the 
agrarian problem was not being 
solved through the 1960s. 

There were other changes in the 
political stmcture and styles of 
political participation that were 

36. David A. Rosenberg, "Conclusion: 
Premonitions of Martial Law," in Benedict 
J. Kerkvliet, ed., Political Change in the 
Philippines: Studies of Local Politics Pre- 
ceding Martial Law (Honolulu: The Univer- 
sity Press of Hawaii, 1974), pp. 243-58. 

37. Kerkvliet, ibid., pp. 10-257. 

38. Jose V. Abueva, Ramon Magsaysaij: 
A Political Biography (Manila: Solidaridad 
Publishing House, 1971), pp. 157-75. 



either subtle or open but non- 
violent. For one, national and local 
elections were becoming more ex- 
pensive. In many places only well- 
to-do and landowning local elite 
families or candidates backed by 
national politicians could expect 
to win. The escalating cost of elec- 
tions was due to the growing popu- 
lation, the commercialization of the 
local economy, the concentration of 
wealth in national elite families and 
politicians, the increasing number 
of economically insecure voters who 
were willing to sell their votes, and 
the increasing number of candidates 
who sought power, prestige, and 
economic advantage in elective 
posts and were willing to spend 
money in exchange for electoral 
support. 

In some places the traditional 
patron-client basis of politics was 
breaking down. Personal loyalties 
were giving way to reliance on jobs 
money, and projects. Some lane 
lord politicians turned to othe.j 
pursuits, or simply contributed to 
the candidacy of their proteges. 
In others, new political leaders 
emerged from non-elite families 
and headed the local political ma- 
chines linked upward to national 
parties and politicians.^^ Political 
parties were plagued by factionalism, 
by party switching, by rebels who 
contested the official party candi- 
dates, and by independent can- 
didates, again indicating intense 
political competition and the inabil- 
ity of the pait>^ system to integrate all 

39. Lorcis Paul Benson, "Changing Polit- 
ical Alliance Patterns in the Rural Philip- 
pines: A Case Study hom Camarines Norte," 
in Kerkvliet, Political Change in the Philip- 
pines, pp. 139-50. 

40. K. G. Machado, "Changing Patterns of 
Leadership Recruitment and Emergence of 
the Professional Politicians in Philippine 
Local Politics," in Kerkvliet, Political 
Change in the Philippines, pp. 77-125. 



126 



The Annals of The American Academy 



the power seekers and diversifying 
interests of a modernizing country. 
In the light of these changes, and 
the advent of professionahzed cam- 
paigning, party nominations, con- 
ventions and elections for presiden- 
tial, vice-presidential, and sena- 
torial candidates also were becoming 
the preserve of the substantially 
wealthy. 

The consequences of the deteriora- 
tion of traditional patron-client rela- 
tions and the inability of the parties 
and machines to channel political 
action or provide economic security 
to broad groups of citizens are many 
and varied. The temptation toward 
excessive patronage, corruption, and 
exploitation of public office became 
irresistible. Government resorted to 
deficit financing and diversion of 
foreign exchange reserves, espe- 
cially during election years. Not 
infrequently, severe competition 
brought out "gold, guns and goons" 
during campaigns, for some politi- 
cians had become veritable "war- 
lords. ' Political cynicism became 
widespread and infected even the 
youth.^i 

. perceived corruption and 

ineffectiveness of government and 
politicians and their presumed sub- 
servience to American and other 
^oi-eign interests, and the mounting 
nationalism of progressive intellec- 
tuals, labor, and peasant leaders, 
led to ideological diversity and 
confrontation politics in Metro 
Manila and its environs in the 
late 1960s.^2 ^^^^ left-of-center 
groups became active, among them 
the Christian Social Movement, the 
Movement for the Advancement of 

41. Loretta Makasiar Sicat, The Political 
Attitudes of Young Filipinos: A Study in 
Political Socialization (Quezon City: Univer- 
sity of the Philippines Press, 1972), pp. 
79-88. 

42. Abueva, Filipino Politics, pp. 54-267. 



Nationalism, and the Kabataang 
Makabayan. Student activism and 
strikes proliferated, and in 1970 
students marching to Malacanang 
battled the police and the military 
and sustained casualties. In 1971 
the bombing of the political rally of 
the Liberal party in Plaza Miranda 
threatened to annihilate the opposi- 
tion, and gave President Marcos 
reason for suspending the writ of 
habeas corpus over the land. Mos- 
lem rebels in the south began 
agitating for secession, partly in 
protest against their traditional 
leaders who had ceased to provide 
for their security and welfare. 

Meanwhile, most citizens in the 
provinces remained amorphous 
masses who were poorly integrated 
into the functioning of interest 
groups, parties, the Congress, and 
the bureaucracy. Unorganized and 
unable to see their individual prob- 
lems and interests in terms of policy 
changes, they could neither assert 
the necessary policy demands on 
legislators or administrators, nor 
provide adequately the required 
public scrutiny and support needed 
by a well-fi-inctioning democracy. 
While Metro Manila and Central 
Luzon were seething with discon- 
tent, ideological ferment, and con- 
frontations with political authorities, 
most provinces seemed as calm as 
ever, although the results of the 
senatorial elections in 1971 showed 
that the people wanted a change in 
political leadership. The 1971 Con- 
stitutional Convention was a timely 
response to the crescendo of de- 
mands for political reform. 

The press, supposedly one of the 
most free in the world, was usually 
sensational and unbalanced in its 
coverage of events. Actually, some 
media and their practitioners were 
biased if not corrupted tools of 
politicians, while others that were 



Filipino Democracy 



127 



independent and honest tended to 
create a public sense of crisis by 
exaggerating or distorting the facts, 
or by habitually ignoring the posi- 
tive. The unintended consequences 
of this unbalanced and irresponsible 
journalism were the aggravation of 
political cynicism; the undermining 
of representative institutions like 
Congress, the parties, elections, and 
the press itself; and the predisposing 
of the citizenry to an audioritarian 
alternative to participatory democ- 
racy. 

The Effects of Martial Law on 
Democracy (1972-1976) 

President Ferdinand Maicos im- 
posed martial law on September 21, 
1972, '*to save the nation and insti- 
tute reforms." A year later he re- 
vealed more fully the events that 
led him to this act that changed 
Filipino democracy, such as it was, 
into what he calls ''constitutional 
authoritarianism." He was con- 
vinced that his enemies were plot- 
ting to eliminate him by coup 
d'etat, assassination, or forced resig- 
nation. He cited "seven sources of 
threats to the republic: the com- 
munist revolutionaries, the rightists, 
the Muslim secessionists, the pri- 
vate armies and political warlords, 
the criminal elements, the oligarchs, 
and the foreign interventionists."^^ 

There were theories such as the 
following advanced by others to 
explain the president's action. He 
simply wanted to perpetuate himself 
in power for self-aggrandizement. 
He was influenced by American 
business interests and multinational 
corporations to opt for an authori- 
tarian solution to mounting disorder 
and economic nationalism. Frus- 

43. Ferdinand E. Marcos, Notes on the 
New Society of the Philippines (Manila: 
Marcos Foundation, Inc., 1973), pp. 11, 40. 



trated by his growing inability to 
cope with simultaneous problems in 
spite of his powers, it was propitious 
to emulate his strongmen neighbors: 
Suharto of Indonesia, Lee of Singa- 
pore, Razak of Malaysia, Thanom of 
Thailand, Park of Korea. 

Whatever die motives, tlie con- 
sequences of Marcos's imposition 
of martial law, witli the critical 
support of the armed forces, were 
visible enough. He remains in 
power indeterminately. Under the 
1935 constitution, he could not 
have succeeded himself after De- 
cember 30, 1975. Under the 1973 
constitution, he had to be elected 
by the interim national assembly 
as prime minister to retain his 
powers. He abolished the Congress 
and has not convened the interim 
national assembly. He commands 
executive, legislative, military, and 
administrative powers. The inde- 
pendence of the judiciary has been 
further weakened. Administration- 
sponsored citizen assemblies, refer- 
enda, and, lately, elections of some 
local councilors have replaced pleb- 
iscites and regular elections as 
modes of political participation. The 
media, some of which are owned by 
relatives of Mrs. Marcos and busi- 
ness friends of the president, all 
are supportive of the Marcos ad- 
ministration and the New Society 
it has sought to establish. Fomierly 
elected local officials hold office 
at the pleasure of the president, and 
so do, in law, practically all gov- 
ernment personnel. Martial law 
began with the arrest of many 
persons known to be opposed to the 
president or regarded by the ad- 
ministration as dangerous to the 
state, including legislators, conven- 
tion delegates, local politicians, 
publishers and journalists, profes- 
sors, student activists, and labor 
and peasant leaders. An undeter- 



The .\xxals of The .\^^EIUCA^.' Academy 



maumted mumber remained under 
detention in various camps for 
different periods, with or without 
charges brought against them, cil- 
though many have been released 
or pardoned. 

The 1971 constitution was over- 
taken by martial law and its product, 
the 1973 constitution, contains tran- 
sitory provisions that enable the 
president to claim correctly that 
his rule is "constittitional authori- 
tarianism" because it is based on 
those provisions. The Supreme Court 
resolved by a vote of six to four that 
the 1973 constitution was not 
properly ratified by the citizen 
assemblies which were hurriedly 
called by the president in January 
1973, but the same tribunal found 
no further legal obstacle to the 
enforcement and effectiveness of 
that constitution. The constitution 
proper is liberal, socially oriented, 
progressive, nationalistic, and de- 
velopmental.'*-* 

Politically conscious citizens seem 
polarized between the members and 
supporters of the Marcos adminis- 
tration who share in the permitted 
modes of political participation and 
those who feel outside the political 
arena and reduced to political 
mefficacy or inconsequence. The 
lormer are overt in their advocacy 
and support of the new dispensa- 
tion.^"^ The latter are either re- 
signed and guarded in their opposi- 
tion or courageous in their recourse 
to the courts, voicing their views in 
a few limited forums and publica- 
tions^^ or in their protest marches 

44. Jose V. Abueva, "Some Outstanding 
Characteristics of the New Constitution" 
(Quezon City: mimeographed, 1973),pp. 1-8. 

45. Onofre D. Corpuz, Liberty and Gov- 
ernment in the New Society (Manila: Depart- 
ment of Public Information, c. 1973), pp. 
1-32. 

46. See Salvador P. Lopez, The Philippines 
under Martial Law (Quezon City: University 



and strikes to call attention to their 
grievances, some of them ending in 
prison. Some religious and promi- 
nent citizens hav^e been in the 
vanguard of open and peaceful 
opposition. Criticisms and chcil- 
lenges hurled against the Marcoses 
and the administration are rarely 
carried by the media, with the 
notable exception of the activities 
of the Communists and the Moslem 
rebels. It appears that vast numbers 
of the citizenry, particularly in the 
rural areas, do not feel affected by 
the constraints on political partici- 
pation. To many of them, politics, 
except for elections and patronage, 
had been an esoteric activity carried 
out in the remote centers of power. 

In sum, President Marcos, witli 
the active participation of his wife 
who is also appointed governor of 
Metro Manila, is the undisputed 
head of a new encompassing power 
structure or grand coalition which 
consists of: (1) the military; (2) 
cabinet members and technocrats 
and the bureaucracy under them; 

(3) local officials who also hold 
office by presidential appointment; 

(4) persons close to the president 
or Mrs. Marcos, whether relatives 
or loyal friends, and fonner politi- 
cians; and (5) businessmen who 
enjoy the political stability and 
economic incentives which the ad- 
ministration provides. At the base 
of this political pyramid are the 
millions whose welfare is the 
avowed aim of the New Society, 
in whose name change and reforms 



of the Philippines Press, 1974); Civil Liber- 
ties Union, The State of the Nation after 
Three Years of Martial Law (Makati: Civil 
Liberties Union, 21 September 1975); Jovito 
R. Salonga et al., A Message of Hope to 
Filipinos Who Care (Manila: By a represen- 
tative group of citizens, 1 October 1975); 
and Diosdado Macapagal, Democracy in 
the Philippines (Manila, 1976). 



Filipino Democracy 



129 



are being initiated, and whose 
support provides the regime with 
legitimacy through referenda and 
citizen assembHes, and the sang- 
guniang haijans alid harangaijs. 
Gone is the old pluralist power 
structure based on open competition 
and the two major political parties 
and the minor parties, including 
new political movements. Only one 
nationwide, non-party, political ag- 
gregation is allowed to exist. Various 
socio-economic groups throughout 
the country have been incorporated 
into the New Society*^ through 
the government's positive induce- 
ments and assistance, as well as the 
hint of their denial if these groups 
are uncooperative. The new system 
of local government, through various 
tiers of sangguniang baijan, in- 
cluding samahang nayons (pre- 
cooperatives) and kilusang baijans 
(cooperatives), and the harangaijs, 
integrate the citizenry into the New 
Society of President Marcos. 

The New Society definitely has 
improved peace and order, except 
in the rebel areas of Luzon and 
Mindanao, substantially increased 
government revenues and expendi- 
tures, boosted food production and 
built infrastructure as never before, 
raised large foreign loans for de- 
velopment, attracted foreign invest- 
ments, promoted and expanded 
exports, developed tourism, imple- 
mented land reform on rice and corn 
lands far beyond all previous efforts, 
and instilled a measure of citizen 
discipline and social order. Export 
markets have been diversified. Dip- 
lomatic and trade relations have 
been opened with China, Soviet 
Russia, and other SociaHst states. 

47. Remigio E. Agpalo, The Organic- 
Hierarchical Paradigm and Politics in the 
Philippines (Quezon City: University of 
the Philippines Press, 1973), pp. 25-8. 



Philippine sovereignty is being 
asserted in the operation of U.S. 
military bases in the islands. Greater 
support has been given to research 
in science, agriculture, technology, 
and even the social sciences. Given 
its ends and norms, government 
in the New Society has introduced 
greater rationality and a long-range 
perspective in its planning and 
management. The question may be 
asked: which of these important 
accomplishments could have been 
achieved, and to what extent, only 
by a shift to authoritarian rule, 
rather than by a more determined 
and vigorous exercise of govern- 
mental powers under the pre-martial 
law political system? 

Claims of markedly improved 
public service and less corruption 
are being contradicted by the ex- 
periences of citizens, as President 
Marcos himself has admitted.^^^ The 
absence of a legislature and a free 
press denies the public reliable 
information regarding the inner 
workings of the government and the 
true sentiments of the people, as 
well as a check on the expenditure 
of public funds. Official admonitions 
against extravagance and ostentation 
seem hypocritical in the light of the 
perceived life-styles of the political 
leadership. The anxiety over im- 
pressing the world and attaining 
international approval for the ad- 
ministration has cost the people 
unreported millions in the extiava- 
gant hosting of conferences and 
public entertainment and in luxu- 
rious foreign visits. Tremendous 
amounts are invested in government 
infoniiation programs, including an 
expanded intelligence network. The 
emphasis on prestige and costly 

48. Ferdinand E. Marcos, "The President's 
Report to the Nation," 19 September 1975, 
pp. 16-19. 



130 



The Annals of The American Academy 



centers in Metro Manila raises the 
question of priorities in the allocation 
of scarce resources of an under- 
developed country, many of whose 
government services barely reach 
the people in the countryside. Popu- 
lation growth, inflation, the keen 
competition for employment, and 
falling real incomes tend to nullify 
some of the otherwise impressive 
gains in the New Society. Whether 
wealth and welfare are being re- 
distributed remains to be proved. 
Civil liberties are in jeopardy.'*^ 
Arbitrary arrests and detention, and 
even torture, are being reported by 
word of mouth and recently con- 
firmed by a team report of Amnesty 
International. Academic freedom is 
constrained. The holding of refer- 
enda and the sangguniang bayan 
system appear to be haphazard and 
managed affairs lacking credibility. 
This is unfortunate because with 
proper care they could become 
honest, workable, and superior sub- 
stitutes for the discarded institu- 
tions of local representation. 

The Authoritarian-Democratic 
Political Culture, "Revolution 
FROM THE Center," and the 
American Heritage 

Martial law in the Phihppines 
illustrates the latest, and most 
pronounced, tilting toward authori- 
tarianism in the continuing mixture 
and interaction of democratic and 
authoritarian elements in Filipino 
society and polity. It will be re- 
called that the pre-Spanish baran- 
gaij "^^^ essentially authoritarian, 
hierarchical, and non-egalitarian! 
Spanish colonialism^ aggravated the 
domination of the "superior" ruler 

49. Lopez, The Philippines under Martial 
Law, P- 



over "inferior" subjects. The Philip- 
pine Revolution and the first Philii> 
pine Republic, while espousing 
egalitarian and participatory ideals, 
were self-conj?ciously oligarchical 
and elitist, although nationalist in 
spirit. Throughout the American 
tutelage in democracy, egalitarian, 
populist, libertarian, and capitalist 
ideas and institutions were super- 
imposed upon the largely non- 
egalitarian, hierarchical, oligarchi- 
cal, and elitist socio-economic struc- 
ture and political culture. The 
colonial stance of American demo- 
cratic tutelage was mitigated only 
by the early decision to grant in- 
dependence to her ward upon 
meeting certain criteria of pre- 
paredness for self-rule. The Japan- 
ese occupation not only was a ruth- 
less authoritarianism by an alien 
conqueror, but it also revived in 
some areas under guerrilla control 
the rule of armed might by Filipinos 
over their powerless countrymen. 

Since independence was regained 
in 1946,the reinforcing combination 
of private enteri^rise, political free- 
dom, gross inequalities in wealth 
and access to power, social change 
and new challenges to tiie estaD- 
Hshed order, and links between 
Filipino capitalists and foreign bus- 
iness interests, all accelerated the 
centralization of governmental 
power and the concentration of 
wealth and the concomitant weaken- 
ing of local governments, local 
leadership, and local organizations. 
Intense political competition and 
political activism also spawned some 
warlordism and violence which 
eventually evoked an authoritarian 
response. 

Except in centers of greatest 
population, social change, and polit- 
icization, traditional values and 
behavior patterns have persisted. 



Filipino Democracy 



131 



Many "little people" still expect 
to be subordinate to and be domi- 
nated by the '*big people." Mass 
poverty continues to be justified, 
excused, and accepted in various 
ways, even as its reduction or 
elimination has been avowed by 
successive leaders and administia- 
tions. Now President Marcos speaks 
of '*die conquest of mass poverty" 
as the aim of the New Society. 
Despite three generations of demo- 
cratic politics, popular notions of 
leadership show admiration for the 
leader who is strong (inalakas), 
decisive and swift (inabilis), and 
cunning or wise (marimong), even 
if the concrete manifestations of 
such strength (palakasan), decisive- 
ness and expeditiousness (pabili- 
san), and cunning (katalinuhan) 
go beyond the bounds of a Western- 
ized legal and democratic system, 
for the traditional Filipino world- 
view or philosophy is non-dualistic. 
It is based on the unity of unwritten 
custom and formal laws. While 
American-style democracy empha- 
sizes individualism and equality, 
Filipino values stress communitar- 
ianism or belonging to the group 
(sakop) which, however, often is 
confined to the family or to the 
other face-to-face groups. Accept- 
ance of inequality and hierarchy 
and conformism {pakikisama) are 
valued as a way of ensuring harmony 
and togethemess. 

The democratic concept of leader- 
ship regards the leader mainly as 
instrumental to the achievement 
of shared goals and implies respon- 
sibility to the followers commen- 
surate with their limited support. 
Authority resides in the leader's 
position and his faithful exercise 
thereof In the Philippines, men, 
not laws, constitute the content of 
authority. 



Applying this traditional concept 
of leadership. President Marcos, 
"the Big Man," is the head of the 
national alliance system. "His cli- 
ents or followers look up to the 
Big Man and serve him personally. 
They attribute to him the accom- 
plishments of the group as well 
as make him the scapegoat for 
failure. . . . Loyalty is not issue- 
oriented but personality-oriented 
because the Big Man emlDodies the 
group. "^^ It can be argued that 
the foregoing concept of leadership 
leads to this conclusion which is 
disconcerting to the democrat, to 
say the least: "If the Filipino 
family and society is [sic] authori- 
tarian, so must be its government 
if it is to be Filipino. The Big Man 
is the symbol of the national sakop 
and should concretize its aspira- 
tions."^^ 

Among President Marcos's per- 
ceived political assets is his deep 
understanding, if not mastery, of 
mass psychology and popular values 
in relation to his leadership. In 
several speeches delivered under 
martial law, Marcos has used the 
organic and the familial analogy, 
which is traditional; 

To the President, he is the head of the 
national poHty, and the various govern- 
ment officials are his eyes and ears, 
his arms and fingers. He is also the 
father, and the rest of the people are 
his children. The nation, therefore, is 
one extended family, an organic whole 
in which everyone is ... a relative, to 
everybody.^'- 

By his assumption of total gov- 
ernmental authority under martial 

50. Leonardo N. Mercado, Elements of 
Filipino Philosophy (Tacloban: Divine Word 
University, 1974), p. 99. 

5L Ibid., p. 201. 

52. Agpalo, The Organic-Hierarchical Par- 
adigm, p. 24. 



132 



The Annals of The American Academy 



law, President Marcos has become, 
amid some hberal democratic ele- 
ments in the FiHpino poHtical 
system, a reincarnation, with a 
vengeance, of the pre-Spanish dato, 
the contemporary Pangulo (head) 
par excellence in the traditional 
view, although many Filipino demo- 
crats naturally deplore the fact. 
The rise of technocracy is consonant 
with the elitist nature of the new 
political system as with the old. 

The publicized commitment of 
the New Society to democratize or 
redistribute both power and wealth 
is both highly laudable and highly 
problematic. The means and their 
effectiveness are yet to be demon- 
strated, and it will take much time. 
Meanwhile, in addition to the posi- 
tive changes noted above, 

the most clear-cut political change is 
the increasingly pervasive strength of 
the Marcos regime. Political and eco- 
nomic initiative continues to come 
from the center. Not only is the Marcos 
regime concentrating and mobilizing 
v^ealth; it also is concentrating and 
mobilizing other instruments of politi- 
cal power, in particular the military, 
the mass media, and foreign resources. 
These instruments of political power 
contribute a technologically modernized 
torm of elite domination. In this fashion, 
e ite rule persists. Indeed, the ruling 
elite now possesses greater power than 
ever before. 

If this concentrated and pervasive 
political and economic strength can 
be utilized to change the political 
and economic structure fundamen- 
tally. President Marcos and the 
national alliance under him will 
have proved their basic thesis that 
the "democratic revolution" can be 
mounted from the center or the top, 

53. Rosenberg, "Conclusion: Premonitions 
of Martial Law," pp. 257-58. 



thus preempting for good, as he has 
intended, the bloody revolution 
from below. Othei*wise, "so long as 
resources and power continue to be 
lodged in a few in this otheiAvise 
enlightened age, the potential for 
grassroots movements looms ever 
greater."'^^ 

How stable is the new politi- 
cal system? Administration leaders 
claim that its stability is being 
ensured by steady building and 
consolidation of the structure of 
and support for the Marcos adminis- 
tration and the New Society, die 
control of the Communist and Mos- 
lem rebellions, and the restoration 
of peace and order. The institution 
of the Sangguniang Pamhansa (na- 
tional legislative advisory council) 
is cited as part of the transition 
to the parliamentary system en- 
visaged in the 1973 constitution. 
Government effectiveness and "dy- 
namic flexibility" also are cited as 
contributing to political stabilit>\ 
and so are international recognition 
and assistance in loans and invest- 
ments. Others hold tlie view that 
institutionalization of the evolving 
political system will not progress 
much until the constitutional transi- 
tion occurs. The fact that the suc- 
cession to President Marcos is the 
subject of an unpublished presiden- 
tial decree which is kept secret 
from the people is taken to be 
one clear sign of the inherent 
instability of the new political 
order. Still others believe that 
the military, having shared in gov- 
ernance, will not easily relinquish 
its unprecedented power. The view 
is even expressed that "The Filipinos 

54. Mary R. Hollnsteiner, "People Power: 
Community Participation in tlie Planning 
and Implementation of Human Settlements," 
in P/iz7ippine; SfufZ/e-s, vol. 24 ( 1976), pp. 5- 36. 



Filipino Democracy 



133 



are running a race with catastrophe. 
For it is far easier to lose freedom 
witliout bloodshed than to regain 
freedom without bloodshed/'^^ 

Whatever may be said of authori- 
tarianism in the New Society, it 
should be pointed out that the 
continuing influences of the Amer- 

55. Lopez, The Philippines under Martial 
LaWy p. XL 



ican democratic heritage and Span- 
ish Catholicism are being felt in 
the dialectics of continuity and 
change. For, indeed, one has to be 
rabidly against the Marcos adminis- 
tration not to appreciate how it 
ti'ies to temper the exercise of 
concentrated power with the moder- 
ating ideals of Christianity and 
liberal democracy, not to mention 
humane Filipino traditional values. 



