
^ , 

In the list of collaborators in the City go^rnment the absence 

of the name of Dr. Demetrio Belmonte, is very conspicuous. After 
what he has said and done against the Filipino leader and the Phil- 
lippine Army Officers and men and after all he has done to give com- 
fort and help to the Japanese, one wonders why this doctor who pro- 
pagates Japanese virtue and might still continues to hold office with 
impunity. The souls of those departed victims of Japanese atrocities 
cannot rest in peace as long as our government continues to harbor 
within its fold a man who is disloyal to his country. 


I accuse Dr. Belmonte first, for being- a Japanese Propagandist; 
second, as a traitor; for openly criticising the Philippine Army and 
President Quezon; third, for being a collaborationist by giving com- 
fort to the Japanese; fourth, for being corrupt and dishonest; fifth 
for treating the defeated Philippine A rny Officers and men cruelly 
and inhumanely; and lastly, I accuse him of conduct unbecoming a 
government official to the relatives of the Prisoners of War during 
the Japanese Regime. 


Sometime in 1942> before a meeting of Medical Officers and 
nurses in the City Hall, Dr. Belmonte said words to this effect: 

"Look at those Japanese soldiers exercising under the heat of the 
burning sun. They are well disciplined. They obey orders and are 
exact in everything. That is why they are sturdy and efficient 
not like the Philippine Army who are only "postura and postura" 
so that when the time came to fight, they could not do anything 
but run away in Bataan" 

Anv man who can utter such words about his country-men at a 
time when they needed the most comfort in their defeat, is capable 
of selling his own mother. This was said not under any pressure 
or threat from the Japanese. This was said precisely within the 
hearing of the Japanese in the City Hall in order to gain their 
good graces. Among those present at the mentioned conference who 
can confirm this are : Dr, Rafael Delgado, Nurse supervisors, 

Luisa. Cruz, Mrs. Tubig, Dr. A. del Rosario, Dr, Dionisio Farolan, 

Dr. Jose Bautista, and Onofre E. Borja. 

Not contented with this first outburst of treachery, he con- 
tinued to court the sympathy of the Japanese, he made the following 
statement soon after the flash came that beloved President Quezon 
had died. His words moreor less were : "We Filipinos think that we 
cannot set along without Quezon. We think that Quezon is a Superman. 
We cannQt run the Government without him. He is indispensable. 

Viihy now? We are running the Government and Quezon is already dead. 

So after all, we can run the Government without him and that all 
this about him, being a Superhuman is all bunk. This talk of 
Dr. Belmonte about a leader loved by the whole world as a great loss 
to the Allies, were neither uttered, under pressure nor threat, but 
of his own volition hoping that the Japanese Administration in the 
City Hall would get wind of it and he thereby win their good graces 
like other collaborators. This event took place in a gathering of 
nurses and Medical Officers, The testimony of nurse Luisa Cruz and 
Dr. Rafael E. Delgado, may be sought for. 


CONFIDENTIAL 




Increasing further his bid for the Japanese goodwill, thinking 
that the Americans would not come back any more he begun to organize 
closed door parties. He did not only think as a Japanese now, but 
he really began to act like one. At the Malate Health Center, he gave 
parties and dances for the Japanese officials. The Sampaloc Health 
Center was a frequent place of rendezvous for the enemy, the Mendi- 
cants Home is a silent witness to the Japanese gatherings there behind 
closed doors. Beautiful social workers and nurses were made to enter- 
tain the Japanese officials. Chaperons were not allowed to accompany 
these ladies. Dances, parties, and food aplenty and Lord knows what 
more. Sometimes these poor ladies were brought to the Manila Hotel 
to attend parties and then left to go home alone. What really hap- 
pened no one knows. Like the poor victims in Fort Santiago where we 
know only that they were tortured, so with these entertainers who were 
forced to attend parties and what happened really no one knows. Miss 
Cruz can testify to this. Taking advantage of their economic plight 

Dr. Belmonte utilized these girls to 'get closer to the Japanese. 
a 

He opened a' refresher course in his department and which all the 
nurses and other Medical Officers were required to take. All those 
who failed in Radio Taiso, which was the most important subject to him 
would not pass the course, and were administratively punished with a 
threat of separation from the service. Those employees found late and 
absent in Radio Taiso were punished by deducting their salaries. Is 
•not this kind of work within the term "Collaborator". In the sense 
that this Doctor gives comfort to the enemies, a collaborationist not 
selling war materials, but morally endorsing Japanese ways of Govern- 
ment and conduct of same. 

I accuse Dr, Belmonte of being dishonest and corrupt, unfit to 
hold public office. During the Pre-war days a good supply of milk for 
the poor children of Manila was deposited at the bodega ol the Sampa- 
loc Health Center. This doctor has taken about one hundred cases of 
this milk to his home in Intramuros at San Juan de Letran Street and 
then later offered them for sale at forty five pesos a case. This 
was found out later only because the drivers of the jitney being used 
by Dr. Belmonte revealed it. They are Antonio Murin and Pedro Tito. 
Miss Josef ina Tombo and Miss Cruz can testify to this anomally . So 
the milk intended for the poor children of Manila went to fill the 
purse of Dr. Belmonte and Mrs. Argonza, his nurse supervisor who helps 
him in this dirty manipulation. 

Endowed with the ability to make selfish use of whatever chance 
presented itself Dr, Belmonte repeated the same milk story during the 
Japanese regime . The Puppet Government gave milk intended for the 
poor children of Manila. Again Dr. Belmonte and Mrs. Argonza mani- 
pulated the issuance of milk in such a way that the poor children 
became the victims for the second time. The operation was in this 
manner: All the names of the children needing milk were registered 

in different centers. An specific example is the Intramuros Health 
Center in which Dr, Ricardo Garcia was in charge. Dr. Garcia could 
testify that no milk was given to these children but instead this 
milk was taken by Dr, Belmonte, by the fact that he is the only one 
who approved the issuance of this milk to anybody. Later on an agent 

C ON FI DE N T I A L 


- 3 - 






%/ 


of Mrs. Belmonte was selling this milk with the pretext that this 
milk was from the cooperative store, Mrs. Antero Cruz could testify 
on this. 


There seems to be no end to this string of dishonesty and corrup- 
tion on the part of this man. This time Cigars. The male employees 
under his department were given ration of cigars at a low cost, but 
the cigars never came. Later ration cigars reached the University of 
Sto. Tomas. It came out later that Dr. Belmonte presented the same 
cigars to the priests as a gift. Mrs. Valeriano, the wife of Dr. Val- 
eriano of the Bureau of Health can testify to this. This tallied to 
the fact that Dr. Belmonte could not be located for some time by the 
Americans because he was in Santo iomas University hiding, hiding not 
from bullets and shrapnels but from guerillas who had an eye on him 
since his utterances against the Philippine Army and President Manuel 
Quezon. 


Because of this successful stealing in the Government, Dr. Bel- 
monte thought perhaps he could go on without interference . This time 
he went after the Medicine that the Government intended for the Gar 
Prisoners. Kis accomplices were Mr. Hipolito and Mrs. Argonza. lhese 
jHgciicines were sold to the public at black market price . ihe witness 
to this are Dra. Pink, Dr. A. del Rosario, Miss Luisa Cruz, and nurse 
supervisor Socorro Cosio. 

By this time the action of Dr. Belmonte were very queer indeed. 

He began to act more Japanized than a real Jap. He ordered his subor- 
dinates to call the prisoners of war by their numbers "Never call them 
by their rank", you see Castaneda (Colonel to us) came to me personally 
to report, so Lim (General) must report here". He bawled out the re- 
latives and wives of war prisoners and prisoners themselves when they 
came to report to the City Hall. Mrs. Concepcion Dalao, wife oj. Col. 
Esteban Dalao, Pa, is a witness to this. He bawled them out and in 
harsh words, military in accent as if giving orders to slaves. 

. Dr. Belmonte before the outbreak of the war in 1941 was accused 
of estafa filed by Dr. Macaraig, San Agustin. He collected money for 
using his own car, but all the time he has been using the government 
car and gasoline. Counselor Segundo Agustin can testify to this. 

The following persons who could testify against him are: 

1. Dr. Rafael Delgado c/o Dept, of Health North Cemetry. 

2. Dr. Ricardo Garcia, 2250 Interior Rizal Avenue. 

3. imiss Luisa Cruz, Philippine Army Nurse c/o 60th Gen. Hospital 

4. Dr. Dionisio Farolan, 1st Lt. MC, c/o 60th Gen. Hospital. 

5. 1st Lt, Jose Bautista, MPCl at Alabang Training School. 

6. Miss Socorro Cosio,' Philippine Army Nurse c/o Camp MURPHY 

7. Dr. A. del Rosario, c/o Dept, of Health, Sta. Ana Health Center. 

8. Miss Josef ina Tombo, c/o, Dept, of Health - Nurse. 

9. Mr. Antonio Murin, c/o CET, Inspector. 

10 . 


CONFIDENTIAL 


