AHUBL LUIS QUEZON 
OH HIS 
C E 'J T E I A E Y 

* . Appraisal 

* Chronology 

* Reader < 

* Bibliography 



BY ALFREDO B. SAULO 

Biographer of Jorge B. Vargas, Folipc Agoncillo, 
. Norberto Romualdez, Manuel L. Roxas and 
Bienvenido If. Gonzalez 



A Project of the 
KATIOML SCIENCE DEVEL0PMEI1T BOARD 
Gen. Santos Ave., Bicutan 
Taguig, Metro Manila 

Augus t 19 , 1978 



AUGUST 19 
1878 - 1978 



MANUEL LUIS QUEZON 
ON HIS 
CENTENARY 

* Appraisal 

* Chronology 

* Reader 

* Bibliography 

By ALFREDO B. SAULO 



A Project of the 
NATIONAL SCIENCE DEVELOPMENT BOARD 
Gen. Santos Ave., Bicutan 
Taguig, Metro Manila 



DEDICATION 
To the Filipino people for whose 
£r.?sA°fi and i^dejPAndpnce Manuel 
.L. Quezon died in exile on 
August 1, 1944. 



Republika ng Piiipinas 

pambans tfiG ldpon sa pagpspaunlad ng agh#i 

(National Science Development Board) 
Gen. Santos Ave., Bicutan, Taguig, Metro Manila 

DR. MELECIO S. MAGNO 
Chairman 

Engr. PEDRO G. /JT ABLE 
Vice-Chairman & Executive Director 

Atty. Am alia Dy 
Board Secretary 



I. Administrative Service - 

Atty. Victor L. Nicasio, of ficer-in- charge 

1. Personnel Division - 

Mr. Benjamin B. Moraleda, acting chief 

2. Legal Division - 

Atty, Lillian Angeles, of ficer-in-charge 

3. General Services Division - 
Mr. Maximiano Tecson, chief 

4. Science Community Development Division - 
Mr. Simon Legaspi, chief 

II. Financial & Management Service - 
Mr. Agapito M. Perez, chief 

1. Budget Division - 

Mr. Jose Toledo, chief 

2. Accoiinting Division - 

Atty. Artemio C. Magsambol, chief 

3. Management Division - 

Miss Marcela R. C a tibog, chief 

III. Education & Public Affairs Service - 
Atty, Dominador 0. Reyes, chief 

1. Information Division - 

Mr. Salvador F. Zaide, chief 

2. International Relations Division - 

Mr. Silvestre V. Javier, officer-in- charge 

3. Education & Training Division - 
Miss \doracion .'mbrocio, chief 

4. Scientific Library & Documentation Division - 
Miss Delia 0. Torrijos, acting chief 

5. Field Operations Staff - 
Mr. Flaviano Pagador, chief 

IV. Planning Service - 

Dr. Elvira 0. Tan or Miss Lydia G. Tansinsin 
(rotation), officer-in-charge 

1. Planning & Programming Division - 
Miss Lydia G. Tansinsin, chief 

2. Project Development & Evaluation Division - 
Dr. Elvira 0. Tan, chief 

3. Research & Statistics Division - 
Mr. Marcial R. Diamante, chief 



*#**#*'*###** 



This space is reserved for the 
TABLE! OF ORSAmKATIOII 
of the firm or institution ptiblishing 
this book. 



##*##*#***## 



************ 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS \ 



The author is greatly indebted to the following friends 
and/or admirers of the late President Quezon who have extended 
additional assistance to complete this centennial project: 

* The management and staff of the San Miguel Corporation 
through the good offices of Mr. Teodoro F. Valencia, noted columnist 
and civic leader; 

* Mr. Jorge B. Vargas, chairman-president, Jorge 3. Vargas 
Filipiniana Foundat ion ; 

* Mr. Joso lulo, Jr., chairman-president, C-J Yulo &.Sons, | 
Inc . ; . 

* Mr. Pio Pedrosa, president, Prudential Bank; and 

* Mrs. Carmen Aguinaldo Vda. de Melencio, oldest daughter 
of General Smilio Aguinaldo. 

Thank you all. God bless you. 



************ 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 

FOREWORD ..... 

INTRODUCTION , I - VlVl 

PART I 

A. Quezon in History: An Appraisal .../•- $0 

B. Quezon Chronology (Annotated) . , .3/ — 
PART II 

The Quezon Reader - 5¥£ 

PART III - BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Section One - Quezon as. President of 

the Philippines 677 ~ 

Section Tvro - Quezon in Look3 fbf - "ThS 

Section Throe - Quezon in Philippine Pe- 
riodical Literature . . . ttf - 

INDEX 



************ 



This space in reserved 
for the 
FOREWORD 



* * * * * * ****** 



I_H T R 0_D_U g O_T_I 0_g 

IE 1 President Elpidio Quirino had his way, a monument to Manuel L. 
.u-json would bo erected side by side with Risal's "in every public plaza" 
w'aroufc-liout the country; Quezon's name would be "inscribed in numberless 
streets, squares and parks"; numerous schools, hospitals, "happy homes," ■ 
and otlu-.r charitable institutions would be erected, and new Eunicipali- 
tios, cities and provinces established to perpetuate his ..Memory. Quirino 
would also like to see distributed in all schools, colleges and universi- 
ties- books on the life and works of Quezon. 1 Why? 
Be ic.au.s e„ O^ui r ino . .knew.. .Que zp n . 

Former American Governor-General and U.S. Supr«yao Court Justice 
i'rank Murphy said the Uui bed States "never had a better friend, or (knew) 
one who struggled harder to achieve independence and. self-government for 
his country" than Manuel L. Quezon. Murphy believed that Quezon's life 
should be "preached in every pulpit" and taught in all schools and colleges. 
Why? 

^ocjuce_I%rj)hj. knew Quezon.. 

.'ti'r. Paeifico A. Ortiz, S.J. , former president of the Ateneo de Ma- 
nila University, said that "as generations come and go . . . (and) as now 
men and new leaders rise up and walk the stage of history, I an sure there 
will be two men forever towering above the shifting scenes, twin senti- 
nels of our destiny, unequalled peaks of Malayan grandeur: Rizal and 
queaon." 3 Why? 

iiecause .Prtiz„knex..^uA"i:l?i« As presidential family chaplain, he was 
at Quezon's bedside when the i'ilipino leader died on August 1, 1944, at 
Garanac Lake, New York. ^ 

Many other distinguished personages - Franklin D. Roosevelt, Ser- 
gio Osmena, Manuel A. Roxan, Claro K. Recto, Jose P. Laurel, and Douglas 
HacArthur -■ have -ill paid Quezon the highest tribute over: "Father of His 
Sountry," "father of Philippine Independence," "father of the Philippine 
Republic, "■ "Father of the National language," "Father of Social Justice," 
"Father of good government," etc. 

lj Eulogy delivered during the necrological services held at the U.S.T. 
chapel, July 21, 1946. In: S&eap.n. .notorial, book. Compiled and edited 
by i'ilemon Poblador. Manila: Quezon kWorial ' Cokaittee , 1952, pp. 93-99. 

?J funeral oration delivered at the necrological rites held at the joint 

session of the Congress of the Philippines, July 2G, 1946. .Ibid., pp. 101- 
102. 

2/ E 'ulogy delivered at the U.S.T. chapel rites, August 1, 1946. Ibid., 
pp. 124-127. 

.4/ "Quezon's Secret Agent," by Lt. Col. Smigdio Cruz, MC, as told to Dr. 
Conrado Mata, Philippines Free Press, January 31 and February 7 and 14, 
1948. ~ 

i - 



Quezon, the subject of this commemorative book, needs no introduction. 
Simply because he is a great man. He is too well .known. But precisely be- 
curse he is such a great .man that, in th3 words of Murphy, one could not add 
a :rord to his stature, intellectually and spiritually. "That is an impos- 
sibility, " ho explained. "Wo might as well attempt to retouch a master- 



..•co done by an immortal. 



„ 5 



Perhaps no book could ever completely do justice to the memory of 

Quezon. 

II 

THE author corves notice that the present book, in the light of Mur-' 
pay's incontrovertible testimony, does not attempt to do the impossible. Its 
purpose is primarily to commemorate the first centenary of the birth of 
Kanuel L. Quezon and perpetuate his memory. The author will be immensely 
satisfied if the book serves as a helpful guide to more perceptive, better 
organized, and mere adequately funded studies on the life of Quezon. 

•The "Appraisal" and "Annotated Chronology" of Quezon, which make up 
Part I of the book, are the author's substitute for a full-length, up- 
dated biography. The "Appraisal" attempts to condense in a number of pages 
Quezon's most significant contributions to his country. By these contri- 
butions, selected and interpreted in the context of our tames, the reader 
will be able to appreciate Quezon's place in history. Too often biographies 
!>:«.;oni3 too expansive or/get bogged down in details that the reader finds it 
difficult to pinpoint the subject's role in the never-ending drama of man. 

The "Quezon Chronology" is a first in Philippine biographical litera- 
ture. It is profusely annotated and much longer than the average chronolo- 
gy.- It provides a handy framework or outline for more comprehensive 
fjtudios should the reader - a student, writer or scholar - decide to pur- 
sue the subject further. Its decided advantage over a biography is that it 
gives the reader instant information about Quezon's activities at any par- 
ticular time or stage in his life or career. Being annotated, the chronolo- 
gy lightens the burden of assembling the sources of material on the subject. 

Part II - the "Quezon Reader" - is the most comprehensive so far un- 
dertaken in the Philippines, indicating the wide range of interests and pre- 
occupations of Quezon in his long and spectacularly fruitful public career, 
which had its own peaks and valleys, its triumphs and defeats, but always 
inexorably moving- forward, uninterrupted by even the irorst disease that ever 
afflicted mankind - tuberculosis. A lesser man might easily have succumbed 
to the ruthless malady. Physicians confirmed that Quezon had the disease as 
far back as 1927, about the same time that his "enemy," Governor-General 

5/ Kurphy eulogy, suora. 

6/ Carlos Quirino, liuezjm :., Paladin_ of Philippine Freedom, manila: Filipi- 
niana Book Guild, 1971, pp. 191-1927"'" 



- 11 



.Quezon 

Leonard "Iron" Wood, died of tumor of the brain, yet / • bravely went on for 
the next 17 years, fighting the "good fight," until he achieved the "mi- 
racle of the decade," by securing, almost single-handedly , the enactment of 
the "iydings-McDuffie independence law. So certain van Queson of his monu- 
mental achievement that in a message addressed "To the Filipino People," 
deted October 23, 1934, he could say: "I regret that I cannot be with you 
in the fortunate hour when you will be wholly free. But you are almost 
'there and have to go but a snort way. 

A- short way, ind:ud, i;as 12 years, 1934 to 19461 For what is a do- 
se?', years in the life of a nation? VJhat is twelve years against a background 
of 581 years of Western colonisation? 

The beautiful thing about the "Quezon lieader , " which forms Part II of 
the book, is that you could almofvt feel and hoar Quezon speaking right be- 
fore you, without any note::., speaking from the bottom of his heart, be- 
cause he had no need for ghostwriters to prepare his speeches. Here is 
one public servant who meant every word that ho said, and practiced what 

he preached! Perhaps the highest compliment over paid Quezon came from 

10 

his family chaplain to whom, as a .practicing Catholic , " he had fre- 
quently gone in moments of doubt to make confession in all humility. "Any 
nation," said his spiritual adviser, "could bo proud of such a leader. 
Any country would love to claim him as her own." ' And why net? Tide 
question is answered by Quirino , his long-ti^o private secretary and ca- 
binet member. Because Quezon, he said, is the "life and soul of his people - 

12 

the Filipino people." 

.7/ "I, j\ave„ fought the_g£op,d. fight, / I...have i ijiished. the. course, / JJbgv& 
KsSL thpl ^.i *h» -"Tim/ 4, 7. 

3/ "Two Farewell Messages of President Quezon, " ^\bly3XQ9&JXS9..£X9B&t 
July 26, 1947. Also in "Que a 0:1 in Action," a six-volume Quesoniana 
collection compiled by Prof. Juan F. Rivera, U.P. Law Center, Dilinian, 
Quezon City. Vol. V, pp. 2515-2510. hereinafter to be referred to as 
the Rivera Collection. 

.9/ Spanish colonization of the Philippines may be said to have started with 
the conquest of Cebu by Miguel Lopea de Legaspi in 1565- Vide. Gregorio 
i' 1 . Saide, Phj.lij?jmip_.Pj3ll 2 vols. Manila: 

Philippine Education Company, 1957, Vol. I, pp. 130-145. 

.0/ Says S'rcderic S. Marquardt in an article, "Quezon and the Church": "Ma- 
nuel L. Quenon was born inte the Catholic religion but spent most of his 
life as a mason, lie rooncerod the Catholic religion for the sake of him 
children;, and during his last -14 years practiced it and died reading the 
Bible." [The name and date of the magazine from which the clipping was 
taken were inivortently omitted. - ABS.] 

ll/ Ortia eulogy, sujora. 

12/' Quirino funeral oration,., supra. 

- iii 



Part III - "Quezon Bibliography" - is no doubt the most comprehen- 
sive bibliography on Quezon ever published. It will be extremely helpful 
to students of history, puulic officials, writers, and scholars. The first 
section - "Quezon as President of the Philippines" - contains the Adminis- 
trative Orders , Commonwealth Acts, toxecutivo Orders, General Orders, Mes- 



cutivo of the Commonwealth. These are Quezon's concrete achievements as 
President , which may be used as reference or basis of comparison by his suc- 
cessors in Kalacanang. 
w 

One ould like to think of these achievements as constituting the first 

stone of the cathedral which Quezon, the first Filipino nation-builder, laid 

an 

firmly in the ground, serving as/invitation or a challenge to later Pre- 
sidents to emulate if not surpass. D'hat Quezon achieved as a public ser- 
/like 

vant are/so many brightly shin ng mirrors - mirrors held up to nature be- 
cause they are spotless and true - in which hive Filipino people can see 
themselves and feel proud of their amazingly rich heritage. Filipinos who 
sell their birthright for "a mess of pottage, !l i.e., by acquiring alien 
citizenship purely for the sake of convenience, would do well to judge 
thsmselvvs by Quezon's sterling example. Point No. 1 in Quezon's "Fare- 
well Message to the Filipino People" reads as follows: "Value your honor, 
freedom and independence, fight for them to the last!" 13 What nation 
would not be proud to claim such a leader? 

The second and third sections - "Quezon in Books" and "Quezon in 
Philippine Periodical Literature" - provide the warp and woof, tho very 
fabric of scholarship from which, it is hoped, hundreds of books on Quezon 
may be written before the advent of uis second eentonviial - August 19, 
2078 - books that will really do justice to the memory of the "Father of 
His 8ountry." hero is a challenge that Filipino scholars worth their salt 
cannot shirk! 



A PRO J.- iCT of this magnitude would not have been accomplished with- 
out the assistance, direct- or indirect, of many people. The author take a 
groat pleasure in recording, for posterity, tho names of the men and women 
who have, in their persona], and official capacities, contributed to the 
happy realization of the project. 

Mr. Toodoro F. Valencia, a distinguished journalist and leader of 
many successful civic drives, is hereby cited for his fraternal interest, 
d«!ep understanding of the problems of creative scholarship, and expertise 
in securing additional assistance to tho project (see ACICNO"-/L.jPGIDiibTS) ; 
Mr. Simeon G. Rodriguez, associate producer, Zarzuola Foundation of tho 

23/ Rivera Collection, Vol. V, pp. 2515-2510. 




deliver' 




Ill 



iv 



Philippines, Inc.,. for the fruitful advice he has given on many occasions; 
Prof, ii'steban A. de Ocaapo, chairman, National Historical Institute, who 
. uorvod as principal "rof ereuc a" of the author; Dr. Marcolino A. Poronda, Jr. 
c. .airman, department of history, De la Salle University, who was one of the 
■.3.0,3 consultants in evaluating the project study; and Dr. . Amando M. Dalisay, 
former executive; director, National Research Council of the Philippines, who 
kindly referred to the HSDB the author' 3 application for funding of tho huc- 
«ou project. 

In addition, the author wiohos to express profound gratitude to the 
following ITSDB officials for their undiminished interest, cooperation and 
understanding: Dr. Holacio S. Hagno, chairman, who signed the Memorandum of 
Agreement for Project ho. NSDB-PP76O8 So ('.'iueson Cn His Centenary); iHngr. 
Pedro G. Afable, vice chairman and executive director, who followed the 
progress of the project from the planning stage to its final phase; Miss 
hydia G. Tansinslu, chief, Planning and Programming Division; Dr. Elvira 0. 
Tan, chief, Project Development and Evaluation Division; Dr. l'acita L. Zara, 
who served as acting chief of PDXD in the latter stage of the project; Mr. 
Jose B. Toledo, chief, Budget Division: Atty. Arteuio C ^agsambol, chief, 
auditing Division; Mr. Mario Valencia, one-tine of f icer-in-charge of PDED; 
and Mrs. Myrna Consolacion and Miss Juanita (Baby) Ines of PDED, who helped 
in processing tho project study, fly thanks also go to Mr. Salvador P. Zaid;, 
chief, Information Division, for ids moral support. Mr. Saide was the 
author's lor.g~tii.ie colleague in the prewar DMMiM Newspapers headed by Dr. Car- 
los P. Roraulo, publisher, until tho outbreak of the war on December 3, 1941, 
'/hen he was called to active duty, starting as major and ending up as bri- 
gadier general on the staff of General MacArthur, commander of the United 
States Army Forces in t he-Far East (USAFS'E). 

Likewise for tho record, Prof, hauro Garcia, director, Jorge B. V a r- 
•>•-:.! Pilipiniana Foundation, rendered invaluable assistance in onlisting tho 
aolp of its chairman-president', Mr. Jorge B. Vargas, behind the ^ueson pro- 
ject. So did Mr. Vicente P. Barranco, veteran newspaperman, and Ambassador 
Pduardo 'iuintero, in getting the support of Mr. Jose Yulo, Jr., chairman- 
president, C-J Yulo & Sons, Inc., and Mr. Pio Pedrosa, president of Pru- 
dential Dank, respectively. 

As chairman of the Kawit Historical Committee and viae president of 
tho Cavite Historical Society, the author has been in froquont contact with 
Mrs. Carmen Aguinaldo Vda. de Melencio, eldest daughter of General Emilio 
^guinaldo. Apprised of the juoaon centennial project, she readily sent in 
nor modest contribution. Together with her husband, Undersecretary of Justice 
Jose P. Melencio, and their two daughters, Amor and Enilina, Mrs. Melencio 
joined the ••iuoson independence mission that left for Washington, D.C., on 
November 4, 1933. 1 This was the last and most successful independence 

.14/ Isabelo P. Caballero and II. de Gracia Concepcion, Pl^o^RKJ^..^l°?X 
.°JL A.A^tion .and. Its. foremost Statesman. Manila: International Pub- 
lishers, 1935, pp. 535-337". 



respectively, of the Pilipiniana and Asia Division; Hiss Hemchie C. Kar- 
quoa and Ilrs. Celia Bautista of the rare bocks and manuscript section; 
Mrs. helot C Moral, in charge of the microfilm room; and Mr. Maximo B. 
La;,o, chief of the serial section. At this writing lira. Bolos is the 
officor-in-chargo of the National Library. 

The author personally conducted his research at the Main Library 
ol the University of the Philippines in Dilinan, que ..on City. He wishes 
*° GXpreSS Mo thank " rJ t0 U ^ *»Ana Dayrit, th„ university librarian, 
and to the folloui - personnel of the archive section: Mrs. Yolanda C. 
Cranda, Mrs. Josefina ¥;.. Bomingucz, Hiss Lnz y\ Plopino, and Mr. Rodolfo 
'for lit. . 

One of the happiest moments experienced bv the author in the course 
of his research was his ncting with Prof. Juan J?. Rivera of the U.P. L aw 
-enter, thanks to the arrangement nado by -Mrs. Grande. Prof. Rivera 
is the owner of the six-volume quezoniana collection, »q UOHon in Action," 
'• thUh Wao exte, ^i^ly used in the project. The author/pro? muTsrati- 
•bude to Prof. Rivera for allowing him to make use of his valuable col- 
lection. 

Maj. Liberato C. Jimenez (Ret.), of Gahak, Kawit, Cavite, like- 
wise offered to the author the use of his collection of Quezon clippings 
gathered over a period of 3 0 year,. Maj. Jimenez is the vice chairman of 

Xm KaWit Ul3t ° rical °omMttoo and secretary ,f the Cavite Historical So- 
oiet,y. 

The quezon project research staff fluctuated in size as the si- 
tuation demanded. At one time it had si* members, including Mr. and Mrs. 
Justin 3. Saulo, Miss Isabella M. M : ;rano, Mrs. luzvidnda Osorio-de Bios, 
H:,ss ^nrica B. Mantilla, and Mi,, Cynthia H. lose. Asotin (Lolov) is the 
author's nephew. Por many years he was the PRO and editor in the office of 
** provincial governor of Rizal. his wife, the former Estelit Gemontiza, 
XS " Writ0r ' Aaid0 ™ ^-^r. the major part of the research work, Miss' 
-*».rano and Mrs. Osorio did the typing of the manuscript. *.„ Jose worked 
for only one week because she was appointed to a permanent job in the Bu- 
reau of Records Mana:.:e, t ,,t. Miss Han till* nervfjA for ..oven -n,nths. 

,nUth0r ' s 01ll - v daughter, Celia, and her co-teacher, Miss Josefina 
Biaz, helped in the proofreading. 

The mimeographing of the manuscript, a long and laborious process be- 
cause of the freouent chan.-i.ng of the stencil sheets, was made possible 
through the assistance extended by Mr. Ambrosio S. Capayas, district super- 
visor of Kawit, Mrs. Constancia N. Agellon, principal of the Gahak-Harulas 



- vii 



.Jlei.iGr.tary School, and Mr. Rolando Baron, school utility man, who operated 

thj miraoograph machine. Miso Jovita Peregrino, school librarian, made the 
tedious mimeographing job seem light by hor presence and engaging: personality. 

Tho author is happy to note that every senber of hie family pitched 
in to assure the coapletion of the project: his wife, iJieavonida, their 
tvio sons, Tanglao and i'loranto, and the latter' s wife, Loreta, and even 
vl'.oir two-year-old grandson, Glenn-Glenn, who frequently barged into his 
Gr..'-uipa's library with an armful of fresh sunshine and happiness, breaking 
;:h.-. monotony of the 18-month research work. 

My thanko alao go to my good friend, Mr. Consorcio Borje, noted editor, 

for going over the manuscript. 

But, of course, the errors and shortcomings of the book, including 
the opinions and conclusions, are the sole responsibility of the auinor. 



ALFRiCDG B. SAULO 

Ijaator Sunday, March 26, 1978 
jlavit, Cavite 




- viii - 



PART I 



A - QUEZON IN HISTORY 
( An Appraisal ) 

AS THE Filipino nation celebrates the first centenary of the birth 
of Manuel L. Quezon, the firat President of the Philippine-,, 1 it is 
pertinent and maybe helpful to ask a few relevant questions. What is 
Quezon's place in history? VJhat, to paraphrase Rizal, did Quezon achieve 
for the country that gave him "life and knowledge" and made him what he 
was? If his life was not a mere "pebble lost in the field" but one that 
did "form part of some edifice," what had he accomplished to merit the 
everlasting gratitude of his people? If Quezon's life, as one famous Fi- 
lipino journalist and diplomat has said, was the "symbol of +he undying, 
undaunted, and undefeated soul of the Philippines," 5 what, indeed, have 
wo done to make it serve as an example worthy of emulation by every Fili- 
pino? Finally, have the Filipino people, for whose freedom Quezon sacri- 
ficed his life, dying in exile like Del Pilar and Lopez Jaena,' kept faith 
with his high ideals and aspirations? 

Quezon, of course, is considered "one of the greatest men of hie 
time." But to have an idea of his greatness, one cannot help quoting a 
few distinguished men whose judgments may bo considered authoritative. 
First, there is Sergio Osmena, Quezon's colleague and life-long rival for 
political supremacy, who calls the latter "Esther of Ei3 Country." 5 The 
same kudos is applied to him by the late President Manuel A. Roxas and 
Claro H. Recto, president of the 1934 Constitutional Convention. Quezon's 
death, according to Roxas, "took both a father from his country and a 

1/ This is the official title of the chief executive of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines as stated in section 1, article VII (Executive De- 
partment) of the 1935 Constitution. By comparison, Emilio Aguinaldo's 
official designation in article 56, title VII (Executive Department) of 
the Malolos Constitution is "President of the Republic." He is also 
referred to as "President of the Revolutionary Government of the Phi- 
lippines and Captain-General and Commander-in-Chief of the Army." 

2/ The words in quotation marks are those of Simoun addressing Basilio in 
Rizal 's El Filibus t erismo . Translated from the Spanish by Leon Ma. Guer- 
rero. London: Longmans, Green Co., Inc., 1965, p. 52. 

2/ Carlos P. Romulo, "Quezon is the Symbol of the Undefeated Soul of the 
Philippines," Evening News . July 5, 1946. 

4/ N. de Ramos, "Quezon's Leadership," Manila Times . August 19, 1956. ■ 

Sergio Osmena, "Quezon, Father of His Country." In: Vital Speeches . 
1954, The National Library, pp. 169-172. 



- 2 - 

leader from the world. The pain of loss is felt wherever men are free." b . 

Quezon, says Recto, was the "exemplary patriot who dedicated his gifted 

intellect and his passion for freedom to the service of his people." lie 

adds that the "Star of Baler" was truly the "architect of freedom and 

7 

father of our country." 

The same opinion is shared by the internationally known author, John 
Gunther, who, besides calling Quezon the "Father of Hie, Qountry." des- 
cribes him as tho "Beau Brunmiol" among the strong man of Asia. James 
Wingo, noted Filipino correspondent in Washington, former Laguna Go- 
vernor Dominador R. Chipeco, 10 and Prof. Celedonio 0. Resurreccion, ah 
avid student of Philippine history, all have, in their separate ways, coma 
to tho conclusion that Quezon deserves to be callod "father of Bis Country." 

l!^ther_of_the_Republic 

On the other hand, General Douglas Mac Arthur, whose expertise extends 
beyond the field of military science, and the Filipino historian, Dr. Gro- 
gorio F. Zaide, both agreu that Quezon is the "father Of the Philippine Re- 
public." 12 Prestige-wise, this term is just one little notch below that 
of "father of fti:: Country." For, truth to tell, a country may, in the 
course of its long history, witness the establishment of not one but aovoral 
republics. The present Philippine Republic, for instance, is the third on 
record, the first two being the Malolos Republic headed by Aguinaldo, and 
the second, the Japanese-sponsored Republic under Jose P. Laurel. Throe 
magazine article writers likewise consider Quezon tho "father of the 



6/ Manuel A. Roxas, "Quegon Was No Ordinary Han." Eulogy delivered at tuc 
joint session of the Congress of the- Philippines, July 28, 1946. i-J«o 
Quezo n Memorial Book . Compiled and edited by Filemon Poblador. liaailut 
Quezon Memorial Committee, 1952, pp. 03-92 . 

7/ Claro M. Recto, "Quezon, Architect of Freedom." Eulogy delivered at 

the U.S.T. Chapel rites, July 29, 1946. Vj/le Sol II. Gwekoh, SSflfliiSLL.Ii. 

Quezon. His Life and Career . Manila: University Publishing Co., Ino., 

1948 (AppeiidiceT," pp. 293-299. 
8/ John Gunther, "Beau Brunuaol Among Asian Dictators," This Week, magazine, 

August 16, 1959. 

Sj James Wingo, "Quezon, Father of His Country," fenila Post, November 15, 
1945. 

10/ Dominador R. Chipeco, "Father of His Country," KaniJU^TJ^., August 20, 
1956. 

\\J Celedonio 0. Resurreccion, "Quezon and the Commonwealth," Historic al_gu.3 
let in, Vol. VI, No. 3, September 1962. 

127 Douglas llacArthur, "Tribute to Quezon," Manija Daily Bulletin,, July 29 
1946. iilulogy delivered during the necrological rites at tho Congress o 
the Philippines, supra. Also Gregorio F. Zaide, "Quezon, Father of Ue 
Philippine Republic," Evening News magazine, August 19, 1950. 



- 3 - 



Philippine Republic." tilth slight variation in phraseology, a vernacu- 
lar writer calls Quezon the "arkitekto" (architect) of the Philippine Re- 
public." 14 

Fat her of Phil ip pine Independence 

Much in the same vein, four other writers and two periodicals con- 

15 

sider Quezon the "Father of Philippine Independence." Doubtless more 
than any other Filipino, living or dead, Quezon dedicated his entire adult 
life, 1903 through 1944, to the cause of Philippine independence. The irony 
of it, however, is: that while he, almost single-handedly, secured the Tyd.in-c 
McDuffio Act fixing the date of independence on July 4, 1946, he did not 
live long enough to a 30 it. He died -when MacArthur ' s liberation forces woro 
just 600 ai3.es away from the Philippines: 

Two great hypotheses are involved in the question of Philippine in- 
dependence. First, had the United States government agreed to the proposal 
made by Quezon in the course of formal talks with President Roosevelt on 
March 18, 1937, advancing the date of Philippine independence to either De- 
cember 30, 1938 (Rizal Day) or to July 4, 1939, and, as a corollary to this, 
had the President of the United States concluded a treaty with the foreign 
powers for the "perpetual neutralization" of the Philippines, as stipulated 

in Section 11 of the Tydings-KcDuf f ic Act, the Philippines might not have 

17 

been dragged into the war. Japan, it must bo noted, had assured Pre- 
sident Quezon in Tokyo that she would be only too glad to sign such a treaty 



.lj/ S. H, Franc ia and Pete Gonzalez, "Quezon, Father of Philippine Republic," 
^li4]2E4SS_^ c .^2ai°_S® > August 1955; and Pascual Manalo, "Kanino 
Utang and Republika ng Pilipinao?" , Kalayaan, Agosto 16, 1956. 

IA/ Jesus C. Olega, "Manuel L. Quezon, Arkitekto ng Republika ng Pilipinas, ;| 
Bagon g-Bu hay, Agosto 19, 1957. 

25J ^ladio Caliwara, "Star of Baler Remembered as Kan Vfho Shaped the Destiny 
of the Philippines," Manila Chr onicle. August 19, 1955; Jose Burgos P. 
Padlan, "The Legacy of Manuel L. Quezon," and Felix F. Gabriel, "kanuol ' 
L. Quezon as Resident Commissioner," both articles appearing in the 
Hist orical Bulletin, loc. cit . ; "Father of Philippine Independence," Phi- 
lippi nes Today. August 1965; and "Quezon, Architect of P.I. Freedom," 
Evening^ j%ws , August 20, 1957. 

16/ "The Morning of August 1st (Philippine Time) or August 2nd (U.S. Ti. : .ic), 
1944." Excerpts from "Quezon's Secret Agent," by Lt. Col. liimigdio Cru:., 
MC, as told to Dr. Conrado Mat a, Phi lippines F ree Press. January 33 , 
and February 7 and 14, 1948. In: "Quezon in Action," a six-volume Qiu.— 
zoniana collection compiled by Prof. Juan F. Rivera, of the U.P. Law Cen- 
ter, Diliman, Quezon City. Hereinafter to be referred to as Rivera Col- 
lection, Vol. V, pp. 2521-2526. 

2JJ Speech at a popular banquet in Quezon's honor at the Rizal Memorial Sta- 
dium, August 20, 1937. JfJgasagSS. S£^XSL?^S^^. » Vol. 3, Part I, p. 109 
Availab3.e at the Jorge B. Vargas Filipiniana Foundation. Hereinafter to 
be referred to as Quezon ^e ssages . JBVFF. 



recognizing the Philippines as a neutral territory after obtaining her in- 
dependence. ^ 

Second, had Guczon lived long enough to be able to come back with 

r 

MacArthur, the Philippines might have achieved hcyindependencs sooner, ..or- 
haps immediately after MacArthur 1 s announcement on July 5, 1945, that the 
entire country had been liberated from the Japanese. 19 The basis of t'aia 
hypothesis is Joint Resolution No. 93 of the United States Congress, si: ; 
by President Roosevelt on J une 29, 1944, declaring that the United StaVr 
government, after driving away the enemy, shall "restore as quickly af: por:~ ■ 
siblo the orderly and free democratic processes of government to the Fili- 
pino people, and thereupon establish the .complete P-ndej^denc j|__gf. JM PI dl?J!r 
pdgo_ I_sla nd3 ae a separate an^ " ( Italics supplied - 

ABS.) 

Quezon announced the signing of this important document in his last 
July 4th message, less than one month before his death at Saranac Lake, Slow 
York, on August 1, 1944. In connection with this resolution, several inU 
resting questions have cropped up. Why was the clear and unequivocal intsat 
or purpose of Joint Resolution No. 93 not carried out during the Osmena ad- 
ministration? What steps did Osmena tales to secure the immediate implemen- 
tation of the resolution? 

On the other hand, since Roosevelt and Quezon had died before the li- 
beration of the Philippines, did the United States government, for unknown 
reasons, simply lose interest in carrying out the objective of the resolu- 
tion? Why? Or, putting it another way, did the United States just renege on 
her solemn commitment to give immediate independence to the Philippines? 
Was the shelving of the resolution intentional or not? Did it not imply 
lack of faith in the Osmena administration? 

P^nnda^j^s__of^o^ub^c__L^id 

There is no doubt that a strong leader like Quezon, had- he lived, 
would have exerted his utmost to secure the immediate implementation of the 
all-important resolubion. It in not difficult to inagino that he would have 
raised hell if only to call the attention of the Americans that they could nc 
trifle with Philippine independence. Quezon's instant and positive rww 
was something that the people could anticipate - it was inherent in his 
dynamic personality. Therein, it must be admitted, lies the great difference 
between Quezon and Osmena. One was quick and decisive, the other cool and 



13/ Manuel L. Quezon, Th e Good Fxtrht . Mew York: 1>. Apple ton-Century Co., Inc 
1946, pp. 177--17S. 

12/ Free Philippines. Manila, July 5, 1946. Quoted in Gregorio P. Zaide, 
Philippine Political and Cultural. History. 2 vols. Manila: Philippine 
Education Co., 1957," Vol. II, p. 360. 

20/ The Philippines. August 1944, p. 27. Rivera Collection, Vol. VI, ?. 24 



procrastinating like Hamlet. 

Quezon's crowning glory - and this is important for students of Phi- 
lippine history to remember - lies in the fact that what the Filipino peool' 
failed to get by revolution - the country's independence - this son of a pc..:. 
couple of Balt-r, this former ca£ista, this nan of destiny, won it without 
firing a single shot. Recto recalls that after the death of the infant Re- 
public headed by Aguinaldo, t-iuoaon and the other young patriots of the til© 
"again plunged into the struggle, this time not with guns, but with thy elo- 
quence of the tribune and the pen of the statesman . . . The fight for our 
independence which Quezon carried on in the United States is one of the 
brightest pages in the history of all peoples aspiring to be free. He fought 
with pen and with his eloquence in the halls of Congress, in party conventions 
at conference tables, in the press, in popular assemblies . . . One after 

another he captured the historic citadels which marked the progress of our 

21 

struggle towards independence." 

In fine, the independence that the Filipinos are enjoying today is 
Quezon's most magnificent achievement as well as his greatest contribution t" 
the Motherland. As first president of the Commonwealth, he not only laid th . 
cornerstone of the first all-Filipino government in the 20th century but als. 
accomplished certain fundamental tasks of nation-building. Thus when the Pa- 
cific V/ar broke out in late 1941 and engulfed the Philippines, because of our 
colonial link with the United States, Quezon had already completed laying th* 
firm foundations economic, political, social and cultural - of the pre;:; .rat 
Republic . 

President Ramon Magsaysay calls Quezon the "father of Philippine c-j- 
op 

mocracy." This statement, the author believes, requires some explanation. 
What Magsaysay probably moans is that before Quezon became president of the 
Commonwealth, there had been no real democracy in the Philippines. For, in- 
deed, democracy as we know it was out of the question when the country was 
still a Spanish colony. Rule of the people, by the people, and for the peopl- 
- the three fundamentals of democracy - is an impossibility under alien do- 
mination. The short lived Aguinaldo government that was set up after the down- 
fall of the Spanish regime, although republican in form, did not have much, 
time to develop into a fullblown democracy. The Philippine-American War nipp; 
it in the bud. *t is true that the American colonisers - latecomers in the 
bloody game of imperialism - taught the Filipinos the rudiments of democracy 

2l/ Recto eulogy, JLoe. ci_t. 

22/ "Ama si Quezon ng Demokrasya N a tin, Sabi ni RK," Mabuhay, Agosto 19, 
1955. 



- 6 - 

by allowing them, under the Jones Law, a legislature with certain limitation 
while the executive branch was headed by an American governor-general. Such 
was the situation when the Commonwealth government was established on Novem- 
ber 15, 1935. 

Although controlled by the sovereign power of the United States, the 
Commonwealth regino gave the Filipinos the largest measure of democracy. 
Section 1, Article II of the Yjjj Constitution provides that "the Philippin . 
is a republican state. Sovereignty resides in the people and all gover;;n,:;r. 
authority emanates from them." Thus by his election as first president of 
the Commonwealth, Quezon had the signal honor of establishing a viable do :-e 
racy in the Philippines. In this sense ho may bo considered the "father cf 
Philippine Semocracy." 

Suffice it to say, however, that of all Filipino leaders at the inc.;p 
tion of the Commonwealth, Quezon was the most qualified to implement the de- 
mocratic mandate of the Constitution. He had served seven years as reside"; 
commissioner to Washington, during which time he/ d '' Rti ^ ail ln^^i^fy 1 fec 1 ?^ 
nical and sophisticated art of lawmaking in the Congress of the United K* r 

- •..•% , receiving the unqualified plaudits «..:? 

his peers. "Quezon," said the Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives, 
''did for his country more than any two men could have done." 2 ^ "No nan," 
said another solon, "could be more deserving of his people's acclair; th-->n 
Quezon." ' The author of the Philippine Bill of 1902, Rep. Allen Cooper of 
Wisconsin, considered him "without equal as an independence advocate." d ' 

Quezon had so successfully inured himself to the workings of democrv.cy 

os , 

that he knew its strengths and weakness/ its advantages and disadvantages, as 
practised in America. Consequently, when he assumed the presidency of tiu> 
Commonwealth, he was already convinced that American-style democracy could not 
bo transplanted, root , trunk and branch , into the Philippine soil without 
certain adjustments or modifications. 

Firit, according to Quezon, a true democracy rests on an enlightened 
citizenry, which is possible only when the people have reached a certain 

12/ Press statement issued by Speaker Champ Clark, U.S. House of Represei.1 •. 
tivos. In: TJig_ .Philippine Republic , March-April 10 3.6. Rivera" Collec- 
tion, Vol. II, p. 705. 

2jJ Tribute from Rep. Moore of Pennsylvania. In: "Quezon's Farewell to Con- 
gress that Becomes Congress Farewell to Quezon," by Patrick Galle.gbor, 
editor, Far Eastern Bureau, Washington, D.C. Published in the Philippi ne 
v ol. I, No. 10, pp. 11-20, October 1916. Rivera Collection, Vol."' 
I, pp. 338-402. 

25/ Tribute from Rep. Henry A13.en Cooper of Wisconsin, tbid., pp. 388-402. 

26/ Speech on the first anniversary of the Commonwealth, November 15, 1936. 
Quezon Papers, Microfilm Reel No. 36, The National Library. Hereinafter 
to be referred to as QP, KR#36, TNL. 



- 7 - 



level or stage of intellectual development or politicization. A viable de- 
mocracy, he states further, needs free speech coupled with clean and hones 4 : 
on 

elections. The rule of the press is primarily to serve as an instru.:! nx; 

23 

in moulding a sound public opinion in order to safoguard democracy. J ;>?•• 
rupt and inefficient public officials are the worst enemies of democracy 
cause they underline thej people's faith in the government ; and when the 
pie lose their confidence in bho constituted authorities, then democracy f.c 
doomed. ^ 

Based on his own experience :ue»on believes that political parties 

30 

are not indispensable in a democracy. A partyless democracy, he itisi.-rc::. 

is feasible provided that there is complete freedom of information and dia- • 
31 

cussion. Contrary to orthodox political belief, fiscalization .of ths ~d ■ 
ministration is possible even without political opposition. 'This function rif 
be performed by groups of concerned ci linens, not necessarily political par-- 
ties. There can be no freedom without self-restraint, ho asserts, and sc.'' 
restraint in the use of ipowor, not the Constitution per _se, can safeguard 
democracy. 

leather of Philippine Army 

The Philippine Army traces its roots back to Iiarch 22, 1807 when the- 
revolutionary government under Aguinaldo was sot up during the Tejercs Con- 
vention in Cavite. It was this ragged people's army that later fought the 
vastly superior American expeditionary forces before the turn of the century? 
But when the Philippine-American l.'ar ended after the capture of Aguinaldo in 
Palanan, loabola, on March 23, 1901 or after the surrender of lialvar on Apr.!.". 
16, 1902, this revolutionary army virtually disappeared. Hot a single pl--.tr-. 
of this army survived to f.--rr.i the nucleus of the Philippine Amy that was sr t 
up under Commonwealth Act lie. 1 , otherwise known as the National Defense Law 
signed by President sues or. on December 21, 1935. Consequently, the PhilioP-' "• 
Army under the Coranonwcalth was entirely different from its predecessor. T* 
came into being solely through the initiative of President -'jueson. 

'.That many people seen to forgot is the fact that while the United St-'.-! 

2jJ Untitled speech, 1958, n.d.n. 'iP, Kfi;;'4 i , T?TL. 

28/ Message in the PhlllriTiincs, , ♦for.a.ld Cor-isionvealth inauguration Suppleiic-it, 
November 7, 1935. Pi iffty38, Ti-iL. 

22/ Quezon to Speaker Gil Montilla of the i-'irst National Assembly, July 
25, 1936. "••uezon Koasaftco. Vol. 2, Part I, pp. 213-214. 

20/ Speech before the II. P. Alumni Association and the U.P. student body, 
1938, n.d.m. (no day and month), qp, HftjiHl , Till. 

2l/ speech before the U.P. Student Council, July 16, 1940. 'P, Mi;;-44, THL. 

2%/ Speech at the open forum of the U.P. Alumni Association, August 7, 1 940, 
Uivora Collection, /el. V, pp. 2241-2242. 

22/ Address at the U.P. Alumni Irorum, Villamor n all, August 7, 1940. -iP, 'i"M 
44, TI-IL. 



- 8 - 

under the Jones 'Law, agreed to grant coraplote independence as soon as a sit:.'^. 
government could be established in the Philippines, yoi she did not provide 
the 'Filipinos any opportunity to build and develop their own amy to saf ogUr- v. 
that independence. This was the American dilemma. The United States, as a 
democracy, could not in conscience deny the Filipinos thoir right to indepen- 
dence; but as a colonizer she could not trust then enough to establish thei? 
own defense system which could work not only against any outside aggress -.ir 
but also against America: herself, .. „ 0 • .. 

Quezon, thanks to his genius, at once saw the solution to this dilo> 
Through his own initiative abetted by his charismatic personality and -suarv'; ■ 
lous eloquence, the Philippine Legislature in IS 17 passed the Kilitia Act- 
creating the Philippine National Guard, which Quezon subsequently offor.-.d tc 
President Wilson to fight side by side with the American expeditionary forest 1 
in Europe during World War I. 54 Quezon had the foresight to realise that f.\ 
25,000 Filipinos comprising the Philippine National Guard, and to be trained 
by American officers, could provide the nucleus of the native army that would 
be established to protect the Philippines after independence. Unfortunate!;^," 

the Armistice came too soon on November 11, 1518, preventing the Filipino 
n , from seeing 

Guardsmen/ action at the Western Front. The P2W was demobilized soon 

after the war. When the Philippine Army was set up after the inaugurate' " ; ' . 
the Commonwealth, it had to depend primarily on the few thousand PhilipviaA 
Scouts, an integral part of the United States Army, and on the Constabulary 
which was trained essentially for police work. ^ 

Anchored on the truism that self-preservation is the first law of life, 
lor men as well as for nations, - the Philippine Amy was organised as a 
result of an intensive information campaign carried on by Quezon. He ap;. .•al--'d 
to the patriotism of the Filipino people, to their sense of responsibility 
and self-respect. "Wo have to rely on ourselves to defend our national into* 1 - 
rity, he said. "National defense is the duty of every self-resnectin-- Fi- 
lipino. In the course of his drive to mako the Filipinos defense-conscious 
he made such important utterances as, "A nation ready be defend itself coi.uv.3da 

2±/ Carlos Quirino, /jue.zon: Paladinjpf Philippine Freedom, Manila: Fili-r'- 
niana Book Guild, Vol. XVIII, 1971, pp. ' 1~21-122T aiTd" Zaide , op. citl ... 
Vol. II, pp. 252-2^3. " 

35/ Theodore Friend, Betw een Two Efcroi reai The Ordeal of the Ph ilippines , 23£*t' 
12.4.6. Manila: Solidaridad Publishing House",* 19697 PP." 164-167. 

2S/ Address on national defease at the University of the Philippines, February 
12, 1936. Quezon Messar-es. Vol. 2, Part I, JT5VFF, pp. 32-53. 

2jJ Speech before the Philippine Columbian Association, September 25, 1^35. 
Rivera Collection, Vol. Ill, pp. 1191-1192. 

22/ Press statement on national defense, 19^6, n.d.m. QP, MR#36, TflL. 



- 9 - 

the world's respect"; J ^ "National defense is a constitutional mandate' 1 ; 

41 / e 

"Self -defense is the supreme right of mankind" ; "We must/ready to kill 

or die in defense of homo and country" ; ^ "Military training makes bettor 

and disciplined citizens"; ^ and, "The Philippines is never going to war 

a a 

except for self-defense." r 

A realist, Quezon, of course, never believed that the Philippines could 

45 

successfully defend herself from invasion by a f irst-class power. Never- 
theless he said that the Philippine national defense prog- am , envisioned in 
Commonwealth Act No. 1, "must servo notice upon the world that the citizens of 
these Islands are not to be subjugated; that conquest of this nation cannot be 
accomplished short of its utter destruction; and that destruction would in- 
volve such a staggering cost to an aggressor, both in blood and in gold, that 
even the boldest and the strongest will unerringly mark the folly of such an 
undertaking . " . ^ 

"Foundi ng Father" 

An Aaerican-owned Manila daily newspaper, during one of the traditional 
Quezon Day rites, describes Quezon as the "founding father." 47 Franklin b. 
Roosevelt, the only American over elected four times as president of the United 
States, likens <juozon to Washington. "He (Quezon) will be remembered," says 
FDR, "with the respect and veneration that we in the United States have for 
the name of George Washington." <r ° 

As "founding father," it fell to Quezon the great task of building, the 
Filipino nation up from the debris of Western colonization. First of all, ho 
had to appeal to all Filipinos for national unity. "Without it," he said, 
"everything is lost. National unity means our consciousness of oneness as a 
people with the same history, the sane ideals, characteristics, customs, 

22/ Message to the First National Assembly, November 25, 1935. Quezon Messa- 
ges., Vol. I, op. Rev. Ed., JBVFF, pp. 22-23. 

4.0/ Speech on the occasion of the first anniversary of the Commonwealth. 
November 15, 1936. QP, MR#38, TNI. 

ill/ Message to the First National Assembly, November 25, 1935. Quezon Messa- 
ges, Vol. I, Sp. Rev. 3d., JBVFF , pp. 19-20. ** * 

42/ Address before ROTO cadets, University of the Philippines, January 18. 
1937. Ibid., Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, p. 24. 

42/ Speech at the luncheon given by the Mayor's Committee, at Waldorf 
Astoria, New York, February 20, 1937. 

MJ Message to the First National Assembly, .supra. 

45/ Speech broadcast over the; Columbia Broadcasting Station, January 26, 
1934. QP, MR-;.' 36, TEL. 

,4J5/ Message to the First National Assembly, _su?ra. 

4.2/ "Quezon: Founding Father," M anila Daily Bulle tin. August 19, I960. 
4 6 / Gwekoh, op. cit . , p. 247. 



- 10 - 

aspirations, and roa&inos3 to sacrifice for the 3ame goal." ' Now, once 

unity was attained, he cichorted then to have unity of purpose or policies 

50 

which must be carried out to their logical conclusion. But national poli~ 
s 

cies or program oannot be successfully undertaken without national disciplir • 

The underlying spirit of national discipline, he added, is the self-sacrif ic 

51 

of every citizen in the interest of the whole corv-amity or nation. 

"To be a worthy Filipino,'' according to Cjuoaon, "a worthy citizen of a ,;ortk 

52 

country, one must loam his duties before demanding his j.±ghts." To hiii, 
duties come first before rights, suCi* as duty to defend the coimtry from 
attacks, within and without ; duty to pay one's taxes promptly in order to sup- 
port the government ; duty to vote and vote honestly for candidates worthy of 
their responsibility as public servants; duty to obey the laws, ordinances, 
etc. 

Quezon's optimism about the future of his country stems from the reali- 
zation that Filipino nationalism is no mere political catchword. "It is real 
and written in blood," he said. "It was there when the Filipino S f ought Spain; 
and it was there when they resisted, in a suicidal struggle, the implantation 
of American sovereignty over their country." :> ' J Nationalism is a tremendous 
force for good, ho stated further, ana, properly guided , nationalism can bui 1 * 

for Filipinos a beautiful and enduring nation. >r "We are one nation," bo 
concluded, "we will die as one nation." J? 

Closely linked with his vision of a beautiful and enduring nation is 
Quezon's emphasis on preserving the national identity. As early as 1913, he- 
maintained the firm belief that the Filipinos, being a people of Oriental ha- 
bits and cast of mind, raised in the tropics and subject to their o'*n cf.-n-3.i~ 

their 

tions of life and industry, should be allowed to evolve ./ own type of cul- 
ture and government, following * / f Xr own instincts in selecting a path tci/ar 1 
the attainment of a higher civilisation, instead of being a slavish imitator 

Press statement on the need for national unity, 1035 , n.d.m. QP, tSl-'jr, 
TNL. 

50/ Speech before the U.P. Alumni Association, 1933, n.d.m. QP, MRj?41, Tl'/L. 

51/ Speech before the Foreign Policy Association, Hotel Astor, New York City, 
April 3, 1937. Quezon Mesoagoa, Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, p. 82. 

52/ Speech at the Waldorf Astoria, How York City, February 20, 19^7. -IP, E?# 
39, TNL. 

52/ Address before the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 

Philadelphia, November 25, 1927. In: The P hilippine Repub lic. Vol. V, J?o.- 
2, March 15, 1928. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, p. 804. 

5j/ Annual Report to the Congress of the United States, 1937. QP, MRir-l-C , 

Tin,. 

'5.5/ Speech at the banquet for Secretaries Blpidio Quirino and Jose Xulo, 

Malacanan, September 27, 1938. Quezon Messages. Vol. 4, Part I, JBVFF, 
pp. 222-223. 



56 

of any other country, however elevated may be its civilisation. 

One of r jiioi5on , s chief concerns was the building of the Filipino ruv.tio • 

nal character. He places groat emphasis on character building. A millionair 

without ideal, he says, is no better than an animal. ' Character buildiiv 

58 

is .more important than more acquisition of knowledge. Similarly, charr>c~ 

59 

ter is decidedly more important than brains. For a man without character 
he explains, knowledge is dangerous. ^° He appeals to the Filipino youth to 
live simply but imbued with a noble ideal. He asks them to eschew all vie 30. 
which are harmful and destructive of \ hatever good is accomplished or achiovd 
and try to recover the lost virtues of their forefathers. ^ 1 

"My responsibility as head of this nation," he says, "compels ne to 
face and state the facts, however disagreeable they may be to me or to our 
people. But I have not lost faith that there is within us all the spiritual 
and moral forces needed for the building of a great nation. Our tasic - it is 
a heroic task - is to awaken those forces so that our people should become 
what of right they should bo: morally strong, virile, hard-working, refined, 

CO 

enterprising, persevering, and public-spirited." 

It was simply unavoidable that as the first Filipino ever to have 
opportunity to lay the foundations of a new nation, Quezon had to provide a 
general guideline, .of conduct to be scrupulously observed by each and ovory 
member of the national community. Upon his direction and inspiration, a com- 
mittee of savants, representing diverse fields of specialisation, drafted a 
16-point Code of ethics, otherwise known as the "Code of Quezon," reminisccvl; 
of Code of Kalantiaw ( 14 33:3), Sj Bonifacio's Decalogue, 64 Mabini's True 

5§/ Article, "Recent Progress in the Philippines," Journal of Race D evelop- 
<2£2t> January 1915. Rivera Collection, Vol. j f p , 331, 

53/ Speech at the Zahboa.nga Normal School, Zamboanga City, August 25, 19 28. 
. Queson Messages, Vol. 4, Part, I, JBVFF, p. 167. 

53/ ibid. 

53/ Speech at the inauguration of Bacolod City, Negros Occidental, October 
19, 19358. Rivera Collection, Vol. I v , p. 1927. 

60/ Speech at the Cngayan High School, Cagayan, Oriental Hisamis, August 27, 
1938. Q uezon Hpsaagos. su^ra, pp. 185-186. 

61/ I]2i_d., p. 193. 

62/ Speech at the Risal Memorial Stadiun, August 19, 1938. Ibid . , p. 154 , 

62/ "Kalantiaw: Ancient Filipino Lawgiver," In: Gregorio F. Zaido, Groat 
FjLliji.ino.s in History. Manila: Verde Book Store, 1970, pp. 224-23J. 

647 "Bonifacio: Father of the Revolution." Ibid, pp. 105-110. 



- 12 - 

65 66 
Decalogue, and the Ten Coinraandnents received by Moses. 

What is important is that Quezon meant every word contained in 

the Code, Hg lived by it. "I do hereby require all schools to teach the 

following civic and ethical principles, drafted by a croup of eminent 

67 

citizens," said Quezon in Executive Order No. 217. He had the moral 
authority to toll others to follow the Code because ho was one man, 
one of a select few perhaps, who practised what he preached. Indeed, 
in writing about '-iuezon's life, his biographer does not need to tell a 
lie. Nor gloss over his weaknesses. Of course, as a human being, ■'••.ue- 
aon committed mistakes, end lie was l. nest enough to admit that he was 
building a nation not of heavenly characters but of ordinary mortals 
possessing certain good qualities. "I air. not building a country of 
saints; no, let the priests do that," he said. ''I am trying to toach 
thorn (tho people) to bo men and women with high ideals of public mora- 
lity, truthfulness, honesty and laboriousness." """ 

In substance, scope, relevance and applicability to the present . 
situation in the Philippines, 'jueson's Code can compare favorably with 
either Bonifacio's or Mabini ' s Decalogue. After all, the Code came 
nearly half a century alter the two Decalogues, ; and Philippine civili- 
zation had progressed tremendously during that long span of time. Note 
the following key words or ideas of the Code: 1 ) Have faith in Divine 
Providence . . .; 2) Love your country . . 3) 'Respect the Constitu- 
tion . . .; 4) Pay your taxes . . . ; 5) Safeguard the purity of suf - 
frago . . .; 6) Love and respect your parents . . . ; ?) Value ' your ho- 
nor . . . ; 8) he truthful and honest . . . ; 9) Lead a clean and fru- 
gal life . . . 10) Live up to the noble traditions of our people . . 
.; 11 ) Bo industrious . . 12) Rely on your own efforts . . . ; 13) Do 
your work cheerfully . . . ; 14) Contribute to the welfare of the commu- 
nity and promote social justice . . . ; 1 '}) Patronize made-in-the-Phi— 
lippinea products . . .; and 16) Use and develop our natural resources 
and conserve them for posterity. 

One of '.uezon's a-abitione was to be remembered with affection 
by the people after his exit from this world. "i''or a man," he said, 
"there can bo nothing more sublime than to be- remembered, after death, 

65/ "Apolinario Mabini: Drains of the Philippine Revolution." Ibid. » 
pp. 202-287. 

66/ Louis of Granada, O.P., Sum ma- of the Christian Life. 2 vols. Trans- 
lated and adopted by Jordan Anunan, O.P. London: B. Herder Book 
Co., 195'J. Vol. II, pp. 57-60. Also The Old Test ament (Douay Ver- 
sion), Chapter 20, "Tho Commandments, " Dxodus . 

6 7/ Executive Order No. 217, "Prescribing Certain Civic and Ethical 

Principles to be Taught in all Schools in the Philippines," August 
19, 1939. Quez on me ssages. Vol. 5, Part I, JDVPj", pp. 991-992. 

68/ Speech at the Cagayan High School, supra. 



- 13 - 

for the good ho has done to all." Certainly, this Code of ethics that 
he left behind is a magnificent legacy to Hie Filipino people, if not to 
the whole human race. 

Fath er of Social Justice 

70 

Quezon is likewise considered the "Father of Social Justice." 

This is understandable, because next to independence and the nation's 

self-preservation through adequate national defense, Quezon's pas- 
was . . . 
sion/for social justice. To him there is an immutable link between his 

oath to "do justice to over/ man" and social justice. Thus when he was 

severely lambasted for his criticise of a court decision in the Cuevo- 

Barredo case on grounds of executive interference in the functions of 

the judiciary, a separate and co-equal branch of the government, iue- 

zon had to fall back on the oath which he took upon assumption of the 

presidency. 

"Those words 'do justice to every nan,'" he explained, "do not, 
of course, mean th. t the President of the Philippines has been vested 
with any judicial power to adjudicate cases . . . But the words 'do 
justice to every man* mean that the Chief Executive must always be a- 
lert and vigilant so that justice may reign supreme over this land, 
and this he can accomplish only by a careful and conscientious exer- 
cise of his power to appoint members of the judiciary, and by his rea- 
diness to take action, in the manner proscribed by lav;, against judges 
who may be derelict in the (performance of their duties. » He addod 
that his oath imposed upon him the duty "not only to do justice' in ca- 
ses where the decision rents with the executive, but also to see that 

the other branches of the government do not commit- acts of injustice 
71 

to any man." 

The Cucvo-Barredo case represents a high-water nark in Quezon's 
struggle for social justice. The President condemned as unjust the 
court decision denying the claim to compensation filed by the heirs of 
an employe of the Barredo and Co., who was drowned in the Pasig River 
while o joying the urde.r of his foreman to jump into Die stream to sal- 
vage a piece of lumber belonging to the firm. Kan's right to live, as- 
serted Quezon, is the duty of every wall-organised and functioning so-- 
72 

ciety to uphold. He bol .vod that when he took his oath of office 
he entered into a covenant with the people to "do justice to every 

§3/ Speech before a delegation of iabcrr.rs at Kaiac .nan, february 17, 
1S30. .2^Z9JLlljSSr.£SS.t Vol. V, Part I, JBVFF, p. 18. 

JO/ "Cite Quezon as Father of P.I. Social Justice," Philippine,, Bera.ld . 
August 19, 1350; and i'l. Galang, "President Quezon, Advocate of 
Social Justice," ^tlavaan, August 16, 1956. 

HJ Joseph .Ralston liayden, The Philip >ines : A Study in ^tipnalJDeye- 
ISESsni, New York: The Kacmillan Company, 1947, pp. 71-73. 

J2.J Speech, "Underfed Because Underpaid, s ' In: Pedro de la Liana and F.B. 
Icasiano, Quez on , in Hjs, Sj^oches . Manila: State Publishing Co., dS*37 



- 14 - 

73 

nan," arid this ho proposed to do by giving every man a decent livoli- 
74 

hood, • "I don't want to achieve social justice at gunpoint," he said. 

However, he appealed to the rich - the capitalists and landlords - to give 

voluntarily to the community a part of their property, and retain the rest 

jusi 
76 



75 

for themselves. Social justice, in his opinion, would be more benefi- 



cent if done spontaneously. 

What does -rjuesc-i mean by social justice? In the first place, social 

77 

justice, he stated emphatically, does not noaa communism, precisely be- 

78 

cause it moans justice to each and every social group, justice for every™ 

79 80 
body, ' justice for laborers, capitalists, rich and poor alike. For the 

81 

rich to live in peace, he asserted, they must give workers their due. In 

82 

other words, everybody gets what he deserves under social justice. 

One recalls, in this connection, the advice of old man Lucio Quezon • 
to his son, Manuel, after the latter was admit cod to the University of Sto- 
Towns as a working student - a capist a to tutor some classmates who were 
weak in Hath - in lieu of tuition, board and lodging. Before returning 

to 'jaler, the father gave the young man tJiir. prophetic advice: "My son, 
just lie good and just to your fellownen. No matter how high your station 
in life may be, never forget that you came from poor parents, and that 
you belong to the poor. Don't forsake them, whatever happens. God bless 
you." And that was the last time Quezon would sec his father, for the old 
man and a younger son were waylaid b>- bandits on their way home not long 
after this mooting. 

V/ith this fatherly advice still fresh in his mind, Quezon on 
1 reach" B tho apex of his career, set out to "do justice to every man," • 
most especially to the poor. "I love the poor," he confessed, . "because 



22/ Speech on the principles of law and justice, at the U.S.T., October 
2, 1937. j&ezpn .Moa sages , Vol. Part I, J&W'J , pp. 143-144. 

21/ State of the Nation message, January 24, 1939, Ibid., Vol. 5, Part 
I, JBVFF, p. 245. 

33/ Speech on the first anniversary of the Commonwealth, .November 15, 
1936. Ibid., Vol. 2, Part I, .iBVFF, p. 144. 

26/ .Birthday address over station K-RK, Manila, Aivrust' 19, 1936. Ibid., 
p. 118. 

Ill Speech before local officials, at i'lalacanan, Ibid., Vol. 4, Part 
I, JIJVF.-, p. 9. 

22/ 'iuezon to Secretary of Interior Silpidio ••iuirino, February 14, 
1938, Ibid. , p. 564. 

22/ Speech in Ormoc, Leyte, June 15, 1938. Ibid.., pp. 99-100. 

80/ Press statement on labor terrorism and social justice, August 27, ' 
1938. IJiid. , pp. 693-694. 

81/ Speech in San Fernando, Patroanga , February 14, 1939. Ibid . . Vol. 
5, Part I, JI3VFF, pp . 27-20. 

82/ Ibid. 

82/ Carlos uuirino, iiuozonj. j^lMii\-Qf ^^i^iup Jtreedgn. Manila: 
Nilipiniana Book Guild, Vol. XVlf 1 , 1 971 , p. 14."" 



- 15 - 

„ 34 

they need my help." 

What is the rationale behind the .uezon social justice program? 

The answer is just one word: survival. The Filipino natior, he said 

with finality, can only endure if -:.-.cinl justice is given to all. 

the 

Father of/ Nati onal Language 

Perhaps the nost ondurintf of Quezon's achievements is the adoption 
of the national language based on Topg.iog, the . M mc&t developed of all crUv 
ing languages in our country. " w Quezon, it must be noted, carried the bu. 
for the national laagu; >.r> e fro;-., the 1234 Constitutional Convention which sr. ■ 
to it that a provision was included in the 1935 Constitution concerning th» 
"development and adoption of a cowmen national language based on one of 
the existing native languages'' ; ° ' to the First National Assembly in which 
Asaomblywan Mcrb»;rto Itomualdez , a linguist fro:,. Leyte, sponsored Dill ho, 
2291 providing for the establishment of the National Language Institute; 
and finally to I'UlacanaiF where the President signed it into law - Common- • 

i'lf) 

wealth Act Ho. 184 •- on November 12, 1926. 

The adoption of the national language appears to be part of a gr-.nd 
strategy which only President -iueztm - he and he alone - could have engi- ■ 
neercd and successfully executed. This, it must be stated, is no reflection 
on the other Filipino loaders of the tine, including Sergio Osmena, Manuel 
A. Poxas, Claro K. Recto, J osc P. Laurel, etc. To ny nind, none of then had. 
the stature, political expertise, i-.ersuasivo ahili by, and charismatic per- 
sonality of Tucson to overcome the etrong and determined opposition put up 
by the oi.her language groups in the country. 

First, Quezon virtually liandpicked decte, a Tagslog exponont froa 
Tiaong, Tayabas ( now '■'iucFon Province), to bead the Constitutional Conven- 
tion. Laurel, a Batnngoj.Oi.io , and an authority on constitutional law, in- 
tended to run for the presidency of the convention, but an '''unseen hand'' 
suddenly placed hin in bhc chair of "temporary chairman" to preside 
at the initial phase of tl>, convention. From the"mo.gician's hat" the 
samo hand plucked something, and loi Necto was unanimously elected 



Q&J Speech bo* ore municipal mayors and coconut planters at Halacanan, 
February 19, 1920. ...iieppn pe^sa^s, Vol. 4, Part I, JLVFF, p. 27. 

05/ Speech at the inauguration ox" Iloilo City (data inadvertently emit- 
ted), ibid. , Vol. 3, Part I, JLVFF, p. 120. 

OG/ "Footnote on Tagalog, w Pliijpjppijws Frpe.Fre_ss, January .12, 1928. 
See Alfredo Baulo. i^ter olj&«J:^ 

nomjialAqa Xl P7£"Ui£U- Manila: National historical institute, 1972, 
pp. 244-243. 

QjJ Sec. 3, Article XIV (General Provisions) of the 1935 Constitution 
reads as follows: "The Congress shall take steps toward the deve- 
lopment and adoption of a common national language based on one of 
the existing native languages. Until otherwise provided by law, 
English and Spanish shall contiv.-us as official languages." 

88/ Baulo, pp.. ext., p. 241. 



- 16 - 

president of the convention. 89 Quezon, the supreme arbiter, Bade short 
shrift of what otherwise might have been a tumultuous, conflict-ridden 
part of the convention. 

Recto and Romualdez , the only philologist in the special Coonit- 
tee of -even (Seven Vise Hen), played the decisive role in the adoption 
of the constitutional provision on the national language! "based on one 
of the existing native lanugos" instead of the original provision 
''based on the existing native lanugos. u Jlouiualdess , v/ho was very close, 
to Quezon, realized only too well that "scientifically and historical- 
ly, national languages are formed by choosing the most culturally de- 
veloped and strategically located 1- nguage or dialect in the country, 
and then developing this into a c canon national language through active 
government support." 90 As chairman of the all-powerful Committee on 
Style, Recto .was responsible for the modification of the phrase "based 
on the existing native languages" to "based on one of the existing na- 
tive languages." Romualdoz continued the work on the national lan- 
guage ■ in tho ilrst rational Assembly, culminating in the approval of 
Commonwealth Act Ho. V:>\. 

On January 12, 1957, -iuezon appointed the first officers of the 
National Language Institute headed by Jaime do Vcyra, a Honualdez oora~ . 
JXSJtiJBltijmi and cn November 9th the Institute recommended the choice- 
of Tagalog as the basis of the national language. Accordingly, the Pre- 
sident cn December 30th (liirsal Day) issued Executive O r der No. 134. 
proclaiming the national language of the I'hilippinos based on the Ta- 
galog language. 92 Finally, on April 15, 1959 Secretary of Education 
Jose JD. Romero signed Department Order No. 7 officially calling the 
national language "Pilipino. " 9 ^ 

"I hover realized how terrible the lack of a common national 
language is until I became President," .'luozon recalled in one of his 
speeches. "I am President of the Philippines; I am the personal repre- 
sentative of the Filipino people. But when I travel through the pro- 
vinces and talk to my people, I need an interpreter. Do you over hear 
of anything more humiliating and horrible than that?" y4 Then on ano- 
ther occassion, he told a group of municipal ' mayors and 'coconut planters, 
"As President cf cur own country I cannot find any language which every • 

.02/ '-iuirino, r^. c .it. , p. 268. 

3.0/ Saule, op_. pit.., pp. 220-221 . 

9.17 JJnUh, P. 220. 

1?/ "Tagalog Proclaraado," .-lOsbajbo, Diciembro 51, 1951. 

3l/ Saule, siijira., p. 250. 

2.4/ Speech at the San Juan do Let ran alumni banquet, ffovomber 7, 1 937. 
I^imJpjaaagfti Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFi?, p. 167. ' 



- 17 - 

one of you can understand. Is that not ridiculous, humiliating?" ^ 
Aside from his personal experience, Quezon realized that 

national language pronotes national consciousness, 96 and strengthens 

97 1 
national solidarity. - Ho believed that a nations, language can wold 

the Philippines into one strontr nation, and promote raoid national prop- 

98 ' " 

ross. But as a nationalist, he realized that the national soul can't 

exist without a national language. 99 Quezon insisted that ho was net 
a partisan for any one native language. "Tagalog is the official lan- 
guage in ray family," ho explained. "But I am ready to learn Ilocp.no, 
■i T . have a 

Visayan or any other vernacular tongue as long as we shall/language that 

can bo spoken by all." 100 

■without President Quezon, it's inconceivable how the national 
language "Pilipino" could have been born in the 30' s. 

It is interesting to note that in -iuezon'o hierarchy of values 
and scale of priorities, national economic development comes next after 
national defense. On December 23, 1935, two days after the approval of 
Commonwealth Act lib. 1 (National Defense .'Law) , the ^resident signed Co.il- ■ 
monwoalth Act No. 2 creating the National Economic Council. The crea- 
tion of the H3C oonmited the Commonwealth govornr.ent to a definite eco- 
nomic policy, which is still being followed today by the Republic. 

"V/o don't believe in the economic philosophy of l aissq z _f airs , " 
he said in the first mooting of the ISC. . "7e favor government leader- 
ship in production activities. Mc believe in planning the national eco- 
nomy. The world has learned at a cost of untold economic waste and hu- 
man suffering, after submitting to a very UO vere test the 'very founda- 
tions of the social order our civilisation his created and erected, that 
governments cannot allow unlimited free rein to private enterprise with- 
out jeopardizing the public welfare in the interest of human greed." 101 
Quezon's fight with (Jevornor Conoral Hood in the Board of Contrrl 



25/ Speech before municipal mayors and coconut planters at Salaccn^ap 
February 19, 1930. Ibid., Vol. 4, Part I, JBWF, o. 35; and QP, 
ml,-; 41 , i'JIL. 

96/ Press statement on the creation of the national Language Hoard, 
Jstnuary 13, 1937. Q^qz^Jlj3BSMS3.t Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, p. 312. 

27/ MG s'sage to the First National Assembly, October 27, 1936. Ibid., 
Vol. 2, Part I, JQVFF, pp. 355-356. 

38/ Speech broadcast from !-ialacaJUm 6 on fiiaal Day, December 30, 1937. 
IMd. , p . 1 02 . 

33/ Juan de Lot ran speech, sii^ra. 

IP- 0 / IhM. 

iPj/ Speech at the opening of the National .Jconomic Council, March 30, 
1936. j^aoaJ{eviscj^!a_, Vol. 2, Part I, JBVPF, p. 75. 



- 18 - 

case in the early 20' s gave an early indication of his thinking on ac- 
tive government direction of the national economy. Aside from the 
struggle for increasing Filipino autonomy, which "food tried to revert 
to pre-Harrison status, ' ; uezon and Osmsna favored putting up government 
corporations like the Philippine; National Lank, Manila Railroad Company, 
National Development Conpany, National Coal Company, and the N National 
Cement Company not only to accelerate economic development but, more im- 
portant., to curb the increase of alien investments in agriculture and 

industry which Filipinos feared might delay the final severance of poli- 

1 02 

•cical ties with the United states. ,J The fight against the giant A- 
merican corporations could not safely be left to private business. In 
other words, the government must not only actively participate but lead . 
in the country's economic development to safeguard public welfare. This 
was an important initial stop in the evolution of Quezon's socio-econo- 
mic philosophy which found its culmination in his social -justice nro- 
103 T 

gram. l c clearly antedated Roosevelt's "New Deal" and the rise in 

northwestern Europe of the so-called "mixed" economies, half free enter- 
prise and half socialist. ' " ' 

■'iuezon set a precedent tht his successors have found difficult, 
if not impossible, to follow: good govern >ant* First, he placed, all. 
government offices, subdivisions, agencies and instrumentalities under 

1 05 

the Civil "Service. ( J Ha required the strictest implementation of sec- 
tion 1 , Article II of the 1 035 Constitution providing that appointments 
in the 6ivil Service, except in positions which are policy-determining, 
primarily confidential, or highly technical, shall be made strictly ac- 
cording to aor.it and f itnofcu, to be determined by means of Civil Ser- 
vice examr ations. 106 Then he provided a general guideline on the ap- 
plication of seniority rules to prevent nepotism" or favoritism such as 
giving preferential attention t., relatives, friends and 



102/ Toodor.o A. Agoncillo and '■ il^gros C. Guerrero, History o£_the Jj.- 
U&Ml£ewlQ. 'iiieaon City: llclcyn Books, 1 970," ~pT~552; and Zaide , 
02 . cit . , Vol. II, p. 232. 

IQJy Speech at the 25th commencement exercises of the University of 
the Philippine*!, April 4, 1959. •••hies on Muse, j&a, Vol. 9, Part I. 
TUVFF, p. 66. 

124/ R;ltl1 • Uavian and Nilliam A. Har.mi, Urol t ;od m .j^tates jlistory. U.C. 
Heath and Company, Philippine Copyri~i~t7^T6^f pT~S29. 

125/ Executive Order No. p„ "Enforcing the Provisions of the Constitu- 
tion on the Civil Service," January 2, 1956. muozon messages, Vol. 
2, Part I, JI'iVFF, p. 607. 

J 06/ Message to the First National Assembly, December 16, 1935. 'giosoa 
jiJLS3_ag.es, Vol. I, Op. A G v. Sid. , JBWF, p. ' 53. 



- 19 - 

c omproyinc ir.no s. ^7 

— He also promulgated rules in filling up positions and promo-' 

1 03 

tions. while admit tins-; that "there is no perfect government on 

earth as Ion;-; as won are mo:: and not angels," he said that it's 

not really difficult to have a good and honest government, provided that 
"every official of the government, from the President of the Philippines 
down to the last town policeman, : ' subcribes sincerely to the principle 
that public office is a public trust, and not for nersonal a^randir.e- 
mont. 110 

.timpoworod by law to effect urgent roforna and. changes in the dif- 
ferent executive departments, bureaus and offices of the government, 
Quezon created the Government Survey Board to facilitate the achieve- - 

ment of his administration's primary objective: an economical, efficient 

111 

and simplified government. He firmly believed that the government - 
could be made as efficient as private firms, adding that he could not 

see why an individual who is capable of do inf. a good job for a private 

the 1 i 2 

corporation could not do/same for the government. Always with an 

eye to the future, Quezon told the members of the i''irst National Assem- 
bly: "tfe shall build a government that will be, lust, honest, efficient 
and strong so thttt the foundations of the coming Republic may be firm 
and enduring - a government, indeed, that must satisfy not only the 
passing needs of the hour but also the exacting demands of the- fu-r . ■ 
,ture." 113 

To set an example worthy of emulation by his successors, 'Quezon • 
asked the National Assembly to eliminate Section 683 of the Administra- 
tive Code permitting the Chief ilxocui.ive to make appointments to posi- 
tions in the classified service without regard to the examination re- 
quirements of the law. lie said that the existence of this provision 

presented ;, a continuous throat to the inviolability of the Civil 6or- 
11 /! 

vice rules." 

The record shows that he did not spare anybody in his drive 



127/ Memorandum for the Secretary of i'inance on the appointment of 
Capt. Villavicencio as Manila pilot, September 6, 1937. Ibid. 
Vol. 3, Part I, JPVPF, pp. 355-356. 

108/ Administrative Order ifo. 40, "I-'illing of Positions and Promotions 
in the Civil Service," Au&ust 24, 1937. Ibid., p. 1165. 



102/ Speech, "Pie", for Philippine Independence," November 25, 1927. 
QP, MH#29, TNL. 

11£>/ Speech on public service in Ilagan, Isabela, February 28, 1936. 
^MPJlSi§.m^IL> Vol. 2, Part I, J3VSV, p. 55. 

Ill/ Message to the j ; 'irst National Assembly on government reorganiza- 
tion., December 12, 1935. Ibid., Vol. I, Cp. Pcv. 3d., JBVPP, pp. 
45-47.. 

HZ/ Press conference at fialacanang, January 31 , 1936. <-P, M>v ; 33, TNL. 

112/ Inaugural Address, ii'ovcmber 15, 1935. .Ibid., p. 13. 

Hit/ lieosage to the j'irat National Assembly, December 16, 1935, supra. 



- 20 - 

against graft and corruption and any other form of public malfeasance. 
Ho asked the people to "file charges against erring officials, and I 
will talco care of then." 116 H-j :r, pledge was as good as/bond. He warned 
public officials x/ho were lazy and incompetent to "get out of the go- 
vernment," adding that "the sooner they do so, the sooner will they be, 
for once, rendering a great and patriotic service to the nation," 117 

iuezon's overriding ambition was to establish a .jovomiaont that would 

1 1 ^ 

rea.Lly do justice to the Filipino people. 

^Si^.9I..PL_f-M 1 i2i}^i2S§i i; of ^rms 

Less than one month after the establishraent of the National Eco- 
nomic Council, iuezon signed Executive Order Ho. 19 creating the Natio- 
nal Council of Education to "advise the government on educational poli- 
cies and necessary reforms in the cristing system of education." 119 
.'j.liioe tho political future of the Philippines had been definitely set- 
tled under the xydings-I'iciXtf f io Law, the President felt the heed for 
reorienting the educational system to the status and needs of an inde- 
pendent nation. Por chairman of the council he chose the nationalist 
educator, Dr. Rafael Palma, former president of the- University of the 
Philippines. 120 

Consequently, four great changes in public education were intro- " 
duced by the government. ! :!ho first was the i'iliyinization of educa- 
tional outlook, objectives, and teaching materials. Emphasis was placed 
on tiie study of i'ilipino heroes, biie use . of textbooks and supplonentary 
readers written by Pilipino authors, and the inclusion of more subjects 
and materials about th; Philippines. 

Secondly, the curriculum was revised, making it more vocational 
than academic . Ten national regional agricultural schools were estab- 
lished, weaning away the youth from "white-collar jobs" which contri- 
buted little, if any, to the economic development of the country, third- 
ly, stress was laid on character education in order to provide the moral 
underpinnings of the now educational system, a separate subject on cha- 
racter education was proscribed for every grade in the elementary school, 
using as general guideline the '.ueaon-inspired Code of Ethics, final- 
ly, primary instruction in the public schools was made fro:: and compulsory, 

.115/ Viclo Administrative Orders in Part II (••uoson iloador). 

JJ.iL/ ^pcach in t>an P G rnando, 1'ainapanga, Pebruarv 14, 1^39. 'liuezon _Kes-- 
sages, Vol. 5, Part I, JPVPP, p. T 0 . ' — 

Speech in Ilagan, Isabels, siipra. 

US/ Speech on the fourth anniversary of tho Commonwealth, Pcvembar 
15, 1939. ffltegen ^ossa^cs. Vol. 5, Part I, JBVPP, p. 23. 

Executive Order V.o. 19 was signed on February 19, 1936. Ibid., 
Vol. 2, Part I, J13VP./, pp, 628-629. * ' 

.12.0/ iSaido, op. cit . , Vol. II, p. 322 ff. 



- 21 - 



in accordance with the constitutional mandate, but wore particu- 
larly because, as Talma informed Quezon, illiteracy presents a real me- 

t 1 ?1 

nace to the nation's sability. 

The rationale of the Commonwealth policy on compulsory primary 

education was stated clearly by ••■ueaon. In his own picturesque way, he 

said that "if the Philippines is going to bo ons laved, it is better for 

the jj'ilipinos not to be educated, for a man who is not educated can 

1 22 

stand tlu.t better than a man who has got education." However, ho 

said primary education is not enough for citizenship training. It 

would bo wise to encourage children to complete the elementary educa- 
1 23 

tion. In line with this orientation, the i J rcsident on August 7, 

1940 signed Coraraonwoalth Act IJo. 586, otherwise known as the Educa- 
tional Act of 1940, reducing; the elementary course from seven to six 
years, adopting, the double-single session plan, raisin.; the entrance 

age to between seven and nine years, and fixing the school year from 

1 2^ 

July to April, instead of from June to March. r 

'i/hat Quezon wanted above all was for the students to bo able to 
form their own views, and thus exercise the duties of citizenship. He 
wanted them to see things or questions relating to community or natio- 
nal affairs in their own light, "not from what they have heard Quezon 
or Aguinaldo or anybody else say on the subject/' 125 In his first col- 
lision with Osmeha, Quezon advocated a government of opinion or consen- 
sus* giving everybody complete freedom of expression, which is the es- 
sence of true democracy, instead of the people merely following what 
their leader has oaid or decided. Of course, : ; uezon had no illu- 

sion about education, he said ''education does not always mean wisdom. 
. . A parson who is just half-baked in his instruction is more dange- 
rous than a man who has no instruction at all and who accepts his ordi- 

1 27 

nary reaction as guide." 

Quezon disclosed an important educational policy when he said 
that the state is not obligated to give higher education, its 



121./ Palma to Quezon, reporting- on educational measures requiring le- 
gislation, August 24, 1936. Quezon Messages, Vol. 2,- Part I, 
JiiVK?, p. 298. 

1.22/ Speech before the foreign Policy Association, Hotel Astnr, New 
York City, April 5, 1937. Ibid., Vol. 3, Part I, JBV5V, p. 80. 

123/ Message to the i'irst National Assembly, March 25, 1938. Ibid., 
Vol. 4, Part I, JhVDhQ PI >. 314-315. 

Igi/ Saide, op., ext., Vol. II, p. 324. 

Press conference at halacanang, October 27, 1937. QP, HR#40, TNL. 

1.26/ Vicente Albano Pacis, Ber^-io, Osjriona. 2 vols, aiezon City: Phoenix 
Press, Inc., 1971. Vol. I, p. 281, quoting the Manila Daily^hul-- 
Latin, December 17, 1921. Microfilm, Newspaper Division, Library 
of Congress, "ashington, D.C. 

Igj/ Press conference at Kalacanang, October 27, 1937. QP, MRvi'40, TNL. 



- 22 - 

principal duty bainc- to provide elementary instruction to the youth of 
1 28 

the land. " J If the state , be explained, mist support and maintain a 
university, such as the University of the Philippines, it. must have a 
definite aim » which is to set the highest standard of university educa- 
tion. The state university, he said, "can justify its existence by 
actually rendering a service to the country that private universities 
cannot render at present. . . I would rather see only a few graduates 
every year from the University of the Philippines but who have left 
the University with character and knowledge that will lit thorn, by dint 
of their own efforts, to become leaders of their respective callings." 1 2 ^ 

Sy££2n_^i£^i^s t _ D i j t at or ship 

Quezon was definitely a strong leader if ever there was one un- 
der the aegis of democracy. He ran four times for senator ( 1 91 6 , 1922, 
1923 and 1934), and he won each election ' overwhelmingly There 
is no doubt about that. In the first election under the Jones Law on 
October 3, 1916, lie was elected senator without lifting a finger, so 
to speak, despite the fact that he arrived from the United States less 
than one week bef ore/election. He did not even file his own candidacy 
because his party did it for him, thanks to Speaker Sergio Osmena. 130 
Then in the next two elections in 1922 and 1928, he was elected sena- 
tor ia^^PJ^if- because he was abroad heading the Philippine indepen- 
dence missions. In his last senatorial fight on June 5, 1934, he had 
again returned from the United States just one month and five days be- 
fore the election. As in tha previous elections, he did not campaign 
at all. There was no need for it, because ho come back with the 
Tydings-McDuffie Act, the second independence law he secured from the 
United States in 18 years, which Recto describes as the Apolitical mi- 
racle of the decade." 1:51 

From 1916 up to his death in 1944, a period of 28 years, Quezon 
clearly dominated the political scene. But what is marvelous, if not 
unbelievable, about it is that he remained riding on th", crest of vic- 
tory and power, not by sufferance but by sheer love and respect, almost 
approaching veneration, of the Filipino people. r :uezon knew the 



12§/ Speech before the U. P. Board of Rodents at Kalacanan, November 
11 > 1937. Ibid. 

112/ Message to the First National Assembly on changes in appropria- 
tions for til.. University of the Philippines , '.'Fovember 17, 1937. 
."m&Q2L^ujt$i&§.f Vol. 3, J^ftrt l, JLvVP, p. 249. 

119/ Gwokoh, 0£. pit., p. 79; Isabelo P, Gaballero and i'-I. de Gracia 
Concepcion, ^\Qap/A:jn^_ptoj^i .of, j\_ Hat ion _and. Its rqrcnos.t. 
statesman, Manila: International Publishers, 1935, ppTl 50-1 51 } 
and ('iuezon, op_. pit., p. 131. 

1537 Claro M. Recto, "The -Political Philosophy of Manuel L. tjueaon." 
Speech delivered at the Philippine Columbian Club, August 19, 
1953. Vide, 'guirino, on. pit., "Appendix," pp. 391-403. 



- 23 - 

WGS 

people's great affection for him, and he /grateful for it. "My country 
men,' 1 he told a huge croud during one of his periodic provincial tours 
''there is no man living in the Philippines who has received so many 
favors from his countrymen as I have. There are few men in the whole 
world who have received the loyalty of their people for such a long 
time as I have, and there is nothing that I can do to pay it back ex- 
cept to serve you unselfishly, devotedly with all ray wind and heart, 
and that is what I want to do.'' 1 (Applause.) 1 : ' 2 

In this self-app .raisal Quezon is seconded by Oamena. "?To man,' 
the latter said, "has received more tokens of a people's love and con- 
fidence than h.-.o Quezon at the hands of the Filipino people." 135 

"In triumph," said Roxas, :, he ( Quezon) was elevated to the su- 
preme leadership of his party and his people [in the June 6, 1922 
general elections - ADS], a leadership he never lost in the 22 remain- 
ing years of his life. Seldom if ever has one man attained such po- 
wer and influence among his people and held it unchecked for so long, 
let it was not power held through force or intimidation; ho had no 
Gestapo to uphold . hia rule. It was a leadership exercised by 

the prentige of his person, by the stature of iiis accomplishments, by 
the dominating proportions of his talents, and by the unswerving loyal- 
ty of his followers. Few non in all history, unclothed in the purple 
of royalty, have equalled Manuel Quezon's tenure as a people's leader. 
It has no counterpart anywhere in the world in our time." 154 

It is not amiss to state that Quezon in his time was called many 
names by his critics. "What the Sakdaliotas said about me is awful," 
he admitted, "but nobody went to jail for that. J am not nerfoct; I 
know that." - /J> The political opposition then attcked him for using 
the yacht C^qlana. And Quezon countered: "Do they (hlo critics) want 
th3 President of the Philippines to ride a cascp?" he was also lam- 
basted for remodelling MalacaflanSalace . "Shall I build me a hut?" he 
asked. "I am used to living in a hut, and I can live in one." 12,6 
If Quezon was a "dictator," as his opponents alleged, he was certainly 
an uncommon, extraordinary dictator , because he was not afraid to go 
out incognito, riding in a Ford car, and unescorted. He was not afraid 
of any harm that might be attempted on his person. For why should he 
be afraid of hie: own people? "I am not afraid to be alone," hs said. 

12§/ Speech in Oriaoc, Leytc, June 13, 1030. .'tivera Collection, Vol. 
IV, pp. 1793-1794. 

121/ Cvokoh, o£. cit. , p. 248. 

X2&J J-^oxas eulogy, loc. cit. 

YJnJ Remarks at conference with a delegation of the Young Philip- 
pines, at Malacanang, September 29, 1937. Queson iiessages. Vol. 3, 
Part I, JBVFF , p. 136. 

.12.6/ TJieJ^bune, Octobur 8, 1937. Rivera Collection, Vol. Ill, p. 1 591 



- 24 - 

"I was born alone, and I grew up alone," --^ 

Owing to the vast powers enjoyed by the President 
of tha Philippines under the 1935 Constitution, making him more 
powerful than tha President of the United States, 133 Quezon was also 
described as a "legalised dictator." Tie pointed out that the term is 
contradictory because. "a man cannot be a dictator under the Constitution 
if he exercises powers that are given him by the Constitution." 139 
In addition, he said, the Philippines could not be anything but a demo- 
cracy under the 1935 Constitution - "a republican state . . . (where) 
sovereignty resides in the people and all government authority emanates; 
from them." 140 

To out a halt to all allegations of dictatorship, Quezon, speak- 
\ing before the student body of the University of the Philippines, said 
with finality: 

"I stand before you as the opponent of dictatorship in whatever 
form it is presented, including the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
I firmly believe in democracy, in the soundness of its principles, and 
in its capacity to ultimately save humanity from misery and want, and 
as the only system of government capable of doing .justice to every man, 
woman, and child . . . when properly conducted, it (democracy) is the ., 
natural and only system of government that should be acceptable among 
civilized men."' 141 

al_and/or_ Que z on 

Nearly two decades separate Quezon from Riss.1. At the time of 
Rizal's execution on Bagumbayan field (now .Sisal Park), Quezon was va- 
cationing in Aliaga, Nuova Jiicija, a strapping youth of 13, unmindful 
of the tragic event in Manila that would trigger the downfall of the 
Spanish regime in the Philippines. 142 It was perhaps several years 
later that he would realize the profound significance of Rizal's 
martyrdom. 



122/ Ins "Raps Petty Attacks Against President." Ibid. 

128/ Spo&ch on the principles of law and justice at the U.S.T., 

October 2, 1937. jflraOELLgRfiAOgftf Vol. 3, Part I, pp. 142-143. 

122/ Speech at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, New York City, iVebruary 
20, 1937. Rivera Collection, V.-.l. Ill, p. 1464. 

HQ/ Ii.4e Section 1, Article II (Declaration of Principles). 

.till/ Speech on the essence of democracy at the University of the 

Philippines, July 16, 1940. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, p. 2229. 

14j2/ The poet laureate Cecilio Ap-ostol ( 1377-1930), in his poetic 

tribute entitled A RjLzal (To-Rizal), says in part: Aos_t_injaeace 
Afi. -t h - e - ~§&aA2K&. of, pjaliyjjon.,, / Redeei«jgr of. .a, country in Jbp^da^el' / 
I^/Jt^i^ACJlil^XQXai. do not crv. / i±qo£ not" tjie.^^ij;.^ * 
J^JtfJI^of the. i^paniard / j3oc_aus.q M^JS^^XJ^f^^^UL^SE. 
-S^iniAUiij. / Uikewijr,_c_j>^ 



- 25 - 



Quezon, of course, considered Rizal a great patriot - "one of the 
noblest characters that the huawi race produced." 14 ^ In three brief pa- 
ragraphs he eondonsod Rizal' s life as follows: 

"Rizal died when he was only thirty-five years old. For .-nost men, 
this is the tine when nature life begins. But, at this age, Jose Rizal 
had accomplished what few people in the history of civilization have ac- 
complished who have lived oat their full span of life. 

"He became a distinguished physician, a scientist, a poet, a wri-- 
ter, a philosopher. Ho wrote two novels, which swept through the Philip- 
pines with their words that ran,;; out his passion for liberty. He read, 
and './rote, and spoke many languages - not only Spanish and the languages 
of the Philippines, net only ungliah and most of the European languages, 
but also Chinese and Japanese, and even Latin and Greek, Hebrew and 
Sanskrit. 

"But the life of our national hero was composed of more than scho- 
larship and art. Rizal was, first of all, a patriot. From childhood, 
his thoughts, his deeds, had but one purpose - the freedom of his people. 
And he died, a martyr to his cause." 144 

By reason of his achievements in Many fields, Rizal vv.c, indeed, a 
great man - one, in the words of Dr. Ferdinand Blumentritt, "'who appears 
but once in every two centuries." Quezon, by the same standards, st 0o d 
out as another great nan -- one who would bo considered great "in any coun- 
try, in any clino, and at any time" in the history of mankind. 145 

But time, place, and circumstance prevented Rizal from realizing 
his dream for Ids country: "toj^thy. l&JAJte^U&SjUtoaJOti^ / 
iJL°B.J&mLO£l<L E^JL^mUh^M APjrroj* Jree } / Mo_blusAmth £ . b^, 
na. .tojffi. in thine eye. " 146 

To be specific about it, Rizal' wanted 1 ) to sec his country free 
and independent; 147 2) to give the Tagalogs, Visayans, Ilocanos, Bico- 
lanos, and other ethnic groups a sense of national consciousness, calling' 
themselves "Filipinos," not the opprobious term "Indies"; 140 3) to preserve 
the Filipinos' Asian or Malayan heritage, including tiutir customs, racial 

Speech, "Jose Rizal and the Sun of Liberty," broadcast from Washing- 
ton, D.C., on December 30, 1942. J.'ivera Collection, Vol. V, t>. 241 R, 

145/ Gabriel P. Fabella, "Manuel L. ,ueaon: An Appraisal," Historical 
MliP.tina. JLoc . cit . 

\A§J Culled from the fourth stanza of Rizal 's La3t Farewell,, 

147/ The idea of a free and independent Philippines pervades all lizal's'. 
writings. 

14.8/ Rizal 's prize-winning poem t^^^sj^aS^j^i^m. (i'o the Filipino 
Youth) is the first reference to his people as "Filipinos," not 
"Indxos." Also see The , Hj.s.g.-BliyaoQtritt Correspondence (Manila, 
19b"), Vol. II, Part I, p. 73. " ' 



- 26 » 

traits, and tradition, instead of being h'ispanized or iiiuropcanized; 14 ^ 
4) to adopt and promote their native language, denouncing those who do not 
love their own tongue as "worse than putrid fish and a beast"; 150 5) to 
preserve the Filipinos' sense of self-respect or dignity as human beings 
created by God in His oun image; - 6) to prove to the world that the Fi- 
lipinos are the equal of any other race on earth, exploding the Nordic con- 
cept of racial superiority; 1 7) to uphold the inviolability of human 
rights such as the right to "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness," 
and freedom of speech, press, and belief, etc.; 1 5; ' 8) to enable the Fi- 
lipino women to enjoy equal rights as the men; 154 9) to promote the edu- 
cation of the masses, this being the foundation of every civilised society 
and the best instrument for the redemption of the Filipinos from bondage; 1 ' ^ 
10) to uphold the concept of popular sovereignty, such as a well-organized 
republic established on atrict equality and .justice; 156 1 1 ) to transform 
the country into a community of alert citizenry, patriotic, law-abiding, co- 
operative, and courageous; V ' 1 and 12) to see in the Philippines the triumph 
of the idea of human brotherhood. 1 ^ S 

What Rizal dreamt from childhood to his martyrdom at the age of Z5, 
Quezon, remarkably enough, achieved during the 41 years that he spent in V. * 
service of his country. One was the dreamer, the other the achiever, for- 
tunately, dreamer and achiever, though many years apart, combined to give 
the Philippines the republic that Filipinos cherish today. 

Quezon's achievements almost tallied, step by step, the Rizal blue- 
print. The independence that was proclaimed on July 4, 1946, is his chief 
handiwork. It was th-, result of the covenant - the Tydings-KcDuff io Act. 

.1.42/ T «ia is clearly indicated in the conversation between fijinoun and 
basilic in Rizal' a M„/M&yLj}t«TXW\.9.t op. cit., p. 50. 

LIQ/ Vifo, Real's poeu, 3a. MllJ&Jte, iuibajjata. (To Ky Childhood Prions V 
writ -con imon ho was barely eight years old. 

15l/ Rizal to Pr. Pablo Pastells, o.J. Dapitan, A.-.ril 4, 189?. 7:!yi3to'h\V3 0 
Ms«Sl.ij31' (Manila, 1065), Vol. IV, 0. 11 9. " 

mJ Gregorio k. 'iaide, ):^^i^-^;^st^oz^_o, nationalism. Manilas 
am Bntt=rprises, n.d., pp. 29<;-300. 

1.5,3/ Austin Craig, ed., ^2-^2^fm^XS&L^I^xxii-:ri (Manila, 193?), p. 14".. 
•iuoted in .-aide, siipra, pp. 301- -302. 

V}£iJ Rizal 'a 'Message to the ; . ; cm.;n of Kalolos." In: Political. and historic 
PJ*kj-jjJi£l\iZL by Jose Riaal. Manila: Jose Rizal "ati'.nal C©ntam ; .V a i 
Commissi on, 1961, pp. 12-18. 

X55/ 'iizal's poem, "rJducution (Jivca Luster to the Motherland." In: Rj,za:ijs 
.?0Pi\s. Manila: Jose Rizal National Centennial Commission, 1962* p.* 12. 

iM^olario, Rijjalino , Vol. II, p. 199. quoted in Saido, supra, p. -05. 

yiAa "Rizal 1 3 .'jocio-Foiitical Concepts," Risal Contennial Lectures. 
(Manila, 1961, University of the East Publication)"," 
p. 307. 

158/ Rizal 's jSL^IlUla^Jb^Lj^, op,, cit., pp. 52-53. 



-21 - 



he secured from tho United States despite tho taunts and ill-wishos of 
his critics. Flad ho lived a few months longer, Philippine independence 
night have been obtained earlier. And again by an irony of fate, Manuel 
A. Roxas, the nan who had "publicly promised to 30 on bended knoes to ths 
pier and kiss '.Quezon's foot" if the .latter succeeded in getting a bettor • 
law than the liaro-Havos-Cutting Act, JJ happened to be the President • 
when the Philippines became independent. Eo was therefore the first bo~ 
neficiary of Philippine independence, thanks to ''iuezon. 

It was this independence which Quezon secured that gave legal per- 
sonality to the Filipino nation. The Philippines during the Commonwealth 
was not a sovereign state, hence it was not yet a "nation" in the true 
sense of the word, hover theless, a- first President of tho Commonwealth, Quo:o 

had the rare opportunity of laying the foundations of a strong and en- 
during i-'ilipino nation, t'irst, ho instilled in the minds of his county. - 

the idea 

men/that there is only one people and one race in the Philippines. The 
Christians and non-Christians, ho said, all belong to the Malay race. 1 ' 
Second, the Filipinos, after centuries of Viestern colonization, have re- 
tained certain customs and traits which he described as truly "raagnif iceivt. : ' ■ 
l ; or instance, ho cited the Filipino family life. "It makes no difference 

to ne," he added, whether they came from Spain or from ancient Malaya. Cur 

1 62 

family life must be preserved." lie was vehementaly opposed to any ' •• • 

form of sectionalism. "It is important," he said, "that wo should fool an:, 
think/* llipinos - nothing more, nothing less. Shore are no separatists 
here." 163 

In another speech before the youth, Quezon said, "we need to rar.ko 

our people, especially our youth, conscious of their oneness, jealous of 

their nationality, lovers of fcho country, proud of the i r race and their 
1 6^ 

democracy, . ." ' Kc also exhorted his countrymen to "revive the moral 
strength and power for growth of our ancestors. They pre. a strong-willed, 
earnest, adventurous people. They had traditions potent in their lives. . . 
We need the anchorage of these traditions to c .uide and sustain us in fcho 
proper discharge of our political and social obligations." 165 



152/ Recto on Quezon's Political Philosophy, Appendix in '.-uirino, op.. 

sit., p.. 393. . 

.1.60/ President Iloxns raised the Filipino flag to the accompaniment of the 
Philippine National Anthem, at the independence ceremonies on July 
4, 1946, at tho Lunota. £ide Snide, op. cit . , Vol. II, pp. 366-357. 

JiLt/ speech in the U.S. House of Representatives, 1^12, n.d.m. QP, ffii.. : 2?. 
TIJL. ' " 

152/ Speech at the San Juan do Lctran alumni banquet, loc. c^t. 

J.53/ Speech at a banquet for Secretaries Quirim and >'ulo at 1-ialacaHang, 
September 27, 1930. 'aioson Hoosaa-es. Vol. 4, Part 1, JDVTF, p. 221. 

I55/ Speech on the I-'ilipino regeneration, at the Rizal Memorial Stadium, 
August 19, 1930. Quezon Messages. .fiujira, P. 1 L"1 . 

15.47 Speech before the ROTC units, 1936, n.d.m. -J?, HR;"33, THL. 



- 20 - 



The native language which Rizal asked hies people to love and choriis 

was adopted as the basis of the national language during the xieson aduini 

tration. In a natinwido broadcast after signing incentive Order No. 134 

proclaiming the national language of the Philippines based oh Tagalog, 

zon said "wo have accoiv.3lir.hod one of the cherished cb.-oa.-us of Itizal." 1 00 

Quezon, like hizal, baliovod that an alien language like English could r.e~ 
, . 1^7 

ver be -cue national language cf the filipinos. ' similarly , Riaal said 

"Spanish will never be the general language of the country, the .people wi? 

never. talk it, because the conceptions of their brains and the feelings 0.2 

their hearts cannot be expressed in that language - each people has its 

own tongue, and it has its own way of thinking." 1o8 

Quezon, in his person, not only proved th.t the :rilipino3 are tho 

equal of any other race on earth but that he himself "is one of the prcud'i; 

1 b9 

products of tho i'ilipino race.'' J Once age in the Nordic concept of ra- 
cial superiority is refuted beyond cavil. Describing juozon as "an out- 
standing example of human greatness,' 1 :.ieoto said that ;, no one took greai:or 
pride in being called and known as a Filipino in cosmopolitan circles in- 
curably afflicted with tho prejudice of their so-called racial superiority. 
And lie ( neson) taught us to orailate that sacred pride, which is not tin- 
arrogance of tho free in the fable, but the elimination of servility and 
flattery in our conduct, and the serene dignity which cones of bhe convicti 
that there are no superior or inferior races, bub only degrees of culture 
and periods of civilization. 11 170 

i-'recdon of speech, press, and belief was ene of the brightest spcv.s 
of the Quezon administration. . He welcomed all types of criticism, parti- 
cularly the "constructive*' ones which, he said, "are always helpful, whotiv. 
they have intrinsic merit or not." However, he yarned that "foolish or 
unjust attacks upon public officials or policies carry the germ of their 
own destruction." 171 Quezon took special pride in the fact that he never 
sent a single critic to iail. He sincerely believed that "the greatest goc 
for the man in public service is criticism." 1 7 ^ 



166/ Speech on the national language, Dcceabor 30, 1937 (Ziizal Day). 
QP, MI-V40, TEL. 

I67/ Speech before municipal mayors and coconut planters at Kalacanan, 
February 19, 1938. liucson images, sw>ra. p. 35. 



J Jig/ ItiB.il 1 a ^1 ^iAijwAteiplprao, oj>. cit . , p. 50. 
162/ itoias eulogy, loc.. cit.. 
JJLO/ decto eulogy, loc.. cit. 

.121/ Quezon to Undersecretary of Public Instruction Gabriel Hanalac, iwi 1 
8, 1938. 3i?pzjmjtes8?.g<.,s, Vol. 4, Part I , JBVPP, pp. 569-570. ' 

11-2/ Press conference at l'ialacanang, October 0, 1937. -SP, IEtj'40, TNL. 



- 29 - 

In his faiaouo "Letter to the women of Halolos," Risal advocp.ted tho 

granting; of human rights to women. In fact, one of C'ueson's most enduring 
achievements was the grant of suffrage to Filipino women, ^he record shows 
that he was in favor of woman suffrage an early c - s 1914. "If the power ox 
legislation solely resided in no," he told an American suffragette, "I would 
not hesitate to give them (the Filipino women) the right of suffrage." 173 
However, the opportunity came 23 yoaru later when, as President of the 
Philippines, he signed Commonwealth Act Vo. 134 setting April 30, 1927 ac 
the date of the plebiscite on woman suffrage. The result of the plebiscite - 
447, 725 women voted in favor, and only 44,307 voted against woman sufxrags. 
i ! 'or the first time in history, ..-ilipino women exorcised their right of suff- 
rage in the local elections of December 14, 1937. 174 Another of Rizal's 
cherished dreams was achieved by ,}uezon. 

Human _Groatness 

How does one measure human greatness? By concrete achievements? Or 
by the totality of the person and his presence on earth? fly the Christ-; 
creed, it is claimed th,,t a .aan'a life on earth is but a pilgrim,- go from 
cradle to/grave. Uan's life is "borrowed" from -od; from G 0 d we come to C;,f 
we return. How wo spend this pilgrimage, nay, every hour and ovary minute 
of it, will provide the basis for 'judging our achievements on earth. In cth... 
words, we shall bo judged by the quality, the. breadth and depth, the scope 
and effects, of our performance as pjlgrims, ad nalor on Delj;loxi«n (for tr'a" 
greater glory of God), 175 

% the traditional standards of measurement, President Quezon "did , C 
much more for our country than any other man, living or dead." 176 In term* 
of concrete achievements, which have affected and will yet affect the livos 
of Filipinos for hundreds of years to come, giu^on has, doubtless, accomplished 
far more than did ;'.isal, who was proclaimed our "national hero" in 1901 , 
thanks to American initiative in foisting the Rizal cult upon an uncritical 
and war-weary generation. 1 11 

For how coKe th.-.t Risal was ,vade the national hero when he "never ad- 
vocated independence nor did he advocate armed resistance to the I Spanish) 

.122/ -MQRon to Mrs. diehard Coke- Surlooon of . 45th Street, How York Cirv. 
Jul y 15, 1914. Rivera Collection, Vol. I, p. 195. 

ill/ Snide , op. c^t . , Vol. II, p. 321. 

J_ZS/ Vide Alfredo L. Uiulo, ^itovj^ jds ajguJU.j.'he Life of Mbrbertc ll 0 ~ 

mjUA9Jl±UW-J311±. Manila: national Historical Institute, 137% 
pp. 301-370. ' ' 

116/ Sermon delivered by i'r. Pacifico Ortiz, S.J. at the Quezon necrolo- 
gical rites at the U.S.?. chapel, August 1, 1946. VM& Owokoh, on. 
ext., pp. 261-262. 

111/ Renato Constantino, "Veneration Mthout Understanding," The Th ird 

?m^.J&LtQ^PJZffJ&. Hanila: National Historical Commission, 1970, 
pp • 1 — 2.2. » 



- 30 - 

government?" Without the revolution engineered by Bonifacio, Rizal 

would have spent an uneventful life as a distinguished 3cholar and physi- 
cian and died an ordinary death. Without Aguiualdc , who brought victory 
to the Revolution and consequently proclaimed Philippine independence in 
iiawit, Cavite, the oppressive Spanish colonial regime would have conti- 
nued, perhaps blithely for years and years, and there would have been nc 
occasion at all for i'lizal to be proclaimed nation;-! hero. 

Finally, without '-iuezon who, replacing the "uniform of soldier with • 
the mantle of statecraft," 179 secured the Tydings-hcDuff ie Law fizing 
the date of Philippine independence on July 4, 1945, how could Rizal' s . 
dream of a "beloved i'ilipinas . . . free fro,-; care and sorrow" have been 
achieved? 

Because of hu»-;cm limitations, lot's leave the question o^who's ..- 
greater than who"/co History, the supreme arbiter. Let History make the 
final judgment, just as History has judged the Solitary life ;! of the 
Carpenter turned itinerant Preacher at the ago of yj, who was nailed to.-,,-, 
the croos, and buried in a borrowed grave. And yet, says an anonymous 
author, "nineteen centuries have come and gone, and today He is the central 
figure of the human race and the leader of mankind's progress. .All the 
armies that ever marched, all- the navies that over sailed, all the parligr ' 
meats th, t ever sat, all the kings that ever reigned, put together/ have" " 
not affected the life of man on this earth as much more as that or^e jjplijbarv 
life." 



^ !" Ham C T r ° n "° rboa ' ^im^in^lf^ c.uotod by Constantino, 

mJ Douglas MacArthur, "-'athor of This Infant Republic." Eulogy on £»uo»un 
.•at the Congress ritos, supra. 



iU.U.'. 

I ill 



March 23, 1970. 
Kawit, Cavite 



1 



- 31 - 

P ART I 

B * Q u E 2 0 N CHRONOLOGY 
( An notated) 

b. Aug. 19, 1878 
d. Aug. 1, 1944 

I. A STAR IS BORN 



1878 Aug. 19 Birth of Son of God. Manuel Luis Quezon is born at 7 a.m., 

■ in a spacious nipa house with wooden posts and bamboo split 
floor, in "Baler, sub-province of Aurora, Tayabas (now Quezon 
province), to a couple of - bo^dhorS, ~. Lucio Quezon and Ma- 
ria Dolores Molina. It is feast day of the town's patron sain* 
San Luis (St. Louis, bishop of Toulouse), hence the middle name 
"Luis" given by the pious mother to her newly born son. ^ The 

infant is christened Manuel Luis, the first name meaning that 

2 

he is a son of God. 

Parents., Lucio is a retired Spanish army sergeant from Pena- 
francia, district of Paco, Manila, who immigrate! to Baler, the 
eabecera of the Uistrito del Principe, some eight years before 
his son's birth. Eventually he becomes the teacher for boys in 
the local comandancia . Maria Dolores, a Spanish mestiza . is V... 
teacher for girls in the same school. Co-education at this time 
is still non-existent. A young and charming widow, Maria's mar- 
riage to Lucio is her second^ ohe has a son named Teodorico 
Molina by the first wedlock. Other sources, however, say 
that she has also a daughter, ^ and another son named Pedro. 

No. 1 in Baler . Although Quezon, in his book-length auto- 
biography and public speeches, constantly refers to his 



i/ Manuel L. Quezon, The Good Fight . New York: D. Appleton-Century Co., Inc., 
1946, pp. 1-7. This is Quezon's book-length autobiography. 

2/ Isabelo P. Caballero and M. de Gracia Concepcion, Quezon: The Story of a Nati on 
and Its Foremost Statesman. Manila: International Publishers, 1935, pp. 4-5 • 

V Sol H. Gwekoh, Manuel L. Quezon. His Life and Career . Manila: University 
Publishing Co., Inc., 1948, p. 8. 

4y Caballero and Concepcion, supra , p. 5. 

5/ Carlos Quirino, Quezon: Paladin of Philippine Freedom . Manila: Filipiniana 
Book Guild, 1971, Vol. XVII, p. 5. 

6/ Quezon's other autobiography was published in The Tribune. July 26, 1933. It 
was a narrative which he made in the course of a three-day speech in the Se- 
nate in answer to criticisms by Honorio Ventura, former secretary of the 
interior, the Osrox Mission, U.P. President Rafael Palma, and other leaders of 
the "Pros" in the Bare-Hawes-Cutting Act controversy. Vifle Teodoro M. Kalaw, 
Aide-de-Camp to Freedom. Manila: Teodoro M. Kalaw Society, Inc., 1965, p. 24-6. 



poor origin, yet his parents are not exactly propertyless . In 
fact, they belong to the local bourgeoisie, being considered tha 
"Wo. 1 family" of Baler and the only family in that rural eonunuiu- 
ty that can speak Spanish, besides the Spanish governor of the 
military district, the Franciscan friar-curate, and the corporal 
of the suardia civil. 7 The teaching couple receive a salary of 
?12 a month each - a tidy sum in the halcyon days of the country • 
and they also own a small parcel of land, about two hectares, 8 
which Lucio cultivates to supplement the family income. As nearly 
everything is cheap during this era of non-inflation, the ave- 
rage Baler family can live comfortably on a monthly budget of 
four peso's plus rice. 

1883 (At 5) i&JilSk As is commonly true of children of middle-class 

families, the boy Manuel learns to read and write Spanish, and 
later on arithmetic and catechism from his mother. 9 Less th<.« 
two decades earlier, R'aal had the same experience, his first 
tor being his own mother. 

1885 (At 7) iSlil^i^inJmbryo. He is taken to the local convent to live 

with the Franciscan priest, Pray Teodoro Fernandez, OSF, who 
teaches him Latin, geography, history, and religion, thus com- 
pleting the requisites for primary instruction. It is said that 
even at this early age the friar-curate can detect qualities of 
greatness in young Manuel. 10 

Closejall. A tragedy mars his two-year stay with Fray Fernan- 
dez. A visiting priest, Fray Angulo, of the Palanan parish in 
Isabels, who is spending a few weeks in the convent, is drowned 
while bathing one morning with young Manuel off the beach of 
Baler. The boy himself is fast being carried away by the swift 
undertow, bubling and grasping for breath, when he is rescued by 
a fisherman, "Mang" Abdon Poblete. 11 "It was my first near- " 
meeting with death," writes Quezon, "meeting which later in 

2/ Quezon, o£. cit., p. 7. 

^ 222; ^ S , b0 ° k ' P« 8 ' s ^ s the area of the Quezon farm is'much 

smaller, just two acres. (One hectare is equivalent to 2.471 acres.) 

^ SLo°p.' S T?' E 2 il J a; a Sister of his mother, also helps in teaching the 

1S0 l B ;^ S * ?: Gw f° h - aaJafaMMaate of Manuel t.. 

1940, p. 11. hereinafter to be referred to as Gwekoh's Quezon Autobio. ' 
13/ Gwekoh, o£. cit., p. 12. 

^ luTsl ^M??/ 37 " " The '' ;h ° ° nCe SaV ° d QUeZ ° n '" Phili ™^ f — - 



1 2 

life has been repeated more than once." 

1087 (At 9) Predestin ed for Greatness. Realizing only too well the import- • 

ance of education in the development of the boy, Manuel's parentfc 

plead with Fray Fernandez, who is being transferred to Manila, t' 

take their son along even as his muchacho (mess boy) so that he 

can pursue his studies. This is how the boy, who is predestined 
1 3 

for greatness, starts life in the great metropolis. He spend 

almost a year as alilang-kanin (the picturesque Tagalog term for 
domestic who receives no salary but only free board and lodging) 
in the Franciscan convent in Intramuros. 14 

1888 (At 10) Racial_Pride ± A sensitive, bright boy with inborn racial pride r 

of course, cannot long endure the social stigma attached to the 
1 5 

job of muchacho. Evidently piqued by the lowly position, ho 

moves out of the convent to live with a married aunt in Paco dis- 
trict , paying P1 2 a month for food and lodging. H e begins the 
segunda ensenanza, at the Let ran College in Intramuros, but after 
a year of hiking almost daily to and from school, a distance of 
several kilometers, he decides to become an interno (boarder) in 
the college, using his father's savings. He come sunder the influ- 
ence of two Dominican teachers, Fr. Sorapio Tamayo, O.P., and 
Fr. Florencio Llanos, O.P. 

Brilliant but Stubborn. A distinguished former classmate, Don 
Francisco Ortigas, recalls Quezon's brilliant record at Letran 
marred only by one "deficiency" arising from his rebellious na- 
ture.. For contravening a school order the youthful Kanuel is de- 
prived of a quarterly medal in physics, a relatively minor inci- 
dent that Lotran authorities can easily overlook provided that un.. 
erring youth makes a simple apology. But the young rebel refuse^ 
Ortigas observes: "I then could detect in him signs of future 

greatness, for whenever he (Quezon) was convinced that a thing 

1 ft 

was right, he never gave it up." 



12/ Quezon, od.. cit . . p. 10. 

JJiZ Cla ^° H. Recto, "Quezon, Architect of our Freedom," an eulogy delivered at the- 
ir. 3. T. chapel necrological rites, July 29, 1946. 

.11/ Quezon's narrative, "An Autobiography." In: Caballero and Concepcion, op. cit.. 
Appendix III, p. 488. ' 

15/ "No sentiment is stronger in me than racial pride," said Quezon in an extern- - 
poraneous speech at the HtiPA Day celebration, Rizal Memorial Stadium, August . 
23, 1940. In: "'Quezon in Action," a six-volume Quezoniana collection of Prof. 
Juan F. Rivera, U.P. Law Center, Vol. V, pp. 2269-2272. Hereinafter to be re- 
ferred to as Rivera Collection. 

16/ Caballero and Concepcion, op_. cit., pp. 11-12. 



- 34 



•'' ggbel JjjgggjggA F or his part, Quezon explains: "I have alwaj's 
been against every established order. I took pride in showing si; 
school or college mates that I had enough nerve to fight or defy 
authority even though it earned for me some punishment. The plo^.. 
sure that I obtained in satisfying my rebellious spirit was 
greater than the pain that I suffered from punishment; therefor ■. 
I expected punishment and continued with my rebellious spirit, 1 '- ' 
1884 (At 16) Highost = HoMrB. A consistent topnotcher. young Manuel finisher.: 

two courses at the end of five years in Letran, namely, Bacholor 
of Arts, gumma cum laude, and "Experienced Surveyor and Apprai- 
ser of Lands." On February 24th, the Governor-General himself 
goes to- Letran to preside over the commencement exercises. A 3 
valedictorian, »anuel has "the great privilege of being call^ 
to shake hands with him. I was dazzled by the unexpected honor," 

IlLjggj-gyJjgacU^ "When I .got my bachelor's degree," Quezon re - 
calls, "I felt so big, so important, that I looked down upon 
everybody, including the Spanish Captain . eneral, who was con- 
currently the Governor-General. I simply felt I was the biggost 
man. I had my breast full of gold medal^ six or seven of them, 
and I was graduated with the highest honors. I felt that I did 
not want to talk to anybody. That is not a ,joko, that is a fact. 
I felt 'it then in my heart. I looked with a sort of pity upon 
everybody. That was the only time I lost my head." 19 

ESlMHi2gi|i Quezon reveals that from early boyhood his father 
has given him this advice: "Always tell the truth regardless of 
the consequences'.' 20 

^5*y*jhQj|ternoon. After graduation, the proud, over-con- 
fident youth goes home to Baler only to find his mother "help- 
lessly ill with tuberculosis. The sight of her broke my heart." 
He spends most of the time looking after his stricken mother r. 
until one day, late in the afternoon, she expires in his arms 
after receiving the last sacraments. 21 

'84 ChalLenge^and^Response. Earlier, Lucio calls his son aside and 

tells him, "If you want to go to the university, you will have 

11/ Gwokoh, op_. cit. . p. 17. 

13/ Quezon, op. cit . , p. 12. 

12/ Frankness is one of Quezon's sterling qualities. See Gwekoh, supra, p. 17. 

20/ Quirino, op. cit . . p. 6. 

21/ Ibid,. 



- 35 - 



'84 



to. find means of supporting yourself." The father's savings hnv 

all been speirfc • in fact, he has incurred debts to enable his so/ 

to finish the Lotran course. This is a challenge which the young 

22 

man cannot ignore. Of course, he is equal to it. 

=~===£i|~-~~* ^ e mother's death comes as a great shock 
to young Manuel. But more shocking 3till is the cold, haughty 
and contemp-frbus reception accorded him by the local Spanish 
authorities. One day his father takes him along for a round of 
courtesy calls. De rlgueur . It's a local practice that can't V > 
ignored without incurring the ire of the. powers that be. In f-i-. 
convent, the friar-curate, his right leg up resting on one of : - 
the long arms of the chair, does not even seem to appreciate hh.. ' 
coming. "I felt inside me a sense of revulsion," Writes Quezon- 
"My father kissed the hand which the friar hold out to him. V/h 
my turn came, I merely took the hand and shook it." 2 ^ Aha! 
a future filibustero ? 

~I=~=g£i v = ==™ - he same thing happens when they call on th 
politico-military governor, and lastly on the corporal of the 
jniardi^_cij^n._ The sensitive youth is irked by the mastor-P^— 
relationship in Spanish colonial society. "But this time," says 
Quezon, "I saw things in a different light. I realized ..that we 
Filipinos were treated as inferiors, and my racial pride was 
deeply hurt. In college there were some Spanish students who war- 
not only indolent but also plain stupid, and many Filipinos wer-; 
superior to them in both character and intellect. In my inner- 
most self, I resolved to change that liumiliating state of 
affairs." 24 

1 1 * gfig_HM IWG OF A_RB3EL 

^iM=Ei=ll = l25£i^ A young upstart fighting the 'iSstablishnxnt' 
One is reminded of Rizal's reference to the earthen jar crashing 
itself against an iron pot. 25 One dark night the corporal of 
the guardia civil, a huge hunk of a man, and young Manuel are 
taking a walk. "A monster of lasciviousnoss and cruelty," the 
Spaniard insinuates that Manuel should convince his pretty vr»-' 



22/ Quezon, op_. cit . , p. 13. 
22/ Ibid . . pp. 13-14. 
21/ Ikid., p. 14. ' 

25/ Chapter 4, "Cabesang Tales," in Jose Rizal, El Filibusterismo . Translated 

from the Spanish by Leon Ma. Guerrero. London: Longmans, Green and Co., Ltd.. 
1965, pp. 24-33. 



- 36 



cousin to yield to the former's immoral advances. Whereupon, . 

Manuel, losing his temper, hits him with a club and almost kills 

the evil Spaniard. Consequently, the youth is haled in";othe co- 

X s 

mandancia headquarters, and/accused of being a member of the Ka-- 
tipunan. Manuel vehemently denies the charge, but the military 
governor peremptorily stops him. "Bastai " he shouts. "You will bo 
confined in the school house until I send you to Manila to bo 
tried by a military court and shot." 

Lucio, being the schoolmaster, becomes his own son's warden- 
After 15 days, however, Manuel is released but only upon the per- 
sonal assurance - glabra do honor,- his father to the mili- 
tary governor that his son will not join the Katipunan nor fight 
against the Spanish regime. 26 

^Jhe = |atigunan? The whole scenario appears unbelievable tc 
Manuel who has imbibed the libertarian ideas of the Enlightenment 
in college. The beastly Spanish corporal preying on innocent 
young girls of the town or flogging to unconsciousness, if not;- 
to death, persons who refuse to be an accomplice in his amorous . 
adventures. The military governor hurling a baseless accusation 
and then sending his victim to jail without trial... Manuel's 
conscience cries in revolt. "Now," he nods his head, "I fully 
understand the why of the Katipunanl" 27 

1395 Bgokjojanila. '1'he year before the Revolution, Manuel, accom- 

panied by his father, returns to Manila determined to work his 
way through school. He is admitted in the centuries-old Univer- 
sity of Santo Tomas, thanks to Fr. Tamayo, his old Letran mentor, 
who is now director of interns. The good Samaritan priest hires- . 
him as ,gapi. s . t a whose job is tutoring students who are weak in 
Math. In turn, he gets free tuition, board and lodging. Manuel • 
enrolls in the. law course, which includes one year proparatory 
and six years of law proper. Among his classmates are Sergio 
Osmena, ISmilio Jacinto, Juan Sumulong, Flaviano Yengco, Vicente 
Singson Encarnacion, and Vicente Madrigal. 28 

g£S^- g°£ggji-^ g-gQgr ♦ Lucio is satisfied that his son at last 
can pursue a career. Before returning to Baler the old man gives 
the youth a piece of advice that will keep him in good stead for 
thu rost of his lif °. "% son," he says slowly but firmly, "just 

26/ Quirino, o_d.. cit., p. 13. 
22/ Quezon, ojd. cit., p. 15. 
28/ Gwekoh, on., cit., p. 18. 



- 37 - 



be good and bo just to your fcllownen. No natter how high your 

station in life may bo, never forget that you came from poor pa- 
rents, and that you belong to the poor. Don't forsake them, what- 
ever happens. God bless you." Father and son part after this ae- 
on 

morable moment, never to see each other again. 

Manuel - a Priest? One day in the university he enters a clans 

in dogmatic theology, but a Dominican professor, who has known 

him since his Lot ran days, throws cold water on his priestly ar- 

bition. "Who has deceived / you into believing that you could ever 

be a priest?"- the professor asks Manuel point-blank, then bursts 

into laughter. "Don't waste your time hero. Get out and contiuuo 

30 

with your law course." 

III. RJVOLUT TO ii_0P__<9 6 

1896 Aug.' 23 Crjr_^Pugad_Lawi^ The Revolution is ushered in by the famous 
cry of Pugad Law in, a forested area in Baliutawak. The premature 
discovery of the Katipanan compels its founder, Andres Bonifacio, 
and his followers to take to the hills. ?A Some classes in 
Manila decide to close, but the pontifical university remains 
open/ c as the situation seems to be under control, except in cer- 
tain areas outside Manila. Manuel continues going to class. A_rT- 
enterprising biographer succeeds in getting Manuel's record in 
the university from first to third year. 32 His well-balanced 
preparation, combining academic studies and actual practice in • 
a law office, will servo him well a few years later. ■ 

'96 Dec. 30 gj^aT gjjjxecut ign . This is an ominous day for Spain. Jose Riaal, 
the young author of the .Mold and .Fill, is executed on charges of 
complicity in the Katipunan uprising, This turns out to be Spain's 
greatest blunder as a colonizer. (For the bullet that pierced 
Rizal's heart, according to the Filipino poet Cccilio Apostol, 
also shattered the Spanish empire.) It's vacation time, and 
young Manuel, 18, is spending a few days among his friends in 
Aliaga, Nuova Ecija, perhaps unaware of the one event that 



22/ Quirino, op., cit. . p.. 14. 
30/ Ibid. , pp. 16-17. 

51/ 



2 




32/ Gwekoh, op., cit . , p. 21 . 
Zal Quezon, op_. cit., p. JO. 



- 38 - 

will unmake Spain in this part of the world. 

1397 Mar. 22 IgYO^Iiogg^GovernraGnt^ Having consolidated their initial vic- 
tories, the Cavite i nsurrectos comprising two rival factions of 
the Katipunan, namely, the "Magdalo" and "Magdiwang," decide to 
set up a revolutionary government during a convention held in 
barrio Tejeros, municipality of San Francisco de Malabon (now 
Gen. Trias town). The government takes the place of the • Katipu:.ia.i 
which has ceased to bo a secret society. ^ 

jjjggj £iL i£_4j?ggg||g • Bonifacio himself presides over the con- 
vention to elect top officials of the revolutionary government, 
tfrdlio Aguinaldo, the 28-year-old capi tan mun icipal who led the 
capture of the Kawit J^iJiunal (municipal building), is elected 
president of the revolutionary government in absentia, being un- 
able to attend the convention because he is manning the defenses 
of the strategic pass called Pasong Santo 1 in the neighboring 
town of Dasmarinaa. But the election ends in a sour note when.. 
Bonifacio, himself elected secretary of the interior, nullifies 
the result of the convention after somebody questions his qua- 
lifications for the Qabinot position. 35 

'97 May 10 Boniiaciols Jxecution. Majority of the convention delegates, " 
mostly from Aguinaldo' s "Magdalo" faction, decide to ignore Bo- 
nifacio, and go ahead with the induction of the newly elected 
officials in the convent of Sta. Cruz de Malabon (now Tanza). 
The situation takes a turn for the worse when Bonifacio attempts 
to establish a separate government and army under the command of 
Pio del Pilar. For this blunder, the Katipunan founder is to pay 
with his life after a court martial. Ho and his brother, Proeopio. 
are executed in Mount Tala, a few kilometers southwest of Mara- 
gondon, Cavite. ^ 

'97 Nov. 1 li|i=ni=l£-|2 = ^Eyblic. Because of intensified Spanish offen- 
sive in Cavite, Aguinaldo and his men comprising the revolution- 
ary government are forced to retreat to Central Luzon. Safely 
entrenched in the caves of Biak-na-Bato, in San Miguel, Bulacan, 
the revolutionists decide to adopt a constitution patterned after 
' that of Cuba which is also in the throes of its third and last 

revolution against Spain. ,J -'he new charter provides the legal 



14/ Agoncillo and Guerrero, so;,. £i±. f p. 202; Zaide, op., cit. , Vol.11, pp. 169-170. 

35/ ^°» i0 11 • Molina, .The Phil ippines . Thr.o. u/th the Centuri es . 2 vols. Manila: 
UST Cooperative, 1961, V 0 1.1I, pp. 107-110. ~ 

2£/ Eufronio M. Alip, PoLitica l and Cultural liistorv of the Philippines. 2 vols. 
Manila: Alip & Sons, Inc., Vol.11, p. 137. ~~ 



- 39 



framework for the Biak-nn-bato Republic, which is also headed 
by Aguinaldo. ^ 

~ r j|~~£|ii2 = ^i Foreseeing a long, protracted guerrilla 
war, Captain-General Primo de Rivera tells the Spanish Cortes 
that he "can take Biak-na-bato, but cannot assure that he can 
crush the rebellion." 38 With this frame of mind, he agrees to 
a truce with the Filipino rebels. 

■37 Doc. i^l5Pact^f = Biak-na^Bato. Aguinaldo and some 26 revolutionary 

leaders agree to go on exile in Hongkong payment of a 

large Spanish indemnity plus the promise of reforms asked by the 
rebels. In the meantime, the Cuban revolution is coming to 

a boil as the rebels appear to be steadily drawing the United 
States government to their side. The Americans are anxious to 
protect their huge investments in Cuba, especially in sugar 
plantations. ^ 

Ilg^for^Comeback. In Hongkong Aguinaldo and Company deposit tJv 
P400,000 initial indemnity paid by the Rivera government in two 
banks, using only the interests for their living expenses. Their 
secret plan is to use the money to buy arms abroad and resume 
the revolution should the Spanish government fail to fulfill the 
agreement. ^ 

1898 Apr. 25 i£|Si|h-American = War. \o long unresolved Cuba question deve- 
lops into a full-scale Spnaish-American war. American naval for- 
ces in Asia are immediately alerted. At the same time American 
diplomatic representatives hold secret conferences with Aguinal- 
do and the other Filipino exiles in Hongkong in order to enlist 
their support against Spain. ^ 2 

®^m2}M§bm§£* Thc young Hanucl at this time is boarding 
in a private house in Intramuros, having been "sent away" from 
the U. S. T. dormitory by Fr. Tamayo for violating house rules,' v 



227 Jo^fS M v K&1&V i / ^^ ^A lAPP. l l^a^fifl. Kawilihan, Kandaluyong, Rizal: 
Jorge B. Vargas. Filipmiana Foundation, 1 969, pp. 59-65. 

jB/ Leandro II . Fernandez, ^iLlli^e.il^bJ.i^. How York: Columbia University 
Publication No. 268, 1926, P . 35. Vide Zaide, o£. cit . , footnote 24, p. 172. 

32/ Itpmpirs of GoneTOl. , A rte ^io Uic art , v : . Manila: National Heroes Commission, 
1963, pp. 57-68. ' 

10/ Ruth 17. Gavian and 1,'illiam A. Famm, United States History. D.C. Heath end 
Company Philippine Copyright, 1966, pp. 569-573; and Renato Constantino, 
igS^J^^iqaL,.4.,Pr.ot novA^t^i. Quezon City: Tala Publishing Services, 
19/5, p. 198. ' 

41/ Jose Alejandrino, ThcJ^ricc of Freedom... Translated from the Spanish by 
Atty. Jose M. Alejandrino. Manila: 1949, pp. 75-98. 

i^JMS^imSrmil. Manila: National His torical Inst i ^ i"^ %ZH -75. 



- 40 _ 



' 98 May 1 



"Fortunately," writes Quezon, "the punishment did not include ex- 
pulsion from lay classes." He is supporting himself in his law 
studies by working as a 25-poso clerk in the h'onte de Piodad. 43 
S^^JS^^ay. Pron his boarding house in Intruniroo, 
Manuel and other students have the rare privilege of witnessin, 
the Battle of Manila Bay resulting in the sinking of the entire 
Spanish Asiatic Fleet by the American Asiatic Squadron under . 
Commodore George Dewey after a brief TC? te 0 r f f thc coast of 
Cavite. Spanish Admiral Kontojo, the fleet colander, is hiaiec- 
wounded, and 303 of his men are ■ ; , kill ed or wounded. For 
this great naval feat, Dewey is immediately promoted to admiral. " 

IV. FIRST PHILI PP INE R3FJJ3LIC 



98 Hay 19 Aguinaldo Returns. 'The chief n f p-t - 

==== == : == ^ ==: ^^ nt - chief ol inc. 1'ilipmo exiles returns 

Hongkong to rosune the unfinished devolution against Spain. 3 £ « 
faith on both Spanish and Filipino sides causes the premature to-, 
Mnatien of the Pact of Biak-nn-bato. Because the Filipinos h,™ 
been fighting the Spanish regime since 1S 9 6, it is only natural' 
for tM n to sxde^with the United States in the war against their 
common enemy . J 

^ll^U^l^m^^m Aguinaldo and his fellow orU.s 
nave been buoyed up by Dewey- s premise - which Dewey later denies - 
that the United States will recognize the independence of the 
Fhxlxppines Just as she has recognized and supported the froedo. 
of .Cuba, which is only at her doorsteps. In other words, the 
Fhxlxppineo, being about 10,000 miles away, need not fear of bo^ 
grabbed by the Tinitod States. 46 

ymSMLmmjm^L Mother the promise is actually aa de or 
■not, whether the United States has sought the Filipinos' help in 
good faith or not, the fact remains that for a brief period of 
time the Americans and Filipinos > ., : thoraa6lvo8 „ aiw 

against Spain. For the Americans the alliance is a military ne- 
cessity. In the beginning Dewey does not have enough forces to 
fight the Spaniards on land. The Battle of Manila Bay, no matter 
how spectacular, can never bring Spain to her knees in the 



.42/ Caballoro and Concopcion, gj>. ext., P . 64. 

M/ George Dewey, Autobio^np hy ftf G eor«j Dewov l-Amm +i it 

1913, p. 223. — ^-^ -^ - u ^ c iA.wn A c tox, ral o f the jfov y f New York: 

.45/ Agoncillo and Guerrero, op_. ext., pp . 219-220. 
.45/ De Ocampo and Saulo, or>. cit . , pp. 75-76. 



- 41 - 

47 

Philippines. 

'98 May 24 Di ct atorial Government. Aguinaldo, heeding the advice of the 
generals around him, sets up a dictatorial government in Cavito, 
There is no other way to prosecute the war to victory. He issues 
a proclamation, published in the first revolutionary organ, La 
Libertad . warning that those "who directly or indirectly put 
obstacles to the realisation of our aspirations and who abuse, 

either in word or in act, the enemies who surrender, will bo 

8 

summarily executed." 

'98 June 12 Indep endence Proclaimed-. Aguinaldo orders the proclamation of 
Philippine independence in Kawit, Cavite, over the objection of 
his new adviser, Apolinario Mabini, who believes that the Fili- 
pinos must first prove to the world their capacity for self -go- 
vernment. An American officer, L, K. Johnson, colonel of the ar- 

49 

tillery, appears as one of the signers of the proclamation. 
Attesting to his good faith, Aguinaldo furnishes Dewey with co- 
pies of all decrees, proclamations, orders, and other documents 
issued by the newly established government . It cannot, therefore. 

be said that Dewey is not officially aware of the existence of x.: 

50 

Phili^'ine Republic. 

'98 June 23 Dict atorial to Rovolutioncry . Upon Mabini' s insistence, Agui v.cj 
do replaces the dictatorial government with a revolutionary go- 
vernment, at the same time setting the stage for the calling of 

51 

a Congress in Malolos, J3ulacan. 

'98 July 15 FirstJ3abj.net. Aguinaldo forms his first 6abinet perhaps to 

show the Americans, as Mabini waivbs/ i lhat the Filipinos are fully 
capable of governing themselves. Cayetano Arellano, an outstand- 
ing lawyer, is offered the premier post of secretary of foreign 
affairs, but he declines, feigning illness, although actually he 

is sympathetic to the Americans . The job is later offered to -'" 

52 

Mabini who accepts it. Almost a year later, Arellano accepts 



£Z/ IMi. 

4j3/ Caballero and Concepcion, jop_. cit. , p. 33. 

12/ Zaide, pp.. cit,., p. 196. Apolinario Mabini, T he Philippine Revolution . Trans- 
lated from the Spanish by Leon Ka. Guerrero. Manila: National Historical Com- 
mission, 1969, pp. 51-58. 

: jOj Dewey's testimony, in U.S. Senate Document Ho. 331, p. 2928, quoted in Cabal- 
lero and Concepcion, op., cit . , p. 35. 

51/ Agoncillo and Guerrero, op_. cit,., p. 232. 

22/ Ibid., P. 233. 



_ 42 - 

the position of chief justice of the Supreme Court offered by 

U.S. President William McKinlcy, and stays on the job while the 

fledgling First Philippine Republic is at war with the United 

53 

States in defense of her newly won independence. 
V. OUR AMERICAN 'ALLIES" 



'98 Aug. 12 First Double-Cross? American representatives, without inf orniil{j 
their Filipino allies, sign the Protocol of Peace with the Spa- 
nish envoys in Paris. 

'98 Aug. 13 Hock Ba ttle . In accordance with this Protocol of Peace, the 

Spaniards surrender the Ualled c ity (intramuros) to the American 
forces after a sham battle. Filipino troops, who have earlier 
placed the city under siege, are not allowed to enter it nor par- 
ticipate in the victory celebration. Second double-cross? 

Q uezo n Is Eye-witness. Student-boarder Manuel is an oye-witiv.-><a-. 

to the American take—over of the '-/ailed City. In fact, he sees 

the Spanish royal flag being hauled down and replaced by the 

Stars and Stripes. "I confess to a feeling of sadness when I 

saw t.io old flag cone down forever," writes Quezon. "After all, 

56 

I inherited from ray mother some Spanish blood." ' 

Birth of _New_Ide olog_y, . On another occasion, Quezon reainiscoas 
"As I saw it that late afternoon- of August 13, 1898, the sun in 
the clouds crowning Mariveles with purple and gold, in the ga- 
thering darkness of the Pacific, the royal flag of Spain ca:ne 
down and for the first time in my life I saw the Stars and 
Stripes run to the fore. Little did I realize then that I was 
witnessing what, in ultimate result, nay prove to be the greatest 
event of modern civilization in the Orient. Little did I know 
in my immaturity that I was beholding the birth of a new ideology 
in Asia - an ideology based upon what was then a strange new con- 
ception in this part of the world - a conception that government 
is of the people, by the people, and for the people - a conception 
based upon the magic words 'liberty' and 'freedom, 1 ' I did not 

dream then that the first pangs of Philippine nationhood were in 

57 

their beginnings." 



52/ Grego rio F. Zaide, Great Filipinos in History . Manila: Verde Book Store, 
1970, pp. 67-70, 

campo and Saulo, op,, cit., pp. 86-87. 

55/ Agoncillo and Guorrrero, op_. cit., p. 224. 

%J Quezon, op_. cit .., p. 37. 

52/ Gwekoh, op., cit . . pp. 25-26. 



- 43 



•yd Aug. 14 U» S. Military Governmen t. General Wesley Merritt, head of the 

American expeditionary forces, sets up a military government. A„: 

the Americans never bother to inforn their Filipino allies abou'; 

such an important step, which will affect their future for the 

next half century or so, the Aguinaldo government cannot but vie; 

58 

this action with deep concern, if not suspicion. 

Father , Brot her Murdered . Meanwhile, as classes in Manila hav • 
been suspended since the Battle of Manila Bay, Manuel goes horn--' 
to Baler for the first time since coming back to the city, ac- 
companied by his father, shortly after his mother's death. Tarr 
he learns of the gruesome murder of his father and a younger bro- 
ther, Pedro, by bandits while on their way home from Nueva Ecija 
Orphaned of both his parents, Manuel stays in the house of an 
aunt, Zenaida, another sister of his mother, who has two winsome 
daughters, Amparo and Aurora, his future wife. ^ 

'98 Sept. 15 Halolos Congress . '^he American military government notwith- 
standing, Aguinaldo goes ahead with the opening of the Malolos 
Congress, which is composed largely of ilustrados and military 
leaders. Quezon, on -• year short of the age of majority, remains 
an unknown bystander as this historic event unfolds before his o;r 

'98 Sept. 19 Indepe ndence Ratified. Doubtless in answer to the establishment 
of a military government by the Americans, one of the first acts 
the Malolos Congress is to ratify the Philippine independence 
proclaimed by Aguinaldo in Kawit. Thus, after the downfall of. tin 
Spanish regime two governments ' , er.erge^ , one American and th • 
other Filipino. 'The situation is fraught with ominous signif icanc 

'98 Dec. 10 Tre atv _o f JParis^ Spanish and American peace commissioners sign 
the Treaty of Paris over the protest of Felipe Agoncillo, minis- 
ter plenipotentiary of the Philippine Republic, who is expressly 
sent to the French capital by Aguinaldo to represent the young 
Philippine government as America's belligerent ally. Insofar as 
Agoncillo is concerned, this Filipino-American alliance against 
Spain is a fact, not a mere figment of the imagination. He was 
the president of the Hongkong Junta when American Consul Rounse- 
villo V/ildman first made overtures to Aguinaldo and the other 



58/ De Ocampo and Saulo, op., cit., p. 117. 

22/ Quezon, op., cit., p. 38. 

60/ Ibid*., p. 211. 

6l/ iCalaw, devolution , op., cit., p. 123. 



- 44 - 



Filipino exiles in the British Crown Colony to fight side by sid 

. , c .62 
with the Americans in t)ie war against bp.'- in. 

Agoncillo Thesis. Agoncillo is barred from talcing part in the 
peace conference that is to affect the destiny of the Filipinc 
people. Under the treaty, the Philippines is ceded to the Uni- 
ted States by Spain whose sovereignty, according to Agoncillo f 
has already been "extinguished by force of arms by the Filipino 
revolutionists." His thesis is that Spain, her colonial regime 
overthrown, has no longer any right to cede the Philippines; anr. 

neither has the United States, being technically an ally of the 

63 

Filipinos, the moral right to accept the cession. 

'98 Dec. 21 Benevolent JPolicy? U.S. President McKinley issues the so-callo'' 
"Benevolent Policy of Assimilation," the first official indic?;t:> 
that the Americans have come here to stay. Born of revolution arj? 
established on the egalitarian principle that all nen are crcat ■? " 
equal, the United States has abandoned her democratic pretenser 
and become a new imperial power over the protests of many Aino- 
cans themselves. 

Double-Standard. one anti-imperialist American solon, Sarjp.tor 
Masc.i, asks his colleagues in the U.S. Senate: "Tell me why wa 
should adopt one plan for Cuba and another for the Philippines? 
Do you say with the ' explosionists' - I mean the expansionists 
- we promised wo would not steal Cuba, but we did not promise 
not to steal the Philippines?" 

1899 Jan. 2 Mabini Cabinet. Aguinaldo forms a new cabinet headed by Habi/ii- 

'99 Jan. 4 Luna Protests. Gen. Elwell Otis, head of the U. -S. military 

government, publishes the MoKinlcy proclamation with some amend- 
to 

ments to cushion • . the shock .i£ their Filipino allies, 
Antonio Luna, editor of La Indepcudencia , leads the attack on 
the proclamation. ^ 

'99 Jan. 5 Counter-Proc lamation . Aguinaldo issues a counter-proclamation 
protesting "most solemnly against this intrusion of the United 
States government on the sovereignty of these Islands." ^ 

On the Sideline. Things are rapidly coming to a head. What 
can a young man like Quezon be thinking of at this time? 

&=J Ibid. . pp. 124-125; also in De Ocampo and Saulo, oj). cit . , pp. 72-74. 

62/ De Ocampo and Saulo, on. cit . . pp. 275-280. 

§&/ Caballero and Concepcion, pj>. cit . . p. 41. 

6J2/ Agoncillo and Guerrero, op . cit .. p. 247. 

66/ Kalaw, Revolution , op_. cit., p. 157. 



- 45 - 

'99 Jan. 22 Malolos Constitution. The Congress in Barasoain Church having 
finished its task, Aguinaldo promulgates the Malolos Constitu- 
tion, the legal framework of the revolutionary government. 

'99 Jan. 23 5®2H^ii£_IS§Hiy:E5li ™ ne First Philippine Republic is inaugi.ii- . 

ted in Malolos, with Aguinaldo as president. It is a red let to: 

day for the Filipino people who have just declared their indop ;■ 

dence. This is their clearest answer to the McKinley proclaror.- , 

tion. It is also the first Republic in Asia, antedating by 12 

years the birth of the Chinese Republic headed by Yuan Shih- 

67 

kai, and inspired by Dr. Sun Yat-sen. 

'99 Jan. 30 Agon c illo J4emorial . Back in Washington from Paris, Agoncillo 
presents a long memorial to the U.S. Senate reitering the right 
of the Philippine Republic to world recognition under "the rula 
of international law." ^ 8 

Frustrati on in_galer. Still hybernating in Baler, Manuel, tno""' 

would-be lawyer, doubtless feels a sense of frustration as he n 

the futile attempt of the young Republic to win recognition, par 
from 

ticularly •/ her supposed ally, the United States. No matter iiov 
just the cause of the Philippine Republic, he can't do anything 
abou + it for lack of involvement. His father's palabra de ho nor, 
given to the Baler politico-military governor, that he. would not 
fight against Spain has been holding him back. But with Spain 
out of the picture, it becomes an entirely different story - as 
far as Manuel is concerned. 

VI. RE BEL VJ ITH A CAUSE 

'99 Feb. 4 The Fuse^ A Filipino soldier attempting to cross the San Jua.i 
bridge dn the outskirts of Manila at 8 p.m. (Saturday) is shot 
and killed by an American soldier, Pvt. Robert W. Grayson of the 
1st Nebraska Volunteers. This is the proverbial straw that : ' - 
the camel's back. The Philippine-American War is on. ^ 

To Wa r I "The news of the hostilities reached Baler almost 
overnight," writes Quezon. "I decided at once that my duty lay 



JaZ/ Kalaw, Revoluti on, op. cjt t _, pp. 145-146. Also John K. Fairbank, Edwin 0. 
Reischauer, and Albert M. Craig, East, Asia: Tradition and Transformation . 
Boaton: Haughton Mifflin Company, Reprinted by G. M. S. Publishing Corporatio-i 
Philippines, n. d., pp. 740-750. 

68/ De Ocarapo and Saulo, £p_. cit . , pp. 289-294. 

.62/ Leon Wolff, Little B rown Brother. How the Americans Conquered the Philippin es 
in 1898-1902 . Makati: Erehwon Press, 1971, pp. 9-64. 



- 46 - 



in fighting for tho freedom of ny country. Neither my father, :: 
while he was alive, nor I had any commitment to the United Strttoe 
Army. On the contrary, it was that army, I thought, which had 
broken faith with ny people." 70 Having taken Roman Law in both 
his second and third year at the U.S.T., Manuel ought to know 
whereof he speaks. 71 

•99 Apr. ggg£dQS_g ightgr. War in any language is electrifying, challenge*^. 

Manuel, the uncommitted youth from Baler, is immediately trans- 
formed into Quezon, the roan of action. Ho joins the revolutionary 
forces of Col. Villacorta, "a good and valiant soldier but almost 
illiterate," in Pantabangan, Nueva IJoija. This man has been con- 
tinuously in the field since the Cry of Pugad Lawin, never laying 
down his arms even after the Pact of Biak-na-bato. Commander of 
the forces that besieged Baler, the last Spanish stronghold to 
fall into the hands of Filipino insurgents, Villacorta knows Que- 
zon personally. Without much ado, he appoints him his aide-de- 
camp with the rank of second lieutenant. 72 

^2|^s = First = S2urs. Quezon wins his first spurs fighting the 
bandits plundering the town of Aliaga, Nueva Ecija. H 0 ia no 
stranger to the town, having boon there, vacationing among friends, 
on the day of Rizal's execution. H G has therefore a sentimental 
attachment to the place. Wiping out all the bandits, Quezon is ' 
immediately promoted to first lieutenant. 

'99 June Joinsjguinaldojtaf f . Because of his excellent record, Quezon 

is assigned to the general staff of Aguinaldo in Cabanatuan, ;% 2 <.r, 
Bcija, which has become the temporary capital of the First Re- 
public after leaving Kalolos, pressed by the advancing enemy fcrcse,?.. 

Ana^er^rom^ ioiu Quezon is assigned to escort General Benito 
%tividad, wounded in the battle of Calumpit, to General Luna', : - 
headquarters in Bayambang, Pangasinan, for medical treatment. 
Mission accomplished, he is promoted to captain. 

'99 June 4 On Inspection. Aguinaldo, accompanied by Ms staff, including 
the newly promoted Capt. Quezon, leaves Cabanatuan to inspect 
fortifications in San Isidro, iMuova Licija. Actiially, they are 
en route to Angeles, Pampanga, the next capital of the Republic. 
True enough, Aguinaldo inspects some 3000 troops under the com- 
mand of youthful General Gregorio del Pilar, making thorn swear 



10/ Quezon, on,, cit., p. 41 . 
ll/ Gwekoh, pp . cit. . p. 20. 

Zl/ Quezon, on., cit., p. 42. This and succeeding paragraphs are found in Tho 
^^odj^ightj. pp. 42-45. 



- 47 - 

to fight on the side of their Generalissimo "against all cowers 
Quito a cryptic oath. B u t the following morning, Aguinaldo and; 
staff proceed in the direction of Bayanbang, arriving there 
lato in the evening. 

ISi|£l|i£ = I'|iigi " 0n thij3 trip," writes Quezon, "I saw Genera: 
Aguinaldo dressed in his military uniform with his insignia as 
full general. I asked him if he was celebrating some happy even-' 
and he just smiled and said nothing." ^ 

':,'9 June 5 Luna Assassination^ General Antonio Luna, commander of all 
Central Luzon forces, has .just arrived in Cabanatuan for an 
important conference with Aguinaldo when the latter* s personal 
bodyguards gang up on him as he is coming down the stairs of the 
general headquarters after a verbal encounter with Foreign Secre- 
tary Felipe Buoncainino, Sr. 1A 

Quezon's Account. %q tragedy takes place about the sane time 
that Aguinaldo and staff arc en route to Bayarabang. "Before mid- 
night," Quezon recalls, "it was rumored in Bayambang that Luna 
had been murdered in Cabanatuan by the personal bodyguards of 
Aguinaldo who were left in the town to protect his mother and ■ 
wifo " 

iilawliJ^ort. "When Aguinaldo called Luna to a conference in 
Cabanatuan," writes Kalaw, "the latter, thinking that he would 
bo asked to form a new Cabinet,' journeyed to the place indicated, 
only to meet a "treacherous death planned by the very aoldiora 
he has disarmed and prosecuted for abandoning their posts and 
for disobeying his orders'. Col. Francisco Roman, who accompanied 
him, was also killed." ^ 

Suproigo, Coanandor. After Luna',' death, Aguinaldo takes com-nd 
of all armed forces of the Republic . Nevertheless, the retreat 
of the Filipino forces continues with the Americans in hot pur*m 

Quezon With Alberts, Meanwhile, from Bayambang Aguinaldo moves 
back to Angeles, and thence goes north to Tarlac, Tarlac, where 
he establishes the general headquarters and the temporary capi- 
tal of the Republic. In Tarlac, Quezon stays with the family of 
Col. Alejandro Albert of the revolutionary medical corps. Mrs. 
Albert treats him like a son. 76 



12/ Quezon, op. cit., p. 45. 

ii/ Agoncillo and Guerrero, op.. cj£. , pp. ?*H-?54 

25/ Valaw, Rovolutri on , op . cit . . p, 189. 

W Gwekoh, op. cit., PP . 26-27; also in Quezon, on. cit., p. 46. 



- 48 - 



'99 July 14 Last_C ongress _M_egt. On the run since the fall of Malolos, the 
Filipino Congress meets in Tarlao and elects a now set of offi-. 
cors led by Ambrosio Rianzaros Bautista, as president, five 
vice-presidents, and six secretaries. Five weeks later (Aug. 2; 
the sane C ong ress elects Apolinorio Mabini, former gab.-: net pre 
sident, as chief justice of the Supremo Court. 77 

99 HSi' Ciuezon is ordered to proceed to Bagnio to re- 

place a garrison coriander until another officer can bo sent tVr 
to take his post. Upon his return from the highlands, making tlv ' 
difficult journey on horseback, he feels that staff work at head, 
quarters no longer appeals to him. It's too tame. At his own 
request, he is assigned to the headquarters of General Tora»s 
Hascardo.in Porno, Pampanga. The next day Mascardo sends him to- 
the battlefront as a member of the staff of Col. Leysan, com- 
mander of Filipino forces on the defense line between San Fer- 
nando and Porac, Once there Quezon sees action galore. 78 

^ILl£ = E£ll- And here is Quezon's confession: "I heard for 
the first time in my life the whistle of a bullet. I ducked. 
Then the number of flying bullets became too numerous to duck, 
and I felt inside m.sclf an irresistible impulse to run away. 
Before this I had a very high opinion of my own valor... I folt 
pretty certain that I could be one of the military heroes of 
Philippine history. But when the test came, I discovered that 
ny fear of death was instinctively quite strong with me..." ^ 

^SU^otion. One day Quezon is assisting najor Liraz in' ' 
defense of Porac. in the thick of the fight Liraz is fatall- hit 
and Quezon assumes command of the battalion. But the enemy pvov ,, 
to be too strong for the defenders, forcing Quezon to order a 
retreat. He figures in more encounters after the Porac fire- 
fight to earnfspot promotion to major. Meanwhile, Mascardo moves 
his headquarters to Bataan at a strategic place previously lo~ 
cated by the young major. U) 

USSS&J^LUSg&m. Quezon's knowledge of law serves hi- 
woll oven on the battlefront. One day a French man BUepeoted of 
being a spy is tried before a court-martial set up by Mascardo. 
The former U.S.T. law student secures the foreigner's acquittal 



'J'jJ Kalaw, s upra , p. 195. 

28/ Quirino, 031. cit. f pp. 36-37. 

22/ Quezon, _qn. cit . , p. 48. 

i'W Ibid. . p. 49. 



after a brilliant defense. Impressed by Quezon's legal prowes3 r 

the grateful French nan makes a startling prophesy: "The young 

nan who took charge of my defense is admirable. His mind is of 

the sharpest and brightest kind. A glorious and brilliant caroc: 

i3 ahead of him. You watch - a brilliant and glorious career will 
81 

surely be his." 

'99 Oct. 12 ^^ilia^arfare. After the collapse of Filipino defenses in 
Pampanga, Aguinaldo appoints ITascardo to succeed the late Genei-- 
Luna as commander of all troops in Central Luzon. Wounded four 
times in combat since the- first phase of the Revolution again.-;-; 
Spain, Mascardo is considered a guerrilla expert. His new posi- 
tion serves to emphasize the new tactics adopted by the Filipinr 
defenders . Aguinaldo issues a general order to all troops to 
break into small units and resort to guerrilla warfare, doub.t- 
less the first of its kind in Asia. 82 :; 

'99 Nov. 13 Aguinaldo Odvosev. Aguinaldo, his family, members of his 0abi-. 

net, and his security forces leave Bayambang, Pangasinan, by 
special train bound for Calasiao, their first stopover. Aguiiv.L- 
do joins the advanced guards commanded by General Del Pilar. • Th ■ 
rear guard is led bv Col. Montenegro. This is the beginning of 
the Aguinaldo odysscy that will tales him over mountains and aero 
valleys, gorges, and rivers from Pangasinan to La Union until 
they reach Tirad Pass. Travelling on foot, theirs is an Qdyssoy 
of "intense suffering." 83 

iiiEllS—ESEiiii [ ' lith 60 Picked riflemen, Del Pilar, the "boy 

general," makes a. gallant but hopeless stand at strategic Tirpd 

some, 50 north of 

Vans, .- -if kilometers Cervantes, capital of Lcpanto, to 

slow down the enemy advance and enable Aguinaldo and his socurit;- 
forces to move farther into the interior. Ho meets a Spartan 
death, every inch "an officer and gentleman," quoting the epi- 
taph written by the enemy. 84 

'99 Dec. 24 A^ck^G^bler. The tempo of battle slackens a bit in an- 
other theatre of war - Batann province. Tired of eating only 
boiW rioo in the hills, Major Quezon takes his unit to the 
town of Orion to spend Christmas Sve and the Day of Nativity. 
The. cooperative town mayor distributes Quezon's men in differed; 
houses to avoid detection. That night, in a game of monte . 



81/ Gwekoh, op., cit., p. 31- a i so la Caballero and Concepcion, oji. cit., p. 63. 
82/ Quirino, 0£. cit .. p. 38. 

82/ Col. Simeon Villa and Dr. Santiago Barcelona, Aguinaldo 'a Odvssev. Manila: 
Bureau of Public Libraries, 1963, pp. 3-7. 

31/ Zaido, History , on., cit., pp , 222-223. 



t 



- 50 - 

Quezon, unrecognized, pits his luck against that of the America 
beating them all the way until his five-peso "capital" zooms to 
one hundred American dollars! With this small fortune in his 
pocket, the young major sends a note to General Mascardo inform 
ing him that he is taking a brief furlough in Manila. Quezon 
stays in the house of the Alberts at 132 Ronquillo, Sta. Cruz. 
•99 Dec. 25 flrst = Casual t ies . The long and painful retreat over trackleer 
jungles exacts the first toll. This Christmas Day members of th - 
Aguinaldo family, escorted by army officers, surrender to Aner'.- 
can forces, thus leaving the generalissimo free to wage a full- 
scale guerrilla war. 86 

1900 Jan. 1 Quezo n= in = UST . Still on furlough, Quezon visits his ilma Mater 

the pontifical university, to hear mass, January 1st being his 
saint's day. He is welcomed by his Dominican professors who in- 
vite him to breakfast. However, they get scared when he informs 
them that he is still an active insurrecto . "Dewey fooled Agui- 
naldo once," argues the unreconstructed rebel; "McKinley would 
fool us again." 7 

2i£L c = ±2 = lgtaan. The young battalion commander returns to Bator: 
only to find his chief, General Mascardo, stricken with malaria, 
Soon he himself contracts the dreaded disease, and is taken to 
Navotas, a seaside town near Halabon, for medical treatment. 

lM&d9M' The guerrilla patient stays in the house of 
a local fishing magnate who has a son studying in Europe. With 
plenty of time on his hands, Quezon reads avidly the many inte- 
resting books in his host's private library - "books which left 
in my mind some doubts as to the certainty of hell as taught :.:e 
by my friar teachers." This is a turning point in Quezon's life. 
The former would-be priest, in deference to his mother's wish, 
becomes a Freemason. 88 

Tw^me^icans^Killed^ Fully recovered, Quezon, accompanied by 
his orderly, goes back to the field. But he makes the mistake of 
taking a passenger boat from Navotas to Pilar, Bataan, They arn 
detected by a spy, Consequently, an American platoon arrives in 
Pilar, scouring the place where he and his companion have landed. 
Not finding/quarry there but only a valise inadvertently left 



25/ Quezon, op_. cit., p. 68. 

86/ Villa and Barcelona, 0£. cit . . pp. 16-17. 

82/ Quirino, o£. cit., pp. 45-46. 

88/ Gwekoh, ojd. cit., p. 33. 



51 - 



behind, containing a picture of Quezon and his girl friend, tl 
enemy sets fire to the houses to flush him out. He barely es- 
capes capture, but his orderly is shot and seriously wounded. 
For the senseless burning of the village and the shooting of ' 
aide, Quezon vows to wreak vengeance on the enemy. Soon enou/. 
his troops ambush an enemy platoon, killing two American sold- 
Tit for tat. 89 

1S00 Jan. 31 ^o = ^erican = Commi3sione. The, Schurman Commission submits r, 

report to President McKinloy recommending the establishment of 
a civil government in the Philippines. Consequently, McKinloy 
organizes the Second Commission headed by William Howard Taft, 
who becomes the first civil governor in the new American colon; 
The Philippines becomes a blot on the escutcheon of American 
"democracy." 

Sept. 6 tegMUsJalanan. The 1 O-month-long Aguinaldo odyssey e,v 

up in Palanan, Isabela, whence the generalissimo will direct 
the guerrilla war for the next six months. 90 

Dec. 23 teWoniats. The Federal Party (Partido Federal) is orga- 

nized by Dr. T. H. Pardo do Tavora and other pro-American Fi- 
lipinos, all of them belonging to the ilustrado class. This is 
the first political party in the Philippines under the American 
regime. It advocates not only acceptance of American sovereign- 
ty but also Philippine statehood in the American Union. It has 
one American member, Dr. Frank S. Bourns, former army surgeon. 
Its organ, La Democ racia (Democracy), is edited by de Tavera 
himself. 91 

1901 Jan. 31 Ool^lalPougdation. The Philippine Commission, which exer- 

cises executive and legislative functions, approves Act Wo. 32, 
known as the Municipal Law, creating a system of municipal go- 
vernments each composed of a municipal president, /vice-pre- 
sident, and councilors elected by qualified voters of the town. 
This is the infrastructure of the colonial regime in the Phi- 
lippines. 92 

'°1 Har.' 23 ^inaldo^ture^ Through a cleverly plotted ruse, Aguinaldo 
is captured by a commando-type team of American soldiers under 
Co1 * Fl, edcrick Funston, with the aid of the "treacherous dogs" 

&/ Quirino, o£. cit., pp . 48 _ 49 . 

20/ Villa and Barcelona, op_. cit .. p. 87. 

ill/ Zaide, History., o£. cit., pp . 237-238. 

52/ Gwekoh, op., cit., p. 5U 



- 52 _ 



•01 Apr. 1 



t TIT: Pa ~ 93 This nark3 «• b ~* * *• 

of the PhUappino-^eriean War whioh milltary strategist3 ^ 

Washington have earlier predictor! w -m ^ i, 

predicted will take only a matter of vo 

VII. E^JS^TUEJEGINNIWG 

back to Manila. E iglrtoen days later Agui „ aM0; a ^ 
an Malaoannn, takes hia oath of alleginnee to tha United Str- 
and at the sane tine issnes a proclamation urging his cenrade, ' 
an the field to lay down their anna and "accept the sovereignty 
of the United States... » Tnis is the oM rf ^ ^ _ • 
as Aguinaldo is concerned. 

m^mMJ^m, ^t the end of the war marks only the 
beginning of a new life for Aguinaldo's former staff officer - 
Major Queen. To find out if the news about Aguinaldo's capture 
xs true, Mascardo summons Quezon to his headquarters. "You h.vo 
served your country well as a soldier," the General tells thJ 
year-old officer, who is almost reduced to a mere skeleton af J. 
a long bout with malaria. "But you are sick and have been 
ferine from malaria for so long that you simply cannot stand thV 
hard life much longer. It is better for you to surrender. The 
Americans will let you free... Go back to your university, con- 
tinue with your studies and finish your career. Our country needs 
men with education. You will be of service to our -oeo.le in 
other fields. Besides, I have a special mission for you. I w.nt 
you to find out definitely if General Aguinaldo has been capture. 
If he has, try to get in touch with him and tell him of the' si- 
tuation of our forces here in B,taan and over there in Zambia 
And ask him to instruct me whether I should surrender or con- 
tinue fighting to the last man." ^ 

^^JSHI^inaldo, Quezon, with two orderlies, surrender, 
to Lt. Lawrence 3. Miller, po3t oonnandep in Mariveles, " who 
helps him get to Malacanan, where he sees the erstwhile supreme 
a war prisoner. "General Mascardo has to assume the responsibi-' 
Hty and decide for himself whether he wants to surrender or 
not," Aguinaldo tells Quezon. "If you see him, give him my best- 
regards and tell him what you have seen, that is, that I am in 



^ & e Se S: SS^^^' Translated from the Spanish by 



Agoncillo and Guerrero, op_. cit., p. 295. 
25/ Quezon, op_. cit., pp , 74 _ ?5> 



- 53 - 

Ualacanan, very well treated by the Americans, but a prisoner 
just the same." ^ 

A_grisgner^_Tog_. His mission accomplished, Quezon goes to the 
Albert residence where he plans to recuperate from his illness, 
and afterwards try to find a job in order to resume his inter- 
rupted law studies. His plan comes to naught when one day, at 
siesta time, he is arrested by American soldiers on a false 
charge of complicity in the murder of a companion. He is confinsc 
with other prisoners, jampacked like sardines, in the small 
guardrooft of the Postigo Gate (Puerto Postigo), Intramuros. 
After six months he is accidentally seen by his former Dominican 
professor, Fr. Florentine Llanos, O.P., who secures his release 
through the intercession of Archbishop Alcocer. ^ 

Nervo us J_Jreck . Returning to the Albert residence, Quezon has 

~, , , --, /Several 
a nervous breakdown. Por the next/months he is confined at the 

San Juan de Dios hospital where he meets Dr. Gregorio Singian, 

who later invites him to stay in his house. After his recovery, 

Quezon gets back his old clerical job at the Monte de Piedad. 

He then transfers to. the house of Santiago Antonio in Pandacan. 

Childless, the Antonio couple treats him like a son, refusing 

to accept any payment for his board and lodging. Meanwhile, 

Quezon reviews his law subjects for the bar examinations. ^ 8 

'01 July 4 g£vi l_^vernment . r fhe first civil government under the Af- 
rican regime is established in the Philippines with Taft himself 
as governor. 

'01 Nov* . 4 ^2E£gllg| = ^|tionalism. 'flic Philippine Commission enacts the 

Sedition Law making advocacy of Philippine independence or sepa- 
ration f rom ( the United States punishable by death or long 
.imprisonment. This marks the beginning of a long period of sup- 
pressed nationalism in the country. ^ 

1 902 Feb. 27 Lukb an_ C ap turod . General Vicente Lukban, who successfully 
directed the Balangiga operations against the Americans, is 
captured in Samar. 

'02 Apr. 16 Last General? Convinced that further resistance is futile, 

General Miguel iialvar, who succeeded Aguinaldo as generalissimo, 
gives up to the Americans, marking the end of organized warfare 



%J Ibid., PP. 79-80. 

SO/ Gwekoh, op., cit . . pp. 39-40. 

Quirino, o_p_. cj.t., pp. 59-60. 
59/ Agoncillo and Guerrero, op.. _cit . , pp. 280-302. 



- 54 - 



against the "Yankee imperialists." 100 

'02 Apr. 16 Pure Slaughter. "The war against the Americans," Quezon writer,' 
later on, "was no war at all. It was slaughter, pure and simple. 
V/e had no weapons to speak of, and did not know how to handle J --h . 
few that we had. Our army ha3 no discipline, no organisation. \: 
had men willing to die, and thousands upon thousands died heroics,, 
.ly, while others survived through a miracle. We fought only to c.:.-.. 
for we are not trained nor equipped to kill." 101 

VIII. A PRUKISIJi'G BAILttlSTKR 



•02 July 2 1jt_£^Mic_^t. The United States Congress approves the Phi- 
lippine Bill of 1902, the first organic act under the American 
regime, providing for the election of delegates to the Philippine 
Assembly two years after a nationwide census. The Assembly will 
serve as the lower house, and the Philippine Commission as the 
upper house of the nation's lawmaking body. 

I===S^i|Sli == liS:i ; 2|i : Several influential Americans are against 
the bill, believing that the Filipinos are still backward and un- 
fit for self-government, but Congressman Cooper of Wisonsin, af- 
ter reciting Riaal's Last Farewell, concludes that a people who 
could produce a patriot and martyr "with pure and lofty ideals" 
like Rizal is not undeserving of American civilization and bene- 
ficence, least of all freedom in managing their political affairs 3 '^ 

jggg_£lgjB|igg- T ^ early American impression of Filipinos as 

"mostly naked savages, subsisting on dogs, and inhabiting tree- 
tops" is largely brought about by the exhibition of several Igo- 
rots in G-strings at the St. Louis Exposition, thanks to Dean 
C. Worcester, a member of the Taft Commission. These Igorots are 
made to represent the "topical Filipinos." For this deliberate 

misrepresentation, Worcester has earned the reputation as the ' 

1 

arch enemy of the Philippine cause. 

'03 March Cen sus ^, Completion of the first Philippine census under the 

American regime. 

'03 Apri ?§£_^°2S2i2^®£« Quezon takes the first bar examination under 

the American regime, copping fourth place with a rating of 87.33 



-100/ Ibid., p. 262. 
121/ Gwekoh, op_. cit .. pp. 34-35. 
122/ Agoncillo and Guerrero, op,, cit., pp. 328-329. 
Caballero and Concepcion, p_o. cit., pp. 58-59. 



- 55 - 



per cent. A certain J. L. Quintos obtains the highest grade of 
96.33 per cent, followed by Sergio Osmena, 95.33 per cent, and 
Fernando Salas, 94.4 per cent. Quezon takes his oath on April 
16th. 1J4 

MLfe^oJoss. Judge Francisco Ortigas, a successful law 
practitioner, invites Quezon to join him in his law office at a 
salary of P1 50 a month with the right to have his own clients -rh 
seek his professional service. The young barrister wins all law 
cases entrusted to him. His first case involves the defense of 
five ignorant farmers accused of aiding revolutionary stragglers 
in the hills. 105 

£^£ion = of = theJoor^ After the third month, and with personal 
savings amounting to P2,000, Quezon decides to put up his own la; 
office in Tayabas. Pretty soon he has to refuse many civil and 
criminal cases because he simply cannot handle them anymore, his 
fame as a successful lawyer spreads far and wide. Why not? "I 
charge large fees to the rich, and none at all to the poor," 
writes Quezon. 10 Modesty aside, he adds: "I hope I may be 
forgiven if I state that I won the liberty of every man I de- 
fended." 107 

'03 Aug. 13 injieu^ofjing^ Quezon is not only a topflight lawyer but also 
a man with a social conscience. When a fire breaks out in the 
house of a prominent coconut planter in Lucena, Quezon himself 
leads the town voluntaries in putting out the blaze. He is per- 
sonally commended by Col. Bandholtz, the military commander; Set 
to be outdone, the Lucena municipal council adopts a resolution 
changing the name of the town's main street from Rey Alfonso XIII 
to Manuel Luis Quezon. 108 

l~~££^ = ^|ckoning : . Quezon files a criminal case in Lucena 
against Fabian Hernandez, his father's arch-enemy, for having 
taken possession of the two-hectare Quezon farm in Baler by 
falsifying the dead man's signature. "That tiny piece of land," 
Quezon recalls, "had supported our family for many years, and 
that as a young man I had worked hard/sweated in clearing the 



^ y^f nte Alban ° Facis, Serbia P^ena, 2 vols. Manila: Phoenix Press, Inc. . 

iyn , vol. 1 , p. 46. . " 

Quezon, ojd. cit., p. 86. 
1Q6/ Gwekoh, op., cit., p. 41. 
•1277 Quezon, op., cit. , p. 91. 
108/ Gwekoh, supra, p. 43. 



field." 1 °9 



2322&J2U£g*. A celebrated case handled by Quezon is th-,t 
of Tagalog playwright, Aurelio Tolentino, who is charged with 
soditxon for his nterary masterpiece, "Kahapon, %ayon at Bukas" 
(festerday, Today and Tomorrow). The dramaUsT i^c^tteT^o 
ly through Quezon's- "unerring logic and forceful arguments." 1 1 "° 

IX. STJ^£? = ^AT_A3CEKT 

Late 1903 goUgf Jublio^ice, Q^on's spectacular record as a pro- 

vmfcial lawyer cannot escape official notice. Towards the end of 
the year (l 9 03), Dr. Pardo de Tavera, a member of the Philippine 
Commission, offers him the position of provincial fiscal of Kin- 
doro with a salary of P1 5 0 a month. As a legal practititaor Cur- 
son is making no less than P1 ,000 a month. But that is not the 
peint. The challenge to public service is something he cannot 
refuse. Quezon assumes the Mindoro post, and after a few months 
he earns kudos fro. American superiors in Manila, notably Jud,~ 
James Ross, inspector of finals, as "one of the best public " 
prosecutors in the country." 111 

1 904 gg.tgd^. ^oeon is promoted to fiscal of Tayabas after six 

months in Mindoro. A busy bachelor, he invites his aunt, Zeneida, 
widow of the late Pedro Aragon, to keep house for him in the pro- 
vincial capital of Lucena. She has two unmarried daughters, Am.aro 
and Aurora. The latter has been raised in the Quezon home, be-' 
coming the favorite of old man Lucie. The young provincial fiscal 
sends his cousin Aurora to Manila to study in the Philippine 
normal School. 1 

^ySJife Th * truth of the saying, "You can't get 
away with murder," is proved once again when the bandits who way- 
laid Quezon's father and a younger brother on their way home from 
Jfueva j^cija are captured by the young provincial fiscal with the 
help of his step/brother, Teodorico. They are prosecuted and sen- 
tenced to life imprisonment. 1 1 ^ 

'°* AUg * 22 H^iUHg^e. ^11 his previous cases since becoming a 

lawyer pale into insignificance compared to the Berry estafa case; 



W Ibid*., P. 87. 
•UP/ Ibid,., p. 43. 

til/ Caballero and Concepcion, op.. c£t., p. 69. 
1J2/ Quezon, op., cit . , pp. 110-111. 
iMd., P. 38. 



- 57 - 

On this day (Aug. 22) Quezon files 25 complaints for estafa in 
the Lucena CFI against Francis J. Berry, a lawyer and publisher 
of the BsJBlSOms^miXsaSu. "a newspaper with great circulation 
and much power in the African community." 114 Pitting his 
legal talents against the best American lawyers in the country- 
Fred C. Fischer, later an associate justice of the Supreme 
Court, Judge W. H. Bishop, former city fiscal of Manila, Jud-e 
Kinkaid, and Mr. Green - Quezon secures the conviction of Berry 1 . 15 

!!gayg„of Empire." Consenting on the case, Francisco says: "At 
the tine when the case was investigated, that is, in 1904, the 
influence of the military regime was still felt throughout the 
Philippines, so much so that there were still many Filipinos 
in prison accused of brigandage. Under the circumstances and 
considering the reprisals to which he wight be subjected, it 
was then considered foolhardy for a Filipino fiscal to bring- 
to court by ..neans of criminal action a citizen of a foreign 
country, more so if that citizen was clothed with prestige and 
influence. Only a fiscal with courage and a strong sense of duty 
would dare institute such proceedings." 116 Almost overnight 
Quezon has become the wizzard of the courtroom. 

Late 1904 I^ISLlSLllliSSlion^ Soon after Berry's conviction on 

September 12th, a fellow American, Capt. Of ley, governor 
of Mindoro, files administrative charges against Quezon arising 
from certain acts he allegedly committed when he was fiscal of 
that province. "Without being previously notified of the charge;:, 1 ' 
writes Quezon, "an investigation ajfcBarJa was held in Mindoro: 

'(> witnesses were called to testify against me in my absence and 

under the moral influence of my accuser, Governor Ofley. All 

the serious charges wore found to be without foundation, but 

some charges of little importance were declared proven, such 

as for example that I physically attacked somebody. Believing 

that I was the object of unjust and vexatious prosecutions, I 

resigned from my office (as provincial fiscal of Tayabas - ALS), 

against the advice of Judge Ross, then the inspector of the 

117 

prosecuting attorneys." 



lW Vicente J. Francisco, Trial Practice _i n the Philippines. Vol. I, pp. 777- 
783; quoted in the footnote of the Rivera Collection, Vol. I, pp. 1 -63. 

Quezon, op., cit., p. 98. 
112/ Rivera Collection, Vol. I, pp. 1-2. 

in/ %d of footnote in Rivera Collection, Vol. I, pp. 12-13. Also in article 
An Autobiography," Appendix III, Caballoro and Concepcion, pp.- cit. . 
pp. 485-49G. 



I 

- 58 - 



1905 Jan. 15 Lo a^and^ain . The i oa s of the judicial branch of the govern- 
ment becomes the gain of the legislative department on the pro- 
vincial level. Desirous of gauging his popularity, especially 
among the common folk,,, Quezon runs for the position of vocal 
in the Tayabas provincial board. Ho wins literally hands down, ' 
An auspicious start for one who, years later, will say that he 
will never accept an appointive position even if it be that 0 T 
Governor-General of the Philippines. 119 

'05 Feb. l^allin^ck. With his seat in the Tayabas provincial 

board hardly warmed up, Quezon launches his candidacy for pro- 
vincial governor. Under Act No. 33, the governor is elected by 
the municipal councilors in a convention. American officers are 
apprehensive about Quezon's candidacy, he being a former insur- 
recto. Asked by the constabulary chief, Col. Harbord, if he is 
loyal to America, Quezon replies: "Colonel, I have taken the 
oath of allegiance, ( and I am determined to make that oath 
good.'.' Quezon election is a cinch despite the fact that 

his two opponents, Tolentino and Carmona, belong to the richest 
families in the province. His lay^ndera_.volunteers to take charge 
of feeding the conce.jales.. The losers file a protest on the 
ground that Quezon's voters are illiterates, but his election 
is nevertheless confirmed. 121 

AotionGovomor. As chief executive of Tayabas, Quezon per- 
sonally leads the constabulary and police in pursuing the band 
of ladrones molesting the rural folhu, engaging them in hand- 
to-hand fights until the bandits are either captured or killed. 
That's the end of banditry in the province. 122 

'05 Mar. Sinejfcajgn. T he publication of the census, as required in 

the Philippine Bill of 1902, paves the way for the election of 
delegates to the Philippine Assembly. 

X. NATI ONAL PO LITICS 

° 5 ElSli5_£f|olico. Believing that religion is no bar to politics, 

Gregorio Aglipay, supreme bishop of the Philippine Independent 

11.3/ Quirino,. op., cit., p. 72. 

W Prom a newspaper report in an unidentified Manila daily, October 1931.- 
"ivera Collection, Vol. II, pp. 844-846. 

■1^0/ Gwekoh, ojd. cit;., p. 53. 
121/ Quirino, ojd. ci_t . , p. 74. 
122/ "An Autobiography," loc. ci£.s 



18 



" - 59 - 

^ *; : " * Church, enters the arena by organizing the Republican Party. Hot 

to be outdone, the orthodox Catholics put up the Centro Catolico. 
Both groups aim to counteract the extreme .pro-Americanism of the 
Partido Federal. 123 

1906 _____ Ban Lif ted. Governor-General Henry C. Ide lifts the ban against 

pro-independence parties. Almost immediately, two parties spring 
UP : the Partido In dependista I nnediata. with Osmena and Quezon 
' among the leading organizers, and the Unio n Nacionalista. orga- 

| nized by Felipe Agoncillo, Rafael Palma, and others. 124 

f '06 July ll~i=I = Ill~2||Z ^either the Aguinaldo capture nor the sur- 

| render of Kalvar terminates the armed resistance to the American 

I regime. Hacario Sakay, a full-fledged KaJ^ijDLuiero., continues the 

forlorn struggle and sets up a "Tagalog Republic" deep in the 
jungles of the Sierra Hadre. But after four years, Sakay is fi- 
nally induced to surrender by Doninador Gomez, a labor leader, 
f acting on the authority given by Governor-General Ide. However. 

Sakay is later arrested by American authorities, charged with 
f brigandage,, and finally hanged. Sakay dies insisting to his last 

breath that he is not a bandit but a sincere patriot working for 
Philippine independence. 

f '06 Oct. 1 F 

irst_ Governors^ Twenty— nine provincial executives hold 

the First Governors' Convention in Manila. Sergio Osmena of Cebu 
is elected chairman of the convention, but Manuel L. Quezon of 
Tayabas, a forceful and eloquent speaker, clearly dominates the 
conference, outshining even Osmena, according to observers. 
Afterwards, Osmena, Quezon and Jaime de Veyra of Loyte are asked 
by Governor-General Smith to remain in Manila for a few days to 

' . assist the Philippine Commission in making some needed pieces 

. . 126 
of legislation. 



XI . FIRST PHILIPPINE ASSEMBLY 

1907 Jan. Stre ng th in Unit y. Leaders of the Partid o Independista In- 

media ta and Union Naciona lista start negotiation for the merger 
of the two parties to give the government-backed Progressive 
Party (formerly Partido Federal) a stiff fight. 

JJL_/ Caballero and Concepcion, pj). cit . , pp. 75-76. 

^aide, History, q p . ci t. , Vol. II, p. 240. 
12_j/ Agoncillo and Guerrero, c_p_. .cit . , pp. 262-288. 
J.2S/ Pacis, o_>. cit., Vol. I, pp. 84-05. 



1 



- 60 _ 



'07 Mar. 12 girth of HP. The nerger is formally ratified and a new party 
is born: the Partido NacionaHfitn. Among the leaders of this 
new pro-independence party are Osmena, Quezon, Rafael Pallia, 
Macario Adriatico, and others. The first two are destined to 
lead the country to complete independence. 127 

'07 July 30 I^s^Ajsenbly^oll^ His star still on the ascent, Quezon low 
the gubernatorial post and runs for deputy or delegate to the Jf : 
Philippine Assembly. This time, with the support of the poor an', 
rich alike, Quezon licks his opponent, Domingo Lopez, by the 
largest majority over: 2,237 against P40 votes. 128 Quozon's 
rise in the political firmament appears unstoppable. 

•07 Oct. 16 lL=i£I=!^^L Inauguration of the First Philippine Assenblv , 
the lower house of the Philippine legislature under the new set- 
up. The American-appointed Philippine Commission constitutes the 
upper house. Quezon nominates Osmena for speaker, and the latter 
is unanimously elected. Thus Osmena becomes the highest Filipino 
leader in the government, next only to the Governor-General in 
official protocol. Quezon, of course, is elected majority floor 
leader, the No. 2 man ir. the Philippine Assembly. He is also 
appointed chairman of the powerful Committee on Appropriations, 

Quite farsighted. though young, Floor Leader Que- 
zon makes a spirited attack oft a bill pending in the U.S. Congress 
■ providing for free trade relations between America and the Phi- 
lippines. Says the Tayabas leader: "I fought the measure upon 
the ground that free trade relations would result in making the 
Philippines absolutely dependent upon the American markets. This, 
I contended, would create a most serious situation in the Philip- 
pine economic life, especially when the time came for the grant- 
ing of independence." 129 This is Quezon's first clash with 
the American government. 

~i22IllML=^lli t/ith p 34,000 appropriated for the trip, 

Quezon, accompanied by two secretaries, Teodoro M. Kalaw and 
F. Theo Rogers, goes to Tzarist Russia to represent the Philip- 
pines in the International Congress on navigation at St. Peters- 
burg (now Leningrad). This appears to be a prelude to his leavin; 
the Philippine Assembly which seems too small for two political 
genuises - Osmena and Quezon. Besides, the Tayabas solon does not 
want to play second-fiddle to any man, not even to his bosom frisud 



1908 



1§2/ Zaide, History , o£. cit . , Vol. II, p. 240. 
120/ Quirino, p_p_. cit., p. 73. 

Quezon, ojo. cit., p P . 107-108. 



- 61 _ 



Osmena. Unfortunately, Quezon arrives at St. Petersburg days 
after the closing of the convention. Fron there he goes to Paris, 
and then to America where he becomes the luncheon guest of Pre- 
sident Theodore Roosevelt. Quezon is much impressed by the de- 
mocratic atmosphere prevailing in the highest government cir- 
cles. u e seems. to like it there. The trip therefore serves a 

. 1 30 

good purpose. 

1909 Jan. 7 ~~=2~~S~= Subjected to scurrilous attacks in the Fedora- 

lista paper La Demo cracia concerning his alleged malpractice as 

flies 

a lawyer, Quezon l.i tt : ,■>?_? ■ z r '~ off the handle, and gives the 

1 "51 

editor, Hugo Salazar, a severe shellacking. The irate 

floor leader at once becomes the butt of humorous remarks. The 

^abl_enew3 -Ame rican, whose editor (Berry) ho has successfully pro- • 
rhe tori c ally 

secutod,/ aslcG^l.T this was what Sr. Quezon learned in hi3 con- 
versations with Hr. Taft and Theodore Roosevelt, and if this was 
what he. had been taught in the Navigation Congress at St. Peters- 
burg." 132 

'09 May 15 E£=H™iSil~i=£^i '"Juezon is chosen by the Philippine Assoub7;- 

as Philippine resident commissioner to Washington, succeeding 
Martin 

'** * Ocampo, publisher of the nationalist paper El Renac ir^iento 
Th* other resident commissioner is Benito Legarda, Sr., one of, 
the founders of the Progrosista Party, previously selected by 
the Philippine Commission. 

'09 Dec. 24 lY e ._g|_-f£H_?2 v j. Quezon arrives in the American capital on the 
eve of a new day for the Filipino people. It's the beginning of 
his seven-year stay in America that will culminate in the appro- 
val of the first Philippine autonomy or independence law. To 
be able to communicate to the American people and thoir leaders, 
Quezon's first task is to loam, possibly master, the English 
language. 

Contemptible! I n the early days of his practice as a lawyer, 
Quezon, still unreconciled to the American regime, used to take 
special pride in the fact that he knew no word of English and 
that he was determined not to learn the new language. "Kow 
contemptible seemed to me those Filipinos who belonged to the 
Federal Party which advocated permanent annexation of the 



122/ Zaide, Great Filipi nos, op. cit. . pp. 232-233. 

12l/ Loopoldo R. Serrano, "The Quezon-Salazar Incident," H isto ri,c a,3, Bul le t j.n , f 
Vol. VI, No. 3, September 1962, pp. 249-259. 

122/ Caballero and Concepcion, ojo. cit . . p. 103. 



- 62 _ 

Philippines to the United States!" says the unrepentant rebel. 1?: 

^Lllgfgjtlful^^riQan . Quezon remains bitter against the. Ame- 
ricans until he is introduced to Col. Bandholtz, the constabu- 
lary chief. Quito an unusual ran, Bandholtz, although an Ame- 
rican, was the first elected governor of Tayabas. He speaks 
Spanish fluently and is fast learning Tagnlog. Becoming close 
to .Quezon, he offers to toach him English, and for the first 
tine the Tayabas fiscal feels sorry that he speaks no word of 
English. Bandholtz 's successor, Col. James G. Harbord, is anotV;,v 
"beautiful" American who. has accomplished so much in winning- 
Quezon to the policy of cooperation with the new regime. 134 

xii. smajKARs in u.s. cgjigrsjss 



1<>10 May 14 Eiaiden Spaoch. i'our and a half months after .his arrival in- tho 
united States, Quezon deliver* his first speech before the U.S. 
house of Representatives. It is entitled "The Hope of the Fili- 
pinos," referring to the day when thu United States will give 
the people of the Philippines the blessings of freedom, lie 
states: "When that time comes and lot us hope that it nay hap-' 
peji tomorrow - the day when the ever-glorious Stars and Stripes 
was raised in the Philippines will eternally be the best-cele- 
brated day of our national life." (Applause.) 135 It is well 
to note that Quezon begins his job in the U.S. Congress with a 
note of hope. Six years later he will end it with near fulfill- 
ment as a result of the passage of tho Jcne3 Act. 

=~2I==~=:l£^ In his second speech, Quezon registers vehement- ' 
opposition to the sale of two large tracts of land in the Phi- 
lippines to big American capitalists to be converted into sugar 
plantations, despite congressional policy limiting to 1024 hec- 
tares the maximum area of public land that could be sold to cor- 
porations or individuals. His thesis is that large American in- 
vestments will inevitably result in the permanent retention of 
the Philippines by the United States. "If the preordained fate 
of ray country," he tells his American colleagues, "is either to 

bo a subject people but rich, or free but poor, I am unqualified- 

1 36 

ly for the latter. 



122/ Quezon, pj>. cit . , p. 86. 

.124/ Ibid,., pp. 94-102. ' 

125/ Rivera Collection, Vol. I, p. 87. 

126/ Quezon , suurn .' ' . _ pp. 118-119. 



Jid-1910 Ii^MmZm± ^ter giving the U.S. Congress an idea of the 

nationalist thinking of the Filipino people, Quezon deserves a 
furlough.. His return to the native heath, however, coincides 
with the visit here of U.S. Secretary of War Jacob M. Dickenson, 
whose department handles all Philippine affairs. The salutary 
effect of Dickenson's visit is that he is able to remind local 
Africans that the governnent here is a government of laws, not 
of aen -^ence an indirect warning against any form of exploita- 
tion. J Ho probably realizes that no such exploitation can 
escape the scathing tongue and pen of such an alert and brillian 
Filipino leader as Resident Commissioner Quezon. 
911 (Autum) ^^and^Discover^ Quezon makes a rueful discovery when h, 

goes on a speaking tour of the New England states under the aus- 
pices of the Anti-imperialist League headed by the distinguished 
American lawyer, Moorfiold Storey. As his trip has been well- 
advertised in advance, he finds many Americans crowding at every 
train station whore he is supposed to get off to speak. They arr 
eager to see a Filipino for the first time in their lives - some- 
thing like the Igorots in C-strings brought to the St. Louis 
Exposition by Worcester and labelled as "typical Filipinos." Th,- 
turn away in great disappointment when they see the Filipino re- 
sident commissioner not in G-strings but in a stylish cutaway 
and top-Hat, looking sartorially more elegant than most Americans 
in the highest councils of state. 1 ' jQ 

11 gr^ ursor_ of_Jpns3 Law, Quezon, in his second year in the U.S. 

Congress, wins a friend of Philippine independence, Rap. John 
Sharp Williams of Mississipi. A senior minority member of the 
House Committee on Insular Affairs, Williams has introduced a : 
Philippine bill which, of course, fails to reach- first base. 
After the Democratic Party has won control of the House in the 
off-year election (l91l), Quezon persuades Rep. William Atkinson 
Jones of Virginia to reintroduce the Williams bill, but the 
measure is shelved in the Republican-controlled Senate. 159 

2 Sept. Second. Plaridel. Playing the role of a second Plaridel (I'iar- 

celo h. del Pilar), Quezon establishes his own .journal, Tlie ' 
iliiiEiS.?. JLee£le t whicJi is "devoted solely to the interests of 
the Filipino people whose name it bears," and for the purpose 
of "hastening the ultimate establishment of Philippine : 

/ Caballero and Concepcion, on. ext., np. 115-117. 
/ Quezon, supra, p. 120. 
/ p. 123. 



/ - 64 - 

independence upon a self-governing republican basis," The 
maiden issue carries the name of Quezon on the front page as 
editor, uith publication address at 1324 13th Street, Washington, 
D.C. The paper, a counterpart of Del Pilar's La aoli da ridad. 

continues publication for four years until the passage of the 

T A • HO 

J 0 nes Act. 

'12 New Freedom. 1' if teen years in the doghouse, the Democratic 

Party rolls back to power under the leadership of the idealistic 
univorsity president turned politician, Woodrow Wilson, His "Ne?r 
Freedom" has captured the imagination of the American public. 141 
Quezon's advantage is that his earlier contacts with progressive- 
minded congressmen, like Jones and Williams, have enabled him to 
got into the good graces of Democratic moguls, including William 
Jennings Bryan and Wilson himself, and thereby assist substan- 
tially in the writing of the Democratic plank on Philippine in- 
dependence . ^ ^ 

Qu ezon's Co ntribu tion^ The Quezon touch is much evident in the 
following passage in the Democratic platform: "We favor an im- 
mediate declaration of the nation's purpose to recognize the 
independence of the Philippine Islands as soon as a stable go- 
vernment can be established, such independence to be guaranteed 
by us until the neutralization of the Islands can be secured by 
treaty with other powers. In recognising the independence of the 
Philippines our government should retain such land as may be ne- 
cessary for coaling stations and naval bases." 1 ^ 

12 j^ggggkg r for 2n dj j^me. If Quezon, through his personal cha- 

risma and persuasive ability, succeeded in having Osmena elected 
Speaker of the First Philippine Assembly, this time he scores a 
more spectacular victory when he gets Francis Burton Harrison 
appointed as Governor/General of the Philippines, succeeding W, 
Cameron Forbes. Wilson, since his election, has been looking 
around for someone to succeed Forbes, a Republican. He has 
sounded Quezon about it. One day, Harrison happens to visit 
Quezon, suggesting the name of a friend for the .job. But Quezon, 
making one of those instant decisions for which he is famous, 
instead tells Harrison to consider himself a candidate for the 
position. And, indeed, Harrison is appointed Governor-General, 



.1:10/ Rivera Collection, Vol. I, pp. 95-99. 

1 iLl/ G avian and Hamm, op., cit . , pp. 546-547. 

14J2/ Quezon, op. cit., p. 124. 

\&2j Caballero and Concepcion, ojd. cit . , p. 142. 



- 65 - 

thanks to Quezon! 

1933 Oct. 6 Filipini zation. Harrison arrives in the Philippines to assume 
his PC ;1 ' With Wilson's instruction that the Filipinos should he- 
given a system of self-govcrnraont step by step, Harrison inne- 
diately proceeds to appoint qualified Filipinos to responsible 
government positions, replacing the Americans. 14-5 Meanwhile, 
conservative Ar.ierica.ns just can't forget that Harrison got his 
job largely through the help of a Filipino. "Hardly twonty-fou" 
hours have elapsed since his disembarkation from the steamer," 
writes an American, Robert Frothingham, in the New York Tines , 
"he (Harrison) ascended the platform before a mixed audience of 
500 Americans and Filipinos and, with his arms around the back 
of Manuel L. Quezon, the Filipino commissioner to the United ' 
States, ascribed to him full credit for his appointment by Pre- 
sident Wilson to the office of Governor-General." 1 ^ 6 

'13 Why Suaul ong is Bi tter. Another outstanding achievement of 

Quezon as resident commissioner is his getting Wilson to in- 
crease Filipino membership in the Philippine Commission. Hereto- 
fore, Filipinos make up the minority of four in the Commission, 
namely, Jose Luzuriaga, Gregorio Aranota, Juan Sumulong, and 
Rafael Palma. After Harrison's assumption of office, thoy are 
replaced by five ." ilipino commissioners, namely, Victorino Map-'., 
Jaime C. do Veyra, Vicente Singson I3ncarnaeion, Vicente Ilustra, 
and Rafael Palma, who is retained. Is this the reason why Sumu- 
long, in later years, became one of Quezon's staunchest critics? 

'13 f "SflfL-iHJ^Sl Ll - lftsr Wilson's triumph, the Democratic Party 

gets full control of both houses of the U.S. Congress. Quezon, 
undaunted by the shelving of the Williams bill, submits to Wil- 
liam Atkinson Jones, new chairman of the Committee on Insular 
Affairs, his proposal giving the Philippines her independence 
except in matters of foreign affairs which are to remain under 
American control. The bill provides for independence in eight 
years ( 1 91 2 ) . It passes the House but dies in the Senate. 
This is Jones Bill Wo. 1. 

1914 Apr. 15 Mankind ' s Liberation . Speaking in Cleveland, Ohio, Quezon 
tells American industrial leaders that "if you give the 



111/ Gwekoh, ojo. cit . . p. 68. 

JL45/ Caballero and Concopcion, op_. cit., p. 130. 

Ii6/ Ibid., pp. 126-127. 

HZ/ Vide Quez on-Sumulong Controversy, in Part II (Quezon Reader). 

34.8/ Gwekoh, supra. . p. 71 . 



Filipinos their liberty there will be nothing that they will not 
gladly concede to you. You will have not only their trade but 
their gratitude, and .you will not only benefit yourselves and 
then, but you will have given the last touch to the work for t!.v 
liberation of nankind that you began in 1776." 1 ^ 

4 July 15 Woman's Champion. Quezon, in a letter to an Aaerican suffra- 
gette, nakes a clear and unequivocal stand in favor of woman 
suffrage in the Philippines. "If the power of legislation solely 
resided in me I would not hesitate to give then (the Filipino 
women) the right of suffrage," he says, "provided first that 

they shall have expressed their desire to vote and not until 
1 50 

then." Ironically, Filipino vronon gain the right to vote 

23 years later (April 30, 1 937) . 

^—JL^iil^g^iU In view ° f Wilson' 3 objection to setting a 
definite date for Philippine independence, Jones introduces 
another bill expressing in its preamble America's promise to 
grant independence "as soon as a stable government can be es- 
tablished in the Philippines." This is reminiscent of Quezon' c 
contribution to the Democratic Party plank., With Quezon carryj ••, • 
the ball for Jones, the bill is approved in the House, 21 1 to 
59' but it is not acted upon by the Senate because of strong 
■Republican opposition. 

■ Oct. 15 Quezon. Warning. Delivering another strong salvo, Quezon war: '.s 
Americans that the "progress toward freedom never stops once 
begun until it reaches its culmination. The Filipino people will 
never bo satisfied with any concession from the United States 
short of their complete freedom as a people. Such being the case, 
they will not be satisfied until you shall have placed in their 
own hands the decision whether they shall be politically inde- 
pendent of the United States." 152 
Jan. £~=£^~|_i^_?|st i Continuing his barrage for Philip- 

pine independence, Quezon questions "most seriously tho state- 
ment that any nation can successfully direct the course of deve- 
lopment that must be followed by another. The education of the 
individual is most successful when it affords the best vehicle 



Speech, "Tho New Regime in the Philippines," before the Cleveland Chamber 
of Industry, Cleveland, .Ohio. Rivera Collection, Vol. I, pp. 183-188. 

Quezon to Mrs,,. Richard Coke Burleson of W. 45th Street, New York City, 
July 15, 1914. Ibid..., p. 195. 

Maximo K.. Kalaw, The Case for the Filipinos . New York: 191 6, p. 204. 
Quoted in Zaide, op., cit . , Vol. II, p. 249. 

Speech at the Lake Mohaulc Conference, October 15, 1914. Rivera Collection, 
Vol. I, pp. 321-322. 



for self-expression; the education of the nation or the race 

1 5 

proceeds most naturally as a natter of internal evolution." 

'15 Feb. 26 International Justice^ "The granting of independence to the 
Philippines," q U ezon tolls a huge audience in San Francisco, 
California, "would in itself create so strong a sentiment of 
gratitude on the part of the Filipino people toward the Units.'! 
States that you would have created in the heart of the Pacific 
a nation. true in its allegiance and friendship to you both in 
peace and war. As to the prestige of the American flag, what 
better prestige can you have than that which will cone to you 
as the result of an act of international justice and generosity 

'15 Late Feb. Allergic t c_Independoncc? The Democrats and Republicans in til 
U.S. Congress reach a compromise on the Jones ^ill, but when 
the Republicans propose to eliminate the word "independence" 
in the preamble of the bill and replace it with "self-governmen 

1 

the proposal is rejected. 

'15 Dec. 17 Much Ado About Phraseology. The bill is reintroduced on the 
opening day of the 64th Congress. Senator Hitchcock, chairman 
of the Senate Coiimitteo on Territories and Insular Possessions, 
recommends a change in the preamble so that Philippine indepen- 
dence will be granted when the United States deems it will be 
"to the permanent interest of the people of the Philippine Is- 
lands," instead of when the Filipinos should have "shown them- 
selves to be fitted therefor." 1 ^ 6 

1916 Jan. 2 Clarke Amendment. Senator James P. Clarke of Arkansas intro- 
duces an amendment to the Jones bill, partly modified upon 
Wilson's request, granting independence to the Philippines "in 
not less than two but not more than four years." Vice-President 
Marshall casts the deciding vote in the Senate, 42-41 , in favor 
of the amendment. But in the House, 23 Catholic Democrats ca3t 

their votes with the Republicans, spelling the defeat of the 
1 57 

amendment . 

'16 Apr. 27 Ante-Mortea. Before the defeat of the Clarke Amendment, 
Quezon, from Washington, wires Speaker Osmena, in Cebu, to 



152/ Article, "Race Progress in the Philippines," J ournal of Ra ce Development. 
January 1915. Rivera Collection, Vol. I, p. 331. 

\5&J Remarks at the opening of the Philippine Exhibit at San Francisco, Cali- 
fornia, February 26, 1915. Ibid. , p. 339. 

155/ Gwekoh, op_. cit . ', p. 74. 

15i/ Ibid^. 

152/ Ibid. 



68 - 



"secure a cable from the Philippine clergy or bishops favoring 
the Senate bill with the Claries amendment , " since President Wilsr/i 
is endorsing the measure. But it is said that the ecclesiastical 
hierarchy in the Philippines, especially the foreigners headed j i7 
Archbishop Jerenias tfarty, are not only against the measure but 
even goad James Cardinal Gibbons of Baltimore, Maryland, convin- 
cing the Democratic solons to break away from party ranks and vr': 
against the bill. 1 ^ 6 

■" 6 Way 1 ^azonjt^djl^ified. Critics vilify Quezon for his alleged 
indifference to the Clarke amendment, although here at hone he 
is for "immediate, absolute and complete independence." Is he 
really ambivalent towards the independence question? 

"I am for the Clarice amendment body and soul," Quezon tells 
the U.S. house of Representatives. "The substantial merit of the 
amendment lies in the fact that it provides for the establishment .. 
within a short period of time, of an independent Philippine go- 
vernment, a government that will be of, for and by the Filipino 
people, absolutely free from foreign control and interference, 
a government which it is our fondest ambition to have, as it is 
our God-given right "o establish, the only kind of government 
under which we can live happily and contented." 159 

'16 Aug. 29 l£l|-Birthdav = Gift :i Ten days after Quezon's 33th birthday, the 

Jones bill, minus the Clarke amendment, is passed without a record 
vote by both house B of the U.S. Congress. The same day (August 2S), 
President l/ilson signs it into law. That night, Quezon tenders a 
farewell party at the Hew Ivillard hotel in V/ashington, D.C., 
which an American editor describes as a banquet "without parallel 
in the parliamentary history of the world." 160 

Jones La w. Briefly, the Jones Act creates a bicameral Philip- 
pine legislature consisting of the Senate and the House of Re- 
presentatives with members elected by the people except two se- 
nators and nine representatives appointed by the Governor-General 
to represent the non-Christian tribes. Aside from legislative 
functions, the Senate is vested with the power of confirmation 
of all appointments made by the Governor/General. 1 ^ Is 



JL5S/ Agoncillo and Guerrero, .op,, cit., p. 345. 

y$Sj Speech, "The Japanese Menace," in the U.S. House of Representatives, 
May 1, 1916. Rivera Collection, Vol. I, pp. 257-361 . 

.160/ See topic "ITo. 3 - America's Tribute," in Part II - Quezon Reader. 

lfil/ Gwekoh, op„. cit., p. 75. 



- 69 



Quezon the real author of the Jones Law? 

Flashback. In 1 91 3 Quezon wrote James Cardinal Gibbons to re- 
fute the latter' s stand against Philippine independence. "I do 
not understand," he said, "why the Catholic Church of the Unit^o. 
States should oppose Philippine independence. Seven and a half 
million out of eight million Filipinos are good Catholics, ar.d 
their ancestors have been so for centuries... Can it be that 
the nistory of some Latin Republics has influenced the attitude 
of the Catholic hierarchy in this country? Does it fear that 
the Filipinos, if given their independence, would seize the 
property of the Catholic Church in the Islands or fail to res- 
pect their rights? 

"I assure, y^our Eminence that there is not the slightest 
foundation for fear in this respect. The Filipinos, if given 
their independence, will respect and protect every right of the 
Church and maintain absolutely intact its property in the Phi- 
lippine Islands. 

"The best proof that such is the disposition of the Fili- 
pinos is found in the fact that the great majority of the native 
priests as well as native bishops of the Catholic Church in the 
Philippines are earnestly in favor of Philippine independence.'.' 

1 1 6 Quezon Resigns. Thinking that his public career has cone to an 

end with the passage of the Jones Act, Quezon tenders his resig- 
nation as resident commissioner to the United States. It has 
always been his vrish to become a private citizen once more and 
return to his law practice. In fact, he announces his retirement 
to private life at the farewell banquet tendered in honor of 

hi3 colleagues in the U.S. Congress. He has kept Speaker Osmena 

1 63 

informed of his retirement plan. 

Advice to Osmena. Meanwhile, from Washington Quezon advises 
Osmena to run for the Senate, the new upper house in the legis- 
lature created under the Jones Act, replacing the American- 
appointed Philippine Commission. Also, under the new legisla- 
tive set-up, the Philippine Assembly becomes the House of Re- 
presentatives. Quezon assumes that Osmena will be easily elect od 
president of the Senate which, naturally, will have more powers 

than the House of Representatives, and the "proper place from 

1 64- 

which to exercise the continued leadership of our party." 

132/ Quezon to Gibbons, February 27, 1913. Rivera Collection, Vol.- I, pp. 132-1 33* 
.till/ Quezon, ojd. cit. . p. 131. 



- 70 - 

^gjjgjg' 8 launder . But Osnena believes otherwise. He decides 

to rs.nain Speaker of the lower house (house of Representatives ) . 
thinking that ho will continue as head of the Jfacicnalista Party 
and of the Filipino participation in the American-controlled Phi- 
lippine government . It turns out that this is a mistake - the 

- 165 
greatest political blunder nade by Osnena in his life. 

Aug. Osiaena^g_Cabla. In a spirit of gallantry, Gsuena cables Quezon 

notifying him that his candidacy for the Senate will be filed 
precisely with a view to having hin elected president of the new 
Upper house. Apparently the Cebuano solon believes that with 'Que- 
zon as Senate president, the latter can work hand-in-hand with 
Osnena, the "Jo. 1 Filipino leader. 

Centurie s of Sufferings Saved . Consenting on Quezon's signal 
achievement in securing the Jones Act, Csuena, in the saae cable > 
says, "."To other living Filipino could have fulfilled such a t ?.'<?- 
■iiiondoua task with such a rare success in so short a tine... (ana.} 
your sincere and steadfast efforts have saved for our country 
centuries of sufferings irfiich other less fortunate peoples have 
to go through on their way to final e; mancipation. " 

'16 Sept. 27 'hero ' s houeconing. Despite pouring rain and. strong winds, the 
x'esidents of lianila and nearby towns and provinces give Quezon ? 
tremendous welcome never before seen in the city. "Not oven on 
the day of ny inauguration were, the people in the streets so wild 
in their demonstration, " Quezon recalls. An opening in the thick 
walls of Intranuros , facing the Letran College, his Alna Miater, 
is ordered by the Manila Municipal board and christened Quezon 
Gate. Then he is presented with a silver hatchet on which is ins- 
cribed a sonnet specially written by the Filipino poet laureate 

1 6T 

Fernando Karia Guerrero. 

1 iS Oct. 3 Overw?ieLuing Victory. Jjesn than a week after his arrival, the 
first election under the Jones Law is held. Quezon's candidacy 
has been filed by his party. Without lifting a finger, so to 

1 sr, 

speak, he is elected senator by an over/rnelaing majority. 
XIII. TiS FIRST SPLIT 



'15 Oct. 15 Senate Preside nt o r Speaker? On the opening day of the 



1A5/ Gwckoh, pp.. pit, . ,. p. c.'=1 . 



16p/ Caball3.ro and Concepcion, pp.. pit. . , pp. 150-151 
XiW Quezon, pp.. pit.., p. 132. 
■ ': j i?u Gwekoh, pp.. ext., p. 79...- 



4 



- 71 - 

Philippine Legislature , the . Senate and the House of Representa- 
tives prcaptly elect Quezon as president and Csraena as speaker, 
respectively. It appears that up to this point Csmena sincerely 
believes that it is "in the speakership where the Filipino leader- 
ship in the government ought to reside because the House (is) 
the more representative body and as such the more sensitive to 
the popular will." ' ' 

But Quezon, with his seven-year experience in the U.S. 
Congress, knows that Ca.-ena is wrong. hot only is the Senate, 
under the Jones Act, vested with legislative powers, but it also 
shares in the administrative functions as evidenced by its power 
of c;-nf irnation of all appointments made by the Governor-General . 
"Wherever the bicameral system exists," says Quezon, "the Lower 
House is supposed to serve as a very sensitive thermometer regis- 
tering the Most uonentary and temporary changes in public senti- 
ment, while the Senate must represent the serene, nature and 
prudent judgment of public opinion. In other words, the Senate 
must be a safe, immovable dan to contain the overflow of popular 
passion. The voice of the people is the voice of God only when 
it expresses a jxidgnont formed within the safe channels of serene 
reflection... we must act when we am sure that we know public 
opinion and that this opinion has been forced conscientiously. ' 

Pas ses into History. With the inauguration of the Philippine 
Legislature, the American-appointed Philippine Commission passes 
into history. Incidentally, the Legislature is also the first 
all-Filipino law-talcing body in history. 

'16 Nov. Wilson is Reelecte d. Another significant event of the year is 

Wilson's reelection, defeating Republican candidate Charles jflvan 

Hughes. Ironically, the slogan, "he kept us out of war," contri- 

1 71 

butes so .much to his victory. As soon as Wilson s victory 

is announced, the Philippine Senate and house of Representatives 

hold a joint session presided over by Osnoria and Quezon to ap~ 

1 72 

prove a resolution of congratulations. 

1917 Apr. 2 America Enters 'far. As Germany steps up her all-out submarine 

warfare, sinking hundreds of unarmed neutral (including American.) 
ships, Wilson is constrained to appear before the U.S. C- ogress 
to ask for a declaration of war. he calls on all Americans to 



J-SS/ Iflid. , p. G1 , 

170/ T.bid.._, p. 0;;. 

YJll Gavian and Hsu-ua , 0P.« PPJc* > PP« 555-556. 

yJZf Caballero and Concepcion, pp.. pit . , p.. 172. 



- 72 - 



join in the "crusado for democracy and lasting peace." Congress 

promptly votos for war, ho Wilson on April 6th signs the war 

declaration not as one of the Allies Kit as an "associated -po^or 

1 73 

leaving the M.S. fro a to make a separate peace. 

: 17 i'-id-i'iay L oyalty to_ U.S. shortly after America's entry into the war- 
the Philippine Legislature, upon Quezon's initiative, holds. a 
special session and approves the ililitia Act creating the Phi- 
lippine tfati<.J7.al Guard consisting of 25,000 Men, which the Sesw.tr. 
President, in an un'ioralded trip to the U.S., subsequently offers 
to President Wilson, to fight side by side with the American ::hi- 
paditionary forces in Europe. ' The Legislature also autho- 
rizes the construction of a destroyer and a submarine for the V. o 
I'fevy. In addition, the Filipino people contribute P1 ,000,000 to 

the American lied Cross and subscribe many millions of pesos in 
1 75 

Liberty bonds. Quezon hrasolf organises a naaaoth "Loyalt'.- 

Parade" in Manila winding up in front of malacanan. Such is the 
Filipino loyalty to America that nearly all American armed for- 
are v. r ithdrawn iron the Philippines for assignment to Europe. Cm 
day, an Anerican kegro soldier is reported to have told an Ame- 
rican General: "Bosc , we are the only Americans now in the Phi".!' 
pines!" 176 

1510 Jan. Quezon's Offer Accepted. '^leaon's offer of the 25,000-man Phi- 

lippine National Guard i3 officially accepted by the U.S., but 

government red-tape delays the training of the Filipinos who are 

1 77 

raring to go to the front. The P;!G training camp in Po.sal 

province will luim with activity only after the death of Private 
Tomas Claudio on the European front on June 29th. Consequently, 
the camp will be named Ca_ap Claudio. 

'18 Oct! 16 Galla ntr y for Oallantry. Governor-General Harrison creates the 

Council of State, composed of the department secretaries, the 

Senate President and the House Speaker. Its function is to ad- 

1 78 

vise the Governor-Go, leral on important state matters. To ■ 

rociprocate Osmona's gallantry in having his candidacy for 
senator filed by the party in the 1?16 election, Quezon nomi- 
nates Osmena for vice-chairman of the Council of State, next 



.125/ Gavian and nana, siip.raj, pp. 603-504. 

174/ Gve.'-oh, pp_.._cit. , p. 85; Caballero and Ccncepcion, p£._c_it . , p. 177. 

.1.15/ ^aide , i-J.atorz, pp.. crib., Vol. II, p. 252. 

126/ Quezon, pj>. pit,., p. 154. 

J-TZ/ Caballero and Concepcion, pp.. ci'b . , p. 109. 

1-7.8/ ilaide, Hpstpry., pp.. ci.t . , Vol. II, p. 251. 



- 73 - 



only to Harrison, thus retaining the leadership of the PhilipprLi 

1 7Q _ 
participation in the government . " The days of Osmena's h%- 

mony, of course, are numbered. 

' '13 ^oard of C o ntr ol. Harrison approves the bill creating the Hoc. 

of Control whose primary duty is to supervise all government-- 

owned and controlled corporations. It is composed of the Gove: is; 

General, the President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the 

of the Representatives . Although ilarrison is the chairman, he c : 

always be outvoted by Osnena and Quezon, garrison's policy of ■' 

government going into business is a bold departure from the sr 

ard American political practices, but his ain is Merely to' ace. 

1 30 

lorate the country's ooono lie develop.' -lent. ° Among the go- 
vernment firras established or acquired under the new policy ar .' 
the Philippine js'atxvaal 3anic, the hanila Railroad Uoupauy , • tnc 
Manila hotel Company, the Hational Bevolopp.ent Corporation, th' s 
Nati nal Coal Company, and the National Cedent Conpany. The aim 
of the legislature in creating these big companies is to preempt 
investments by huge American corporations that could eventuaJ.lv 
hamper efforts to cut political ties with the United States. "'" 
In the Board of C, .itrcl, Harrison completely abdicates his autiv 
rity to the Filipinos. 

'13 Nov. 7 Cor-uiiaaion o f Independence. The Philippine Legislature approrm 
a concurrent resolution creating the Commission of Independence 
for the purpose of formulating a strategy for securing Philippi i 
independence. It is believed that after having convinced America 
of the Filipinos' loyalty to her Ideals, and cooperated in her 
war efforts to make the world safe for democracy, she will now 
be disposed to grant the independence promised in the preamble 
of the Jones Law. In line with this objective, the Commission 
recommends the sending of an independence mission to the United 
States. ^ J 

Mo ;.iov. 11 Ar mistice Sign ed. After the abdication of the German Kaiser.. 

who initiated the war, German revolutionaries take over and tint 

up a republic . It is this German republic that will sign the 

1 84 

Armistice to save Germany from invasion. Because of mili- 

tary ineptitude in Washington, B.C., the Philippine- National 



1.75:7 Agoncillo and Guerrero, pp.. pit., p. 351'. 

.130/ /.aide, hist.orv, pj3. c_i_t . , Vol. II, p. 252. 

iikl/ '-iuirino, pj>. c_i_t . , po. 1 36-1 37. 

132/ Agoncillo and Guerrero, op. cit. , ?. 352. 

1.02/ tfaide, IkLstpry., po. .cit . , Vol. II, p. 303. 

J 31/ Gavian and Kaon, op. cit. , pp. 511-612. 



74 



* Guard is mustered into the U.S. 5'oderal Arsay only a few days *■> 

fore the signing of tho Armistice, l'hus no Filipino Guards.-ir - 
ever sent to the V/estsm Front. 

Dec. 13 A dvanc e d_Par_ty Senate President Quezon, chair.ian of the Vi 

independence Jlisoion, arrives in lionekory; with a small group 

consisting of Jorge B. Vargas, executive secretary of the mir> • 

Guillermo Cabrera, Quezon's private secretary, Dr. Bernabe ?• 

tanante, his personal physician, and a cousin, Aurora Aragon y 

Molina, accor.paniad by her maid. " Officially, Quoflen hi-.,: 

left Manila ahead of the nain body cf the mission "to sound c" 

official opinion" in Washington concerning the Mission's obiec 
186 _ ... 

lve - In nongkong the queson party is to take another r 1 



for San Francisco, Calif orni 



a. 



Dec. 14 Surprise i/oddln g. Injecting a very personal note to this tr. 

Quezon and cousin Aurora decide to get married in a civil cer^ 
nony before the A-ierican consul-general in Hongkong. The groo 
is 40, and the bride is about 10 years younger. They have beie" 
engaged for 12 years. "Contrary to Filipino custom which cele- 
brates marriages at great expense and with pompous ceremonies . " 
Quezon writes, "my bride and I were married in Hongkong in our- 
street clothes and with the attendance of only the members of p- 
staff." 187 

._-.ll2gj: : - c , Ri tes. Tho surprise marriage causes a minor furor in 
Manila Catholic circles because the bishop of the British Crown 
Colony has originally refused to perform the rites, Quezon' bcim- 
a Freemason. But. after a hectic exchange of cables between the 
Hongkong prelate and the archbishop of Kanila, the Catholic ban 
on such mixed marriage of a Catholic and a Freemason is lifted, ; 
and the couple aire re-married three days later in the Hongkong 
Cathedral. After a brief honeymoon, the couple proceed to the 
United States. 

XIV. FXHST IifJ)i;JpJ:i;.l>;!!:«TC33 XISSIUN 



Feb. 23 First Hission L oaves . Having received a "go signal" from Quszr 
in San Francisco, the nain body of the mission headed by the 



Quiri.no, op., cit . , p. 125. 

Halaw, Aide-de r Ca: in, pp.. cit.. , p. 12?. 

Queaon, op.. cit_. , p. 136; Armando J. Kalay, .QfiPKP^A ^^AXi^S^PPfiju JQv?. J&ta 
P/.. Jorge. 3... .Vayrjgaj3. , #HS&AEL.$¥ J L j .fap.aii|Q,a i e T C'.o r c. unatj j.oii,« Manilas Filipiniona Book 
Guild, 1967, pp. 4-5; and Quirino, pj>. .cit., pp. 129, 131. 

'MA. 



- 75 - 



vice^-chairman, Secretary of the Interior Rafael PalHia, leaves on 
the U. 3. transport iJhprrian, lent by Secretary of War Pewton 
5.1aker. 1 In the absence of President 'Jilson, "ho is in lilurop-- 
oai.apaigni.ng for his "fourteen Points" aucng the Allied powers, 
Balder on April 4th receives the mission in Washington. Appearing 
before the joint committee of American senators and representa- 
tives on June 1st, Quezon makes a vigorous plea for Philippine 
independence. But aside fron making a "very good impression" on 
the committee, the mission returns to the Philippines practically 
empty-handed. 

< ;9 har. 17 Decl aration of Purposes. To servo as guideline for the indspen- 
donee mission, the Philippine Legislature approves a significant 
document, "Declaration of Purposes," ashing the united States to 
add "another glory to her banner by establishing the first really 
democratic republic in the Bast," and by extending to the Philip- 
pines "generously and freely the sane measure of hunanity and 
justice that she applied in the case of Cuba." ^ J ® In addition. 

the. mission presents a long notorial to the Congress of the Uni- 

1 91 

ted States ashing for immediate independence. 

'19 Dissenting ffo te. Prom the combative Cebuano editor, Vicente 

Sot to, thi3 dissenting note is heard: "Never in all history haw 

a nation ever attained its independence with resolutions, mono- 

■ , . • • -i 192 
rials, and mssions. 

'19 Sept. 23 jj'irst Child . The first fruit of the narriage that is intinate- 
ly linked with the Pirst Independence hission is a baby girl 
named Karia Aurora (Baby J. 

MS Oct. 29 In dep endence P und. The Philippine Legislature approves a bill 
appropriating P1 ,000,000 annually for the use of missions to be 
sent to the United States periodically to work for Philippine 
independence. The anount is included in the budgets of the Se- 
nate and the House, each sharing equally, thus preventing a 
veto by a governor-general not sympathetic to the Philippine 
cause. The law further provides that expenses of the mission 

are exempted fron pre-audit as required of other appropriate 
1 93 

tions. 



l og/ Ealavr, ' /4de,--,de--C n 9ra. 92.. pit. , p. 130. 

Soilo ii. Galang, ed. , ^^o^ffAi^PlJ^~^^Sk a A^. 1° vols. Manila: 
Philippine Education Co., Inc., 1936, Vol. VI, pp. 223-234. 

VJlJ IbiiU, PP. 243-307. 

12.?/ Caballero and Concepcion, pj% pit.. , p. 201. 
^SoJ Agoncillo and Guerrero, p_p_- pjlt . , p. 372. 



76 - 



'19 A'er. Rgeub 1 i c an_V i ctory_ . Fearful of further "ontanglenaats with 

European affairs" brought about b; tho Wilson administration., 
the American poodle in this year's presidential election veto 
the Republicans bach to power. Republican candidate barren jiar 
ding of Ohio gives Democratic candidate .Taues II. Cox a severe 
drubbing. Wilson, at this time, has been reduced to a helpless 
invalid following his collapse in September while campaigning 
for his brainchild, the League of Nations. 1 ^4 

1 •£ ■■ JSC - 2 Wilson Hecojaigntatlon . In a farewell message to the U.S. 

Congress, President Wilson confirms Harrison's report that tlv: 
Filipino people, since the enactment of the Jones Law in 191 6, 
have already established a stable government, hence he reoo!i».:cn:r 
that independence lx> granted to the Philippine a . Unfortu- 
nately, however, \uider the new Republican administration, the 
Wilson recommendation has bo cone an exercise in futility. 

•S 21 Iiar * 4 Wood-Forbes hisoion. .Wouly inaugurated President Harding ap- 
points a two-nan special mission composed of Leonard Wood and 
W. Cameron Forbes to look into the state of affairs in the Phi- 
lippines, especially after the long Harrison administration 
1920). 'J-'he r.ission spends four months in tho Philippines. 1 

':21 r'iar. 5 jgy^^gosJ^gj^ggi. Francis Burton Harrison resigns as governor- 
general the day after tho inauguration of President Harding.' 
is temporarily succeeded by Vico/-Gov3rnor Charles 2. Yeater. ' " 

'21 Apr. 9 Second Child. Birth oi the second Quezon child, Karia iieneide, 
(Wini), named after a sister of her grandmother. 

' 21 Uct - y adverse Report . ; i'no wood-Forbes mission submits its report tr 
warding stating, among other things, that conditions in the Phi- 
lippines have been most unsatisfactory because of Harrison's 
rather hasty Filipiniuation of the government service- The mins ' :. 
makes the following recommendations: 1 ) the existing political 
status of the Philippines be continued; 2) annulment by the 
U.S. C.ngross of all Philippine laws curtailing the powers oi 
the American governor/general . 3) ia {, asa 0 f a deadlock bet- 
ween the £overaor/#oneral and the Philippine Senate in matters 
of appointment, the President of the United States should have 



liV Gavian and fiara, eg., cit. , pp. 621-622. 

\S5J U.S. Congressional Record, 66th Congress, 3rd session, Vol, 60, Part I, 
p. 26. .ducted in Zaide, -.is to r:/, pjs. cit,., Vol. II, p. 205. 

-1W Zaide, Mp^tpry, pp_. jcpkt . , Vol. II, p. 305. 

MM UihU, p. 254. 



7 



the last say; and 4) the United States should not be left in a 

1 93 

"position of responsibility without authority." . ^he re- 

port concludes that the Filipinos are not yet prepared, eco- 
nomically and military, to assume the responsibilities of inde- 
pendencs . 

W ood Appointed . Wood is still in the Philippines, investiga- 
ting local conditions, when he is appointed Govei-nor-Genei-al, 

200 

sue c 3 e d : .ng uarrison. 

'21 _ hurried 'j-'rip. Tcodoro K. Kalaw nays that in view cf jaany ru:ov3 

about the tfood-Fcrbes mission, mostly unfavorable to the Philip- 
pines, Quezon is "obliged to leave hurriedly for Aaerica -to find 
out the real situation." From "ashington Quezon cables Osuena 
saying that he has conferred twice with President Harding, and 

the latter has assured- hin "very emphatically that in no oase 

201 

would a retrogressive policy be adopted." 

'21 Oct. 11 Cabinet Resigns. Filipino department secretaries tender their 

courtesy resignations to Vice-Governor Yeater in order to givu 

202 

Wood full liberty to form a new cabinet of his choice. 

'2.1 Oct. 15 Wood Takeover . Wood assumes his office as the now Governor- 

General under the most portentous circumstances. " Four 

days later, he tells the press that he is not changing the ne-i- 

bers of his cabinet. But the Filipino department secretaries 

feel uncertain about the future since the Wood-Forbes report is 

opposed to the grant of Philippine independence, the cardinal 

objective of the Wacicnalista Party to which all of them b3- 
204 

long. 

'21 Nov. 3 Osmena' a Second Resignat ion . Speaher Osnena, head of the Fili- 
pino participation and Wacionalista Party president since 1907, 
unexpectedly tenders his resignation over the leadership ques- 
tion during a caucus of party leaders in the Legislature. But 
the resignation is immediately and unanimously rejected. The 
leadership question will be taken up again as soon as Senate 



153/ W. Cameron Forbes, The Philippines , 2 vols. Boston: 1928, Vol. II, p. 302. 
Quoted in Quiri.no, ojiTpTt., pp. 133-139? and Molina, op. pit., Vol. II, 
3. 233. 

1 99/ Saide, nijAory, _QP_. cit. , y ol. II, p. 305. 
200/ ICalaw, ftvA Q ^§^Ssi ! lP> PJ?.- Si-is > P* 1 4-5 - 

Ib:ld.» PP- H4-145. 
?-92-J .Ibid., p. 145. 

2 9jJ holina, op., cit., Vol. II, p. 284. 



- 78 - 

President Quazon rc-covars fro* an illness. 205 Tho first rcsig 
nation w.is tendered by Osncna at a provioiui party convention. 

'21 Nov - 9 ^ood C-ots Involved. Tho Sonato holds up the first appointments 
made by Wood, except those of tho Justices of the Peace, on tho 
ground that tho Senators have not been previously consulted. 
This is a protest against Osuona's continued exercise, apparent- 
ly without any legal basis, of the authority to rocoriuond or 
pass over appointments submitted to the Governor-General. In 
fact, it is suopootod that Csmona, as leader of the party, has 
been consulted by '.food over the appointments. A co-aMon' oonplaint 
is that vacancies cannot be filled without the knowledge and 
consent of Osnena. 206 

>?A ilov ' 14 3uoKon Denial. Quezon, however, denies the alleged Senate op- 
position to the Wood appointments. In fact ho says the appoint- 
ments of the Justices of the ¥>eace have been quickly confirmed 2 '"' 

'21 12 3P Convention. The leaders cooperate in drafting a broad party 

platform adequate enough to refute the adverse Wood-Forbes re- 
port. But the convention gets bogged down on the issue of l\?ad :r~ 

-,.208 \ 
ship . x 

21 Dett ■ 16 Two Separatejjeets. Pro-Quezon Wacionalista senators hold a 

secret meeting at the "ignon hotel, while pro-Osmena representa- 
tives meet at the Ayuntamiento. In the former meeting, Quezon 
declares that the issue does not involve personal rivalry between 
him and Osmena but is based on principles. Quezon is for collect- 
ive leadership, while Osmena is for unipcrsonal leadership. ^ 

is the emergence of 

t-\ Dec. 17 Os.nena-Q uezon Conflict . What has been happening sjnptons 

of •• ■ controversy between Speaker Osmena, still acknow- 

ledged as the leader of the iTacionalista Party and of the Fili- 
pino participation in the government, and Senate President Que- 
zon who, protocol-wise, precedes the Speaker, Their respective 
positions are summed up as follows: 

Oa; .iona_The ory ; "It is imperative that we have a directing 
leadership in tho government that we may be able to coordinate 



2 



.05/ Pacis, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 275, quoting the Y^S^sLP^^'M^P^i^ki 

November 4, 1921. Kicrofilm, Newspaper Division, Library of Congress, 
Washington, D.C. 

2.Q&/ ljbicl., p. 276, quoting reports in the h'anil a Da ily.. Dulletinx .Wovenber 9- 
1 0, 1 921 . pjjrfco . 

Ql/ .Ibid.., P. 278. 

£.08/ Kalaw, Aide-de-Caap, , 0,0, . cp..t. , p. 152. 
&id._, p. 153.- 



79 - 



our efforts for the attainment of our goal, ^specially at this 
crucial aouoat when we need more than ©var to present a solid 
front in the struggle for independence, is such leadership ne- 
cessary so that we nay have a better fight for our country's 
cause in the face of the danger that threatens it." 

Quez on Theory: "It is not necessary to have a single di- 
recting leadership in the government; what we need is a program 
of government such as that which our Party is now adopting and 
let the chairman of each house of the Legislature and each olee 
ive officials in the government wort for the realization of the 
program and act within the powers inherent in the office each 

occupies. ISach particular case that comes up should he submitter 

21 0 

to the majority for decision." 

'21 Dec. 10 Battle is Joine d^ Pro-Osmena ; T acif nalista representative/ pass 
a resolution reaffirming their confidence in Osmcna as the prin- 
cipal leader in the government. This stand is, of course, oj 
posed by the Ilacionalista senators. 211 

'21 Dec. 20 Battle Pos itions^ Quezon issues a press statement saying that 
the Nacionalista Part;/- majority in the Senate opposes i^e exist- 
once of a party leader in the government because "it would bring 
as a consequence the concentration in a single individual of all 
powers of government." Osmena, mailing his first move, gives up 
his political powers as Speaker of the house, '^hereupon Quezon 
follows suit, saying that he is only complying with the demo- 
cratic and liberal practice in the Senate, hence the "political 
struggle is over". Osmena counters that "the fight has just 

begun," and presents his resignation as Macionalista Party pre- 

212" 

sident, and vice-president of the Council of State. 

'21 Dec. 22 Qu ezon ' s Rebuttal . In answer to the Osmena move, Quezon says 
he is not resigning as ilacionalista Party vice/-president and 
member of the Council of State, because he has not accepted 
the former and has stopped attending the latter. lie adds there 
is no need to form a steering committee in the Senate, as 
Osmena has done in the House, because "the entire Senate would 
henceforth exorcise the political powers of the Senate Presi- 
dent." 213 



HQ/ Pacis, j22a Qit., Vol. I, p. 201, quoting the M anila Da ily Bull etin. 

December 17, 1921, Microfilm, Newspaper Division, Library of Congress, 
Washington, D.C. 

£1.1/ Halaw, A id e.-d e-C amp. , pj2,» c it, . , p. 155. 

■*1S/ JbijU 

?-j.jJ Pacis, .cp. xtt.* Vol. I, p. 280, quoting lOde.aJL, December 22, 1921 , 
De la Rosa Collection. 



good> Diary. In the entry in his Diary for this day (Dec. 22 
'• 0od sa " s ^ eaon has conferred with hin to present his side in 
the raging controversy with Osaena. "n e (Quezon)," writes hood, 
"said that tho real trouble was that Osaoua demanded to be con- 
sulted with reference to appointments and that he insisted on t. 
Senate being entirely subordinate to the House, and also wanted 
hin, Quezon, to none out with a written statement accepting a 
subordinate position to the Speaker." 214 

Proluda to 7ar. Osmcna and Quoaon are ween together at a din:, 
in the lobby of the Ayuntaaisnto, drinking to each other's heali 
amidst loud clappings by senators and representatives. To tho 
question if he is ready to see the i.'acionalista Party divided, 
Osmona tells the press that if "the Man who supports tho theory 
of collective leadership so desires, he could not help it." Bui- 
Quezon says he "will always stand by my theory of collective , 
leadership if I have to leave the Nacicnalista Party. The tine 
has coma for tho establishment in the Islands of political parti 
which should fight for principles, not necessarily for the con- 
trol of the government . " 21 - J 

DQ0 - 23 ° J Accuse :.L L:Lhe a military tactician taking advantage of tb> 
element of surprise, Quezon writes a long letter to Osnona di- 
rectly accusing hi;.i of exorcising complete control of the Legis- 
lature and every member of the cabinet, causing widespread dis- 
content in the Party and in the government. Warning that the . 
country demands a government that is truly popular and democratic 
he says that "if we do not give what they (the people) want they 
will look for Mother party that will give it to then." 216 

De ° ' 25 Ogmena' s Counter-Accusation. Stating that Quezon has "acted 
far beyond control," 0 S ;iena answers the Quezon accusation by 
citing "recurrent information" to the effect that Quezon is 
"recruiting men in and outside the Party, that he is decided to 
bolt, and that the only thing that he is waiting for to strike 
a blow is an appropriate opportunity." 21 ? 

Jan * 10 Quegon Roaigns? Quezon hands a letter of resignation to the 
Senate, saying that "owing to the state of my health, I cannot 



Leonard iood Dj^ary, entry for December 22, 1921 . manuscript Division, 
Library of Co.vgress, Washington, D.C. Quotod in Pacis, q_p. cit., Vol. I. 

P« ^ fO« 

Pacis, oj>. ext., Vol. I, p. 285, quoting the KaniLa^T^-ygs,, December 23, 1921 
Hicrofilm, Newspaper Division, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 

Pacis, o£. cijfc.. , Vol. I, pp. 235-288. Do la Rosa Collection. 

JiUil. , pp. 289-297, quoting a story in the Manila Q -'i. e,3 f December 25, 1921. 
microfilm, iJei-rspaper Division, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 



- 81 - 



'22 



continue discharging the duties of President of the Senate, and 
for this reason I have the honor of tendering my resignation." 
Ho then announces his retirement from public life. But he adds 
that should the people insist, ho is willing to go on a mission 
to the U.S. Counenting on the Quezon resignation, Osmena, who 
has previously resigned, says that "there has been no victory 
for anyone. Everything has turned out for the good of the people 
The most important matter now on our hands is the sending of 
the mission to Washington. " ^° 

But when his resignation is taken up in the Senate, Quezon 
delivers a long speech on the principle of collective leadership. 
"0 n e should risk his party's displeasure only when thereby he is 
certain he is serving the best interests of the country," he 
says. "7o one is obliged to remain within a party if he does not 
serve in it the interests of the people and refuses to respect- 
its will." 

leadership to Cues* on. When Os::iena insists on his resignation, 

saying that his "role has always been to unite and not to divide." 
the leadership is then offered to Quezon, who demurs, saying: 
"Kow can I run a party which has demonstrated itself hostile to' 
me?" 21 9 

' ? - 2 Jan ' 30 ^££H}j-g£r_gplit . Speaking at the Club Ifacionalista, Osmena 

declares he cannot believe that, a split will break up the party. 
"The Nacionalista Party is not ours," he says. "It belongs to 
the people. :Jq cannot dissolve what the people have created. Ja 
should not abuse the people's confidence by a division amongst • 
us, but should keep the party united for the judgment of history." 

Quezon, on the other hand, tells the U.P. students that "if 
in order to have a government of laws, it is necessary to destroy 
a political party, then let us do so... The tfacipnalista Party 
will be divided, and this division will be healthful for the 
national cause of independence." 

<-2 Feb. 7 j fe^_^gjg regted? Quezon writes young Governor kanuel A. Roxas 

of Capis that the "Colectivistas are not interested in the party 
leadership. They do not want to be answerable for the leader- 
snip of the party, nor do I want to become its president." 

t'-Z- .iJ'cb. 15 Hear t .-to-hcart Talk. In the evening 'Juoaon visits Osmona in 



2.1.9/ Kalaw, Aido- de-C anp [t oj). ext., p. 155. 

- 2 JlS/ .Lbid., p. 156. 

-?J?.id., p. 157. 

• 2 ^V ibid., p.. 158. 



02 - 



his office, and the two havo a long heart-to-heart tali:. 222 

group. Gives Up. One source (j.^.Kalaw) says the original Com- 
mittee on Conciliation resigns in futility, apparently because 
"many speeches continued to be delivered everywhere supporting 
either Osaena or Quezon. "One Owaena speech arouses the suspicion 
and ire of some Coloctivietas. This speech alludes to soae ne:«- 
bers of the party "trying to rise to power through the window.'' 

Then he adds: "To true Nacicnalista caros to ascend to oower 
by ')^7 
0 h clandestine means." ' - 

' 22 Feb * 1S g.? t jL«Qtiring? Quezon, in a confidential letter, asks Osmena 
to "confirm in writing what we agreed upon last night, namely, 
that neither you nor I shall accept any position, elective or 
appointive, during the next Legislature, and that, therefore, 
we shall not take part in the direction of the Party outside or 
inside the government. " he further states that "since you your- 
self have expressed publicly and privately your desire to retire 
to private life and riy own plan of separating from politics i 
also known, it is believed that neither ycu nor I have any in- 
convenience in putting down all this in writing." 224 

Osmena, Quezon to U.S. The Hacic.naliata Party Convention ap- 
proves two resolutions, namely, l) giving Osmena and Quezon a 
vote of gratitude for their "high and meritorious services to 
the Party and to the country"; and 2) asking Osmena and Quezon 
to go to the United States to head jointly the Second Indepan- 
dence Mission. 

'22 Feb. 17 Birth of Sew Party. Despite the public manifestations made by 

Osmena and Quezon on party unity, a group of Colectivistas, still 
smarting from Osmena' s allusion to party members trying to seize 
power by clandestine means, proceed to hold a public meeting at 
the h'anila Grand Opera house to announce the birth of a now 
party. Quezon, in a stirring speech, formally announces his 
secession from the Nacicnalista Party, and the formation of a 
new party based on the principle of collectivism." 

"The Nacicnalista Party," he says, "has never been and 
never will be the people. :ly l oyalty to ay -pa rty ends J^h_gr_e_mx 
3^SQ^S^SLJiS^S^JV^J^I^^u I'lven if it were not the Maciona- 
lista Party, lot it be another party, • from the moment that my 



i-±Ll tacls, wjj. wjut . , Vol. XI, p. so;. 

Quirino, pp.. cjit . , p. 145- 

22&I Pacis, p_p_. cit. , Vol. I, pp. 297-298, quoting from a letter in the De la 
Rosa Collection. 

Y-?5J Pacis, pp.. cj.;b. , Vol. I, p. 302. 



- 83 - 



'22 Feb. 21 



convictions do not coincide with fho ^ nn1 f , . ^ 

±u ^ae witn the ideal for which the party 

stands, I consider it ny duty to leave it. A man to be worthy 
"of the name should put his convictions into practice, profess 
them with faith, defend the. with courage, happen what nay." 226 
(Underscoring supplied, ,- ABb',) 

Most of the senators and a number of representatives loin 
Quezon's splinter group later known as the Colectivistas. A,ong 
the Quezon followers are the so-called liberals, young and old," 
college professors and students. 227 

Challenge Accopted. Taking up the gauntlet, Osmena abandons hi, 
retirement plan, telling his followers that "it is our duty, m 
this hour of suprene crisis, to give strength and vigor to our 

COmU ° n Party Wh0SQ birth »• ™> »hon it is our duty to lov£^ 
The .%cionalista Party split has now become a fact. 

xv. suGom Kme zmtiME session 

Alir - m^LMm^^M^, '*™ari B the end of April Quezon 

and Oaneaa jointly head the Second Independence Mission to the 
United States, this tine specifically to counteract the adverse 
oi-fects of the V/ood-Porbos report and, if possible, to hear Pre- 
sident Harding's views on the Philippine question, (feed h*s ap- 
proved the F 5 00,000 appropriation for the expenses of the n<ss<o. 
although he believes the nissioners are "on a wild-goose journ§|- ' 

'22 Juno 6 Hands Off ^Wtinn i"-,-, 

======= ££^££tion^ lao ejection for senators and represents v^; 

takes place when the mission is still en route to Washington. Os- 

nena and Quezon, who are both candidates for senator, leave the 

campaign to their followers. Oaneaa, this tine, has decided to 

run for the Upper House, perhaps hoping that he can unseat ^e«oa 

from the Senate presidency once the Hacionalista Party loyalists ' 

or "Uniporsonalistas" win the majority in that body. The Inde- » 

pendonce Mission arrives in '..'ashington just one week (June 13) . 

after the Philippine election. 230 

'22 June 17 Memorial to Harding and Congress. The nission presents a long 
memorial to Harding stating, among other things, that "the pre- 
8ent is the tine for United States completely to discharge 

W Hivera Collection, Vol. II, pp. 576-577. 
f-?:iJ Pacis, ext., Vol. I, P . 304. 

W p'acJsT ^/^rJol! 51 ! ]*T*03* ead9d ^ RQfa01 Palaa - D ° la R ° Sa Collec *^ 

<4S/ Haged0rn ' .^onarOood. 2 vols. How York: 1931 , Vol. II, p. 415. 

-iuobed m O^rino, op. cit . , p. I4tt. ' ' 

<#/ Pacis, pp.. .ci.t., Vol. I, p. 311. 



- 84 _ 



its obligations to the Philippines. The Filipino people have . 
fulfilled their uart in the covenant wi th America. . . If the ±n 
dependence of the Philippines could now he secured as an ami- 
cable agreement between the two peoples, nay, evon as an act o: 
unanimity on the part of a sovereign power, how much would 
that mean to the peace of the world!" 231 T vro days later, a 
oopy of the ne.norial is submitted to the U.S. Congress. 2% 
'22 June 7-2 Harding. g Reply. do not propof3e to retaia under our fl£) , 

any people to whom retention will not be agreeable," Harding I, 
in his reply to the manorial. »I do not have anything but ph P ,. 
of eulogy for your aspirations towards independence and coapl- 
sovereignty. No ono in Anarica would lilcQ tp gee ypu Vfitnout ^ 
tional aspirations. The only thing on which we really disagree 
is the date when independence should be granted. The date today 
is not yet propitious. Put we are not considering the taking of 
any retrogressive step nor do we plan to diminish our internal 
aontrol." JJ 

"I can only oonaond the Philippine aspirations to irw^-~ 
denoe and complete self-sovereignty," he adds. "Hone in Verier. 
W0Uld Wish you t0 be national aspirations. You would be 

unfitted for the solemn duties of self -government without them. 
It is fair to assume that our only difference of opinions relate 
to the time for independence. You crave it now, and I do not 
believe the tine has arrived for the final decision." 234 The 
Independence Mission returns empty-handed. 

'22 Sept. KlectinnRe^lt^ Quezon and OsmeHa are easily elected to the 

Senate. The Colectivistas win four seats in the Senate, the Uni ■ 
personalistas three (including OsmoSa), and the Pemocratas four 
Of the 11 hold-over senators, 1 is a Denocrata, and noat of the 
rest, although previously elected Hacionalistas, have joined 
Quezon. In the House, the Colectivistas win ?2 seats, J)*-™*- ■ 
26, and Unipersonalistas 21 . In the S<»n»tn n„ „,.„., <s ^p--' ' 
president, and Osnsna Senate president protonpore. In the i c - 
neither the Colectivistas nor Unipersonalistas can, indivi " • 
elect a Speaker, The Colectivista candidate for speah;- : 
young and brilliant Manual A. rtoxas of Capiz; that of the Uni- 
parsonalistas, Mariano J. Cuenco; and the De.uocratas, Claro K. 
Kecto. Previously, the Colectivistas," in a caucus, have no uiaatuu. 

i'd/ Galang, pj3. cit . , Vol. VI, pp. 312-324. 

£W Ivalaw, A^e-de.-Cajap., o£. .cit., p. 165. 

2 -23/ iMd,., pp. 165-166. 

•0.4/ Galang, ^r^ . . . pp. 544-543. 



- 05 - 

Antonio de las Alas as candidate for speaker, but Queaon has non- 
vino ed the Batangas so Ion to withdraw in favor of Roxas. Yor to:i 
successive days the Lower House is unable to elect its speaker. z "- 

foroing the three parties to seel- an alliance that can give 
the victory to the chosen candidate. After the Demooratas fail 
to conolude a pact with Osnena's U.nioorsonalistas (Oct. 19), ■■; ; uo- 
icon's Colectivistas, in turn, try their luol: and 'sue c sod in con- 
cluding a "Pact" with the Uniporsonalistas in throe stages, aa:e- 

iy - 

'22 Oct. 21 ||^at_|tog^ Coloctivista and Unipersonalista senators and repre- 
sentatives reach an agreement to elect a Colectivista Speaker 
and a Unipersonalista Speaker Protemporo, premised on the event- 
ual union of the two parties. 

'22 Oct. 24 gecond St ep_. Representatives of the two parties sign an agree- 
ment detailing a joint legislative program of two parts, namely, 
1 ) a joint program, of campaigning for independence and the Fili- 
piniaation of the Supreme Court; and 2) undertaking domestic 
objectives, including a responsible ©abinet, maintenance of th~ 
Council of State, improvement of the conditions of labor, ex- 
pansion of benefits for veterans of the devolution, and faster 
development of the non-Christian provinces. 

'22 Oct. 26 Third Stop. Signing of a Pact of Union and Understanding in 
which the two parties agree to act together in the Legislature 
and to have their respective parties convene in simultaneous 
convention to approve the permanent reunion of the two parties, '' 

Rox aj _Speaker. C n the day the Pact is signed, Roxas accepts 
the offer of speakership tendered by Quezon, newly re-elected 
Senate president, and agrees to the condition that "I shall be 
obliged to present my resignation as Speaker of the House of Re~ 

•Tzo 

presontatives if the fusion io not carried out." " u 

'22 Uov. 19 £ harter_Plan Rejected . Undaunted by the Harding reply to the 
memorial of the Second Independence mission, the Philippine Le- 
gislature approves a resolution asking the U.S. Congress for 

authority to draft a Constitution for the Philippines. Jliis is 

239 

not hooded by Congress. 



?-J>3j Caballero and Ccncepcion, op., pit. . , p. 251.. 

Pacis, pp.. cit., Vol. I, p. 315. 
222/ UB&A'i Pp. 314-315. 

: mj ibid. 

239/ Zaide, his^cry, op. cit. , Vol. II, p. 306. 



- 86 



XVT. -fOOD R51ACT10UARY RiCGIKi ] 

1223 July 17 Uood Cabine t Crisis. Headod by Senate President Quezon and 

Speaker Roxas, the Filipino members of the Council of State and 
the Secretaries of Department jointly tender their resignations 
in protest against Governor-General food's policy "to intervene 
in, and control, even to the smallest detail, the affairs of our 
government, both national and local, in utter disregard of the 
authority and responsibility of the department heads and other 
officials concerned." " 40 'That triggers the mass resignations 
is the Conley Case. 

Fuse of Cri sis. Ray Conley, an American iseabor of the Manila 
secret service force and chief of the gambling sqtiad, is sus- 
pected of receiving bribes. Kayor Ramon Fernandez orders hira 
watched, and when sufficient proofs have been found, suspends 
him from office. The case is elevated to Secretary of the Interior 
Jose P. Laurel, who oonfiras the suspension. Thereupon Governo-- 
Oeaaral Hood intervenes, and, ignoring the. city mar/or and the 
secretary of the interior, orders Conley reinstated. Upon re- 
ceiving the Governor-General's order, Laurel and Fernandez 
resign from their respective positions, thus setting the stage 
for the mass resignations of Filipino leaders headed bv Senate 
President Queaon. c ' r ' 

'23 July 18 1 iere_P j^e3^ _.^j^be:iion._ After hearing that v/oed, consi- 
dering the nass resignations as an act of "rebellion against the 
authority of the United States," has ordered the American Army 
in the Philippines to be ready, just in case, Quezon writes to 
reassure the Governcr-General. "I desire most emphatically to 
affirm that the people of the Philippine Islands are loyal t* 
the United States government," says the Senate leader, "and 
that they are not contemplating any revolt against the sovereign 
ty of the United States." lie adds that "to talk of revolution 
when our people are unarmed and unproparod is comic." Later on 
Quezon tells the .Associated Press that what the Filipino leaders 
hav e done "is not even a protest against the administration of 
President liarding, but against General Vood personally. . . a 
protest against (his) encroaciiment upon constitutional rights 
already enjoyed by the Filipino people and against the 

'■'AO/ Conr-^e Boulter, History of the Philippines. Boston: Ginn and Company, 19*54, 
PP. 513-319. ' ' 

.24.1/ Kalaw, ^P-do^aixQ., op.. cjU . , p. 176. 



- 87 - 

usurpation of powers in direct violation of existing laws." 

Aug. 2 Death of Wa rding. Coning fro;,i an inspection tour of the Alas- 

Jiian region, President hardirig dies suddenly in Ban Francisco, 

California, under mysterious circumstances, lie in succeeded by 

ViceyPresidont Calvin Coolidge, "cool as ice and impenetrable 

in the mysterious recesses of his thinking." A more formidable 

stumbling block to Philippine independence is installed at the 
243 

White House. 

•23 Aug. 11 i'he Coloctivistas and Uniporsonalistas neat in a national con- 
vention and ratify the Pact of Union and Understanding. 2 ^ 

'22 Oct. Wood Vs. Quezon . To bring the issue directly to the people, 

Quezon causes a vacancy in the Senate through the resignation of 
Senator Pedro Guevara of the fourth senatorial district (Laguiia, 
Rizal, Bataan and Manila). A special election is set in October. 
Then Quezon launches the senatorial candidacy of Ration Fernandez, 
the first victim of Hood's arbitrary rule. After some prodding 
by his fellow Denocratas and by the lJ ood administration, Judge 
Juan Sumulong, "the brains of the Opposition," is drafted to 
fight Fernandez. This is right in the trap set by Quezon. The 
campaign issue, as formulated by Quezon and the Coalesced Wacio-- 
nalista, is the "question of political autonomy and respect for 
the law as against the centralization of power and despotism; a 
clean and honest government against a government dirty and de- 
praved" under Wood for supporting Conley. The Douocratas are 
thus obliged to defend 'food. In the ensuing electoral fight dub- 
bed as "the battle of this generation," Quezon's candidate, 

245 

Fernandez, wins by a large majority over Sumulong. 

'23 Oct. Wood's Recall Ashed. The Philippine Legislature approves a 

joint resolution demanding the recall of Wood and the appoint: unt 
of a Filipino governor-general. Washington shelves the request. 
This is followed ^ by another resolution providing for a' ple- 
biscite on independence, but Wood vetoes the measure. The Le- 
gislature quickly repasses it over Wood's veto, so it is referred 
to Washington. The new undiplomatic president, Mr. Coolidgo,. con- 
firms the Wood veto, at the same time rebuking the Filipino 
leaders for the current deadlock in insular affairs. 2 ^ 



- 2 li/ Ibid.., pp. 178-179. 

243/ Caballero and Concepcion, p_p_. cjLt . , p. 247. 

?-Mj Pacis, op_. cit. , Vol. I, p. 317. 

2.45/ Kalaw, Aijde-AsdlsSE* °E« SJL* • » ?P« 181-102. Also in Caballoro and Concepcion, 

pji' pAi.f.pp. 244-246. 

?M-J Quirino, .op. cjLt_. , p . 165-163. 



83 _ 



'2J Dec. Roxas Mission . Lata in the year (l92j) the Philippine Legis- 

lature decides to send a special mission to Wash ■ ngton headed 
by the young Speaker itoxas. The latter then invites the Dcno- 
cratas to join him in order to present before the American peo- 
ple a solid front against Wood. But the opposition party decliius 
the invitation. "Quezon has pushed his party into a quagsire," 
says Ruperto Montinola, the "colossus of the South." "Let him 
.-take care of his troubles himself." Meanwhile, speaking at the 
Lyric Stadium in Iloilo, Roxas condemns Hood's "autocracy" as 
being "worse than the whole ' Spanish regime in suppressing and 
curtailing the rights of the Filipinos." Turning to Montinola, 
the dynamic Speaker concludes: "Lot our people take montinola 
by the collar and make him kneel to ask forgiveness for his un- 
patriotic and criminal act in supporting «ood and the enemies 
of independence 1" 

19?.4 Jan. S Memorial of Gri pes . Speaker Roxas, assisted by the two Fili- 
pino residents commissioners, Isauro Gabaldon and Pedro Guevara, 
presents to President Coolidge a memorial containing a long li- 
tany of grievances against Governor-General Wood. "The recent 
incident (i.e., the Wood Cabinet crisis - ASS) simply serves to 
bring home the compelling need that the Philippine question be 
now settled once and for all," the memorial states. "The time 
for Philippine independence has come. It can be postponed no 
longer. Filipino welfare calls for it; Filipino ideals long for 
it;- and the good name and pledged faith of America require it. 
In deep gratitude for all that America has done for the Fili- 
pinos... we respectfully and earnestly submit that the next step 
in the development of our relationship is the fulf il.lment of the 
promise of the United States to our people, the immediate es- 
tablishment of a Philippine free republic, consecrated to the 
ideals of liberty and justice which America has upheld through- 
out her history." 248 Coolidge' s reply, dated February 21. 
249 

is negative. 

'24 Jan. 9 Con-Con. Rep. henry Allen Cooper introduces a resolution. 

providing for the holding of a Constitutional Convention to 
draft a constitution for an independent Philippine Republic. 
The resolution is approved by the House Committee on Insular 



.2.4.7/ Caballero and Conccpcion, pji. cit . , pp. 251-253- 
2.4S/ Galang, op., ext., Vol. VI, pp. 478-404.' 
249/ Ibid. , pp. 549-555. 



89 - 



_ Affairs. In the Senate, although the majority favor the grant inf 

of Philippine independence, opinion is divided on the date of 

250 

Amorican withdrawal fron the Philippines. 

'24 Fob. 15 l : 'und Suspension. Questioning the constitutionality of the la TT 
appropriating funds for the independence missions to the United 
States, Insular Auditor Ben i' 1 . T ! right orders the suspension of 
payments f rora the funds on the ground that the standing annual 
appropriation is not necessary for the support of the legisla-- 
ture. This Move stirs nucli resentment among the people, 

threatening the immediate paralyzation of the entire independent- 
campaign, including the dissolution of the Commission on Inde- 
pendence, the Executive Office under the Commission, the Press 
Bureau in Washington, etc. The resulting crisis brings 

the Nacionalistas and Democratas in a united protest against 
the 'fright actuation. A National Collection Committee, with 
branches in the provinces, is immediately organized to raise 
funds for the independence oause. Under the able management of 
Arsenio N. Luz, former newspaperman and director of commerce and 
industry, the Committee is able to reach the quota by popular 
subscriptions after a few months. 

•24 Feb. 20 Fai rfi eld Bill. Congressman Louis M. Fairfield of Indiana, 
chairman of the House Insular Affairs Committee, introduces a 
bill providing for the grant of independence to the Philippines 
after a 30-year transition period under an autonomous govorauont. 
known as Commonwealth, headed by a Filipino Governor-General. 
The government, of course, will be under the "supervision" of 
United States Commissioner vested with certain emergency powers 
subject to the decision of the President of the United States, 
After the transition period, a plebiscite will be held to deter- 
mine if the Filipinos will want the Commonwealth to continue 
or bo granted absolute independence. ' Incidentally, Sen. 
William k. F.ing of Utah also introduces a bill providing for 
immediate and complete independence, but no final action is 
taken by the U.S. Congress on both measures for lack of time. 

The Fairfield lr 11 is the precursor of the Kare-nawes-Cutting 

255 

and the Tvdings-iicPuff ie bills. 



250/ Agoncillo and Guerrero, p_p. ext., p. 373. 

?3jJ rbJAs.! p- 372. 

?-b?J K'alaw, AidoKlq-Cam.p.. pp. - 1 07 • 

"±S£As.t P. 10G. 
• 2 M7 JMA._ f pp. 191-192. 
.§55/ Ibid._, p. 192. 



>2i 



- 90 - 

24 Ear. 17 Vood's Cr-ntrovaraiai c?bl~ T« +. . . 

.Z±£±z± stem tno rising sentiment in 

tno li.S Concrass favoring the grant of Philippine independent, 
••'ood,re P ortedly at the instigation of the chief of tho"jWv 
of Inanlar Affair,, dispatches a cable to Washington saying that 
tne Filipino people are not yet ready for independence. ^ , 0 „ 
adds that independence will "signify the ruin of the tobacco and 
sugar industries, the destruction of faith in investments and of 
the finances of the Islands, followed by laziness and disorder 
that would be a big blow to Occidental civilisation." 257 

'^^h^^B^o^ -.'"h Wte President Quezon as 
chairman, the Third Parliamentary Ilission is dispatched to the 
t'ruted States to follow up the various independence measures 
med in the U.S. Congress. Besides. Quezon, the mission is con- 
posed of Sen. Osmena and Rep. Claro II. Recto, members, and Fran- 
cisco Zamora, secretary. The mission is still in Yokohama, Ja.cn 
en r ° UtG t0 ^ er:Lca wl ™ « i- informed by the Philippine Pres. ' 
Bureau in Washington of the Wood cable opposing the grant of in- 
dependence. - Upoa thair nrrival in , aall , ngton> Quo;ion 

—ion is. joined by Roxas and the two Philippine resident com- 
missioners. 

" M ^ 17 ^IlJ^tes^^^d. Led by Acting Speaker Antonio de las 

Alas, a mass rally is. hold at the hanila Grand Opera House pro- 
X * 3tinS aSainst thc %od c able, and reiterating the »tHp<no.' 
demand for "immediate, absolute, and complete independence." 2 ^ 
Apr. 30 Oo^dWe. The Attorney General of the U n ited States rv,os 
that the Commission on Independence is illegal because it is 
exercising powers that belong exclusively to the U.S. Congress" 50 

'* 4 Dec - 4 fmjm, **™ E £ third , 1020n child , Luisa Qora2on 

Paz, an infant. 

JUly ggplidge ^voy. Because of the continuing friction between 
Uood and the Filipino leaders, President Coolidge dispatches 
Col. Carmi Thompson to investigate Philippine conditions in 
order that ho can secure "a better administration" of its affairs. 
Like the '.food-Forbes mission before him, Thompson reports that 
complete independence for the Philippines "is impossible, now 
and for a lo31 S t:L !e to come, because the Filipinos lack the 

255/ Agoncillo and Guerrero, pp.. eft., p. 373. 
Z53J Kalaw, Aide^de.-Carap, pj). cit . , p. 190. 

LMd., p. 1Q9 . 
'£SJ .Ibid.., p. 191. 

7,RUo > ^^toi_Pj ii _jLit . , Vol. II, p. 307. 



'24 



- 91 - 

financial resources, social homogeneity and solidarity required 

of an independent nation. lie warns that termination of free 
trade relations between the United States and the Philippines 
will mean economic disaster for the Islands. 261 

'25 Aug. Osmena .Mission. For the second time in a year Senator Osmena 

is sent to the United States on a special mission by the Philip- 
pine Legislature. The idea is to step up the independence cam- 
paign, taking advantage of the new atmosphere in the U.S. Congro no- 
favorable to tho Philippines. Acting as his technical adviser 
is Teodoro Tl. Kalaw, former secretary of the interior, who is 

now executive secretary and chief adviser of the Independence 

2^,2 

Commission. ' ' In America, Osmena asks the U.S. Congress to 

authorize the Filipino people to draft their own constitution. 

This is reminiscent of the resolution passed by the Philippine 

Assembly in December 1910 petitioning tho U.S. Congress for 

authority to draft a constitution, to which the Philippine Cor- 

263 

mission objected. From Vashington, Osmena cables Quezon 

and Rosas in Manila ruefully stating that there is "no prospect 
now for consideration of any independence bill, while the intro- 
duction of reactionary legislation is imminent." 264 

'25 Cha nge_of Cl imate. True enough, the climate of opinion has dras- 

tically changed in 'Washington. Rep. Koiss has introduced two 
measures, the first designed to increase the powers of the Insular 
Auditor in the Philippines, and the second authorizing the Gover- 
nor-General to control and dispose of revenue collected from 
duties on Philippine products exported to the United States. 
Shortly before the Congress adjournment, Rep. Bacon introduces 

his infamous bill seeking the permanent separation of Mindanao, 

with 

Sulu and Palawan from the rest of the Philippines, :."'A a special 

265 

form of government in these areas. The period of reaction 

has set in. 

25 Sept. General Elect ions. The Colectivistas and Unipersonalistas 

formally effect their fusion under the name Partido Nacionalista 
Consolidado with Quezon as the president. This fusion explains 
the oven/helming victory of tho newly merged party over the 
Democratas. C^uozon's political leadership will remain firmly 



my Agoncillo and Guerrero, op., cit . , pp. 375-376, 
.262/ kalaw, Mjip^d^-Ca:-ip_, op. cJLt . , pp. 132-193. 
.265/ ^aido, Hi story. , op_. cit., Vol. II, p.. 303. 
. 2 J?V Kalaw, suurq. p. 196. 

Agoncillo and Guerrero, op,, cit., p. 374. 



- 92 - 

ogg 

entrenched for the nest decade. >v 

^26 Supremo National Council. iJven before Osnena's return fron 

his special mission to the U.S., Quezon has organized a Supreme 
National Council composed of Nacionalista (Consolidado) and De~ 
mocrata leaders. Luzon's idea is to secure a more solid front 
in the Filipino struggle for independence. The Democrata Party- 
is given equal representation with the ruling majority party in 
the inner council of this fusion. Quezon, of course, sits at 
the head of the table, with Judge Sunulong on his right. Comments 
a biographer: "lir. Quezon's leadership has achieved the impos- 
sible - that of moulding a cogent and solid spiritual devotion 

267 

to an idea out of years of adversities against Wood." 

Kalaw, however, says that the Supreme National Council is 

intended to "supplant the Commission on Independence which had 

been created with the same objectives, but with the difference 

that now the two major political parties are recognized on a 

258 

fifty-fifty basis." lJ Still another observer says that the 

formation of the. Council serves to enhance Quezon's leadership. 

"By joining the Supreme National Council," he adds, "the Demo- 

cratas abdicated their position as an effective fiscalizer to 

the powerful Nacionalista Party and lost forever their oppcr- 

269 

tunity to develop into a full opposition party." 

'26 Feb. 22 Praye r D ay. The Supreme iiational Council holds a mammoth field 

mass on Washington's birthday - previously declared a Prayer Day 

at the Luneta pari: in Manila, invoking the Deity's help "to stay 

the hand that would smite our liberties," and to "grant us the 

270 

grace to forgive those who seek to destroy our freedom." 

'26 Anti-Wood Drive. Under the aegis of the spiritual fusion of 

the Macionalista and Democrata parties, Quezon steps up his 
anti-Wood campaign in the provinces, painting the Governor- 
General as "a tyrant and usurper of power." It is at this time 
that the immortal Quezon dictum is heard around the world. 
"I would rather have the Legislature abolished and allow the 
Governor-General to govern alone," ho says in one of his 
fighting speeches, "There has been no party in power since he 
(Wood) took over his post. Because he is the power, the only 



266/ Caballero and Concepcion, op,, c.it.. , p. 265; and Pacis, op.. c&t. f Vol. II, 

p/ 31 0. : " -v 

Wl/ Caballero and Concepcion, supra^. p. 266. 

26g/ Kalaw, ^-d.Q-A.Q-Corx^, op_. jcij,. , p. 205. 

269/ Agoncillo and Guerrero, p_p. pit . , p. 375. 

iZJQ/ Quirino, op_. cjL_t . , p. 100. 



- 95 - 



power, I would prefer a governm e nt run like jJjg& X hy _ J?23&E}£S23. 

to one run .like heaven by Am ericans, because n o nat ter how b ad 
_ _™ - ~ _ "~ '271 

a Filipino. government might be r- it can sti ll b e jj-rgrovgd. " 

(Underscoring supplied. - ABS.) 

1 26 June 23 Only Son . Birth cf Manuel (Fonong) Quezon, Jr. 

•26 Wov. 9 Big Setback . Wood deals the Filipino struggle for self-rule 

a big blow when he abolishes the Board of Control on the ground 
that it is unconstitutional, assuming the powers that belong 
only to the Chief Executive, Wood contends that under the Jones 
Law he is vested with supreme executive control, and it is un- 
constitutional for the Legislature to compel him to share his 
powers with the Board of Control. Quezon and Osmena elevate the 
case to the Suprene Court of the Philippines, which swihsequently 
[ sustains Wood. The decision of the local Suprene Court is af- 



272 

iirmed two years later by the U.S. Suprene Court. 

'26 Quez o n-Aguinaldo Cont ro versy . Left without his standby, the 

Democratas, who have been won over by the Nacionalistas under 

the Suprene national Council, Wood then woos General Aguinaldo, 

Quezon's commander-in-chief in the Revolution. Aguinaldo 'a son- 

in-law, Jose P. Helencio, husband of his eldest daughter., Canaan, 

is appointed representative for cne of the non-Christian pro- 
273 

vinces. Aguinaldo, in fact, has been on friendly terns 

with Wood since the latter' s arrival in 1921. Kis Vet eran ps .de_ . 
la Revo luc ion has been attacked by the Wacionalistas as unpatrio- 
tic for its refusal to join the Quezon brainchild, the Supreme 

274 

National Council. 

1 S27 Feb. Q uezon Expelled? Stung by the Wacionalistas' attack, Aguinaldo 

prods his Vetaranos into expelling Quezon, a revolutionary Ma- 
jor, from the veterans' organization. But the Senate president 
quips back: "My alleged expulsion is a farce. While I am a ve- 
teran, I have never affiliated nyself with the association, and 
from the time General Aguinaldo, for purely personal motives, 
came out in support cf General i/ood I have considered any con- 
nection with it not only an inconsistency but a betrayal of 

275 

public trust on my part." 



27j/ Kalaw, A_idej^d_e_7^amp, supr a; p.. 209. 

§72/ Agoncillo and Guerrero, op., cit . , p. 368. 

222/ Caballero and Concepcion, op. cit. , p. 2^4> 

12AJ Quirino, p_p_. . cit . , . p . 131. 

275/ Caball oro and Concepcion, supr a> p,. 268. 



94 - 



i27 , Plebiscite Issue. To M.a^rovQ^a^oga±±oxiB-^y-^ELQ^L^ex±ce^ 

Quarters that only a few Filipinos favor independence, the Phi- 
lippine Legislature approves a bill providing for a plebiscite 
on "complete, immediate and absolute independence." Wood vetoes 
the measure on the ground that the Legislature, under the Jones 
Law, has no authority to initiate such a plebiscite bill. The 
Legislature repasses the bill over Wood's veto. It then goes 
to President Coolidge for final decision. 2 ^ 

Wood, already operated twice for hernia on both the left and 
right sides, sails for the United States for medical treatmen^T^ 

'27 Apr. 6 Wood Sustained. President Coolidge upholds Wood's veto of the 

plebiscite measure on the ground that it is untimely, adding 

that with a "yes" or "no" answer- the people will not be able to 

278 

explain their vote, nor can they give any other answer. 

'27 Apr. 7 "Iron" Wood Dies . After serving nearly seven years in Malaca- 

-■■ -nan> -General W oo d expires on -the operating tabic irr- Bcotoi*-- of io* 

27° 

Dr. Harvey Cushing has removed his 17-year-old brain tumor. J 
His Filipino critics can now breathe a sigh of relief. "It is 
with deep regret and sorrow that I heard of the death of Gover- 
nor-General Wood," says Quezon. "I admired in him the courage 
with which he fought for his ideas, and he never resented the 
frankness with which I expressed to him my views when we were 
not in accord. . » n Wood is also described as the "flint 

that produced the sparks" hardening the Filipino national cha- 

racter in the struggle for independence, 
for 

'27 June Off iuxz Shanghai . Feeling indisposed several times, after those 

hectic months of political wrestling within his own Nacionalis- 

ta Party exacerbated by barbed comments from the opposition, 
for 

Quezon sails to Shanghai for a much-needed vacation, Heanwhilej 
another independence mission to the United States is being 
planned, but is severely criticized hy the opposition because 
no accounting has yet been made of previous missions. Neverthe- 
less, contributions to the independence fund keep coming in, 
manifesting undiminished patriotic fervor. 



T 



226/ Agcncillo and Guerrero, op . cit., p. 376. 
222/ Caballero and Concepcion, supra, p. 269. 
.228/ Agoncillo and Guerrero, 0£. cit., p. 376. 

.2.22/ Quirino, op. cit.. , p. 188; and Caballero and Concepcion, op_. cit., p. 272, 
Rivera Collection, Vol. II, p. 779. 

Caballero and Concopcion, pupra . p. 275. • \ 



- 95 



127 July When Cat is Away . • In the absence of Quezon, Osmena is 

elected Senate president protenpore at the opening of the 
regiilap session of the Legislature. The serious business 
of lawmaking is interrupted every now and then by some 
tragi-comic manif estations. Bicolandia's Senator Alegre 
refers to Wood-appointed Senator Jose Alejandrino as a 
"representative of Halacanan." The latter counters by- 
calling Alegre "a bad Spaniard, a Filipino by accident and 
convenience, hence little qualified to give lessons in 
patriotism." Then again the one-tine revolutionary general 
is called "a useless senator of Mongolian features, an 
ignoramus whose salary should be suppressed because he did 
nothing but sit in the Senate as a more decoration." Mean- 
while, in the House, which is presided over by Speaker Ho- 
xas, Tomas Confosor refers to all Wood appointees as 
"representatives of Malacanan" and "of the sovereign po- 
wer," to which Pedro de la Lana, a former newspaperman, 
makes a tart reply, calling the Iloilo solon a "liar" 
and a "rascal." Provoked, Confesor throws at De la Liana 
the "proposed budget for 1927." 

XVII . A SICK MAN FIG HTS Oil 

by 

'27 Oct. 1 Hew Mission . Entirely financed f--. public contributions, 
the fourth (?) independence mission sail3 ^ r tho United 

: States with Quezon and Osmena as joint chairmen. Quezon, 
who is intermittently ill, needs the support of his one- 
time political rival. They arrive in Washington just in 
time to fight reactionary measures, such as the Willis bill 
appropriating $125,000 from the internal revenue tax col- 
lected in the United States on Philippine cigars and tobacco 
far salaries of technical advisers to the Governor-General; 
another bill proposing the appointment of governors for 
the Mohammedan and non-Christian provinces without the 

'consent of the Philippine Senate; .and a third bill imposing 
a duty on Philippine sugar aside from restricting its im- 
portation into the United States. Says Quezon: "Such at- 
tempts are an outrago, since there are already tariff laws 

discriminating against Philippine industries in favor of 

283 

American industries." 



£§2/ Caballero and Concepcion, ££. c.it. t pp. 271-272. 
£§2/ IMA,,..p, 276, 



- 96 _ 



'27 MMJ?antB Stimson. Another purpose of Quezon's trip to 

Washington is to secure the appointment of Col. Henry L. 
Stimson as Wood's successor. 28 ^ 

^ s ^ ful D j^ggff • Advised by Chief Justice Million Howard 
Taft to have himself examined to know what illness is c 
troubling him, Quezon goes to the -New York Institute of 
Health where he learns, to his utter disbelief, that hs is 
suffering from tuberculosis. "No," he exclaims, "not that 
dreadful thing!" But another specialist confirms the first 
medical finding, and he is advised to have "complete rest 
for at least one year if he expects to live." Consequently. 
Quezon enters the Pottenger Sanatorium in Monrovia, Cali- 
fornia. 

1928 Jan. 19 why Stimson? Respite his illness, Quezon continues his 
struggle for the independence cause. I'rom the hospital ho 
wires his aide in Washington, Vicente Bunuan, to try to go I 
a copy of the Stinson testimony in the U.S. Congress fa- 
voring the reactionary bills to which he has previously 
objected. What he likes with Stimson is that the latter 
has never pretended to be in favor of Philippine indepen- 
dence because he is anxious about the fate of the Filipino 
people once they become free and without the protection of 
the United States. Quezon can talk freely to him. "If the 
United States retained tho Philippines under the American 
flag," he tells Stimson, "and taxed our products entering 
the United States while keeping open the Philippine narket 
for American goods, I would start a revolution against the 
United States!" Stimson merely smiles, saying: "I would 
not blame you." 286 

'28 Feb. Family R eunion. Dona Aurora and the Quezon children, 

Maria Aurora (Baby), Zeneida (Mini), and Manuel, Jr. (flb- 
nong) arrive at tho Monrovia sanatorium, and their pre- c <~"'- 
gives the patient great pleasure. 

'28 Apr. Fro m Sickbed. Worried about the possibility that some 

reactionary bills might be "railroaded" in the U.S. 
Congress, Quezon, from his 3ickbed in Monrovia, wires 



28J/ Quezon, o_p_. cj/b . , pp. 140-141. 
285/ 

Caballero and Concepcion, supra , p. 277. 
23J5/ Quezon, <Dp_. ,cit .. pp. 145-146. 

Caballero and Concepcion, o_£. £&t. , p. 280. 



- 97 - 



Bunuan again: "Inquire confidentially of Senator (Burton K,.' 
Wheeler if danger of passing pending measures is great and 
if he thinks my presence in Washington is necessary or if 
memorandum, as you suggest, is Sufficient STOP Although 
dangerous to my health I vail take the risk if necessary 
and go to Washington the first week of May..." 288 

•28 May 4 Spirit Wi lling _Bu t^. . His condition ha3 not improved. 

"I am afraid," he wires Bunuan, "I am not well enough to 
make the trip to Washington. Yesterday I had some tempera- 
ture, and I am writing this in case there is something I 
could do through the mail..." 2S ^ 

No Feac e_ of _Mind. Informed that nightly meetings are 
being held in the U.S. Congress to dispose of pending mea- 
sures, Quezon finally makes the long trip by train on the 
Santa Fe Chief . But during the trip, he succumbs to phy- 
sical exhaustion. On May 17th, ho wires Bunuan from Kansas 
City: "Am too weak to continue the trip to Washington." 
Tempora ry V igjgry. Because of Quezon's intervention, the 
U.S. Congress decides to put off action on Republican mea- 
sures seeking to curtail certain powers already enjoyed 
by the Filipinos. The sick man regains his peace of mind. ? ' 50 

' 28 Spiritual Desolation. With plenty of time on his hands, 

Quezon, a Freemason, reads all sorts of books during his 

long confinement: history, politics, economics,, biographies. 

and even detective stories. Then he comes across a 36-pa^' 

book - - or pamphlet - written by an American mystic, Annie 

Fellows Johnston. He reads it over and over again, getting 

more interested with each reading. At last he realizes 

something missing in him - something that makes his life, 

despite his fame, power and pelf, spiritually desolate. 

This something is his "lack of faith in the supernatural 

life - his lack of religion." As subsequent events show, 

this is the starting point of his return to the faith of 

his forefathers, which will find its culmination about two 
2Q1 

years later. 

'28 June Third Torn . Despite his absence and his continuing ill- 

ness, Quezon is reelected senator of the fifth district 



288/ Ibid , .. 

£§2/ I bjcU , P. 281 . 

£22/ P. 283. 

£21/ Quirino, o_p_. cit . , pp. 192-193. 



- 98 - 



(Tayabas, Batangas, Mindoro, and Marinduquo) for the 
third term. 

'28 Mid-Aug. Welcone_Home! A crowd of about 1500 wolcone Quezon and 
his 'family at the pier. Quezon appears to have recovered 
from his bout with the dreaded disease. 

•28 Aug. 24 Resigns but Stays . His health remaining delicate despii . 

his apparent recovery fron TB, Quezon tenders his resignr. ■ 

tion as president of the Senate, and of the Nacionalista 

Party, but his colleagues turn it down. Senator Camilo 

Osias remarks at a party caucus that "it is never the par'' 

of political wisdom or expediency to change leaders at ■ill J. r 
293 

time." A week later, ' Quezon takes his oath as Sonat" 

president, and delivers a speech keynoting the spirit cf 
cooporation with the new Governor-General (Stimson). Upoi< 
Quezon's initiative, the Legislature enacts the Belo bil] 
appropriating $125,000 (P250,000) for Halacanan technical, 
advisers. Stimson, in turn, revives the Council of State 
which ceased to exist as a result of the Wood Cabinet cri- 
sis of 1923. 294 

Triumph of Conscience . Showing every evidence that ho 
on the threshold of a now life, Quezon begins his tern ir 
the Senate with a fresh outlook on his career in the pub- 
lic service. "I am not wedded to the Presidency of the 
Senate," he declares with conviction, "or to the loadersh:'- 
of the Nacionalista Party. I can live and be happy wither' 
either position or both. But I cannot part with my cons- 
cience and cannot therefore live and be happy with a 
troubled conscience for having been recreant to my dutios,- 
or for having lost my self-respect. The loss of self-res- 
pect or peace of mind is too heavy a penalty to pay for 

295 

political power or riches." 

1929 Mar. 4 Hoover Swor n In. Herbert Hoover, the U.S. secretary of : 

commerce since 1 921 , is sworn in as the 31 st presidont of 

the United States, succeeding fellow Republican, Calvin 

296 

Coolidgo, who did not choose to run. One of h. J .o 

first official acts is tho recall of Stimson from the 



292/ Gwekoh, op_. cit., p. 92. 

222/ Ibid . 

29j/ Caballero and Concepcion, op., cit .. p. 287. 

£25/ Ibid. f p. 298. 

236/ Gavian and Hanm, on., cit., pp. 657-668. 



99 



Philippines to become the new secretary of state. Dwight F, 
Davis, the outgoing secretary of war, is namod to succeed 
Stimson as Governor-General of the Philippines. 

July 18 Davis' Arrival. Davis arrives in Manila and begins his 
brief stay in the Philippines marked by "close, cordial 
and constructive cooperation" with the Filipino leaders . 
Quezon, of course, is away from the Philippines most of the 
time because of poor health. "All that I can say of Gover- 
nor Davis," the Senate President says, "is that ho was a 
gentleman personified and well-liked by the Filipinos." 297 

Special Mission. A special mission headed by Speaker 

Roxas is sent to the United States because of the introduc- 
tion in the U.S. Congress of the Tinborlako bill limiting 
the tonnage of Philippine sugar entering the United States 
duty-free. The measure is backed by American beet sugar 
and Cuban sugar industries, largedly American-owned, which 
are affected by competition from insular duty-free product!? 

Sept. To Japan. His health still none too good, Quezon turns 

over the party leadership to Senate President Protempore 

Osmena, who has just returned from the Vatican, and/- sails 

299 

to Japan for an indefinite vacation. '■' ~ 

Docto r of L aws . Sometime during the year, Quezon is con- 
ferred the degree of Doctor of Laws, honoris causa f by 
the University of the Philippines. 

Oct. 23 33rd° Mason. Quezon is elected to 33rd degree, the high- 
est honor in masonry, by the Supreme Council of the Scot- 
tish Rite Masons in Washington, D.C. This means that 
the beginnings of "spiritual renascence" which he felt du- 
ring his confinement at the Monrovia sanatorium have not 
yet como into full bloom. 

Oct. 29 Stock Market C rash. With Hoover's election slogans, "Four 
more years of prosperity" and "Two cars in every garage," 
the Hew York stock market reached a peak early in September. 
Shortly af terwards Huropean and American investors ' 
began quietly selling their stocks. On October 23rd prices 



Quezon, j£p_. cit,. . p. 147; also in Caballcro and Concepcion, sp.. c . it ,. . 
p. 290. . 

Quirino, op., cit., p. 195; also in Caballcro and Concepcion, supra,, 
p. 291. 

Caballero and Concepcion, supra , p. 292; also in Gwekoh, S£.» Sll't P» 93. 
Caballero and Concepcion, op., cit . . p. 2-94. 



- 100 _ 



broke, dropping 18 points on the average. The stampede of 
selling begins, reaching its climax on October 29th, with 
stocks slumping 40 points, causing a total loss in stock 
values worth 14 billion dollars. 301 This is the begin- 
ning of the longest depression in United States history. ' 
Dairy, cordage, cottonseed oil, and domestic sugar interest! 
ask the U.S. Congress to linit the entry of duty-free pro- 
ducts from insular territories or abolish altogether all 
tariff concessions. This also narks a turning point in 
American attitude towards Philippine independence. There 
begins a growing agitation in the U.S. Congress for cutting 
the Philippines adrift to justify restrictions on Filipino 
immigrations and on the entry of Philippine products into 
the United States. 302 

'29 Doc. Inde^encojill^ Sen. William H. King, one of Quezon's 

^ steadfast friends in the U.S. Senate, reintroduces his bill 
providing for Philippine independence after the holding of 
a constitutional convention. 303 

1930 Feb. 22-26 Indejen dence^ongre ss . Timed with the independence agita- 
tion , . " 

in Washington, the First Independence Congress is held at 

Ha&la Grand Opera House. The first plenary session is pre- 
sided over by Felipe Agoncillo, former secretary of the 
interior; the second, by Rafael Palna, president of the 
University of the Philippines. The Congress has boon or- 
ganized by Dean Maximo Kalaw, former Quezon secretary in 
Washington, D.C., when the latter was the resident commis- 
sioner. The Congress, says Kalaw, is "an expression of our 
solidarity, an assembly not for the glorification of any 
set of loaders but for the common understanding of all 
leaders, not for partisanship but for common leadership, 
not for distrust but for tolerance." Quezon, who is ill, 

cannot attend the Congress. However, he sends a message of 
304 

support. J ^ 

'30 Apr. Sen. Samuel M. Shortridge of California introduces an 

amendment to the tariff bill limiting for five years Fi- 
lipino immigration to students, visitors, businessmen and 
government officials, making the arrangement permanent af tor 



201/ Gavian and Hamm, op., cit., p. 670. 
222/ Quirino, op. cijb . , pp. 200-202. 

222/ Caballero and Concepcion, supra, p. 292; also in Quirino, op. cit. 
p. 201 . 

224/ Kalaw, Aide-de-Cn.np f op., cit., p. 231. 



101 



the grant of independence. However, the majority of the 
Americans believe that as long as the Philippines is a colo- 
ny, the U.S. government cannot impose unfair restrictions 

<^on Filipinos. The alternative is to set the Philippines 
305 

free. The Shortridge proposal is defeated. 

XVIII. IHDEPEHDI3NCE IS SO NEAR 



30 Auspicious Start. Both Senate and House insular affairs 

coonmittees start public hearings on the various Philippine 
bills filed in the U.S. Congress. Quezon wants to attend 
these hearings to present the Philippine side. However, a 
special mission headed by Speaker Roxas has earlier left 
for Washington. 

30 May 30 World Congress. Indicating that they, too, are abreast of 
what is happening in their homeland, representatives of Fi- 
lipino groups in Paris and in other foreign countries ga- 
ther in the French capital and adopt a resolution urging 
the people and government of the United States to "grant 
the Philippines immediate, complete, and absolute indepen- 
dence." The resolution is attested to by Gregorio Y. Zara, 
secretary of the First Philippine Independence World 
Congress in Paris. 

30 June 2 Hawes -Put ting Bill. The Senate Committee on Territories 
and Insular Possessions reports out the bill introduced by 
Senator^Harry B. Hawes of Missouri and Bronson M. Cutting 
of Hew Mexico providing for the drafting of a constitution 
for the Philippines, its ratification and the establishment 
of an autonomous government for a period of five years, 
and the granting of independence after an affirmative ple- 
biscite. But no action is taken by Congress until the end 
of the year. 507 

30 Aug. Quezon to U.S . Feeling well enough to make the trip, Que- 

zon sails to the United States to join the Roxas mission 
in Washington. Upon his arrival in California he first 
checks in at the Pottenger sanatorium for medical exaraina- 
'tion. In September the doctors find "a low-grade activity 



205/ Quirino, op_. cit., pp. 201-203. 

206/ Kalaw, Aide-de-camp . . supra . pp. 231-232. 

202/ Quirino, op., cit .. pp. 204-205. 



I 



102 - 



in the upper portion of the left lung; but the serious le- 
sion... is the one on the right side." Their finding is 

that Quezon is definitely suffering from "chronic fibrous 

508 

tuberculosis with some recent softening." 

150 Aug. 18 Eve of 58th. Quezon is en route to the United States 

aboard an ocean liner, with his wife, Dona Aurora, and a 
maid or nurse, when the idea of addressing a letter to his 
friend, Host Rev. Michael J. O'Doherty, archbishop of Ma- 
nila, occurs to him. It is the eve of his 52nd birthday, 
and ho feel3 it's time ho bared something very important 
that has been going on in the deepest recesses of his 
mind and soul since the first half of 1 928 while confined 
at the Monrovia sanatorium. Writing in Spanish, he tells 
the Catholic prelate that it has been 25 years since he 
left the Church and became a member of Masonry. "I must 
confess," he says, "that during all this long period of 
my life, I had practically forgotten my God, if not com- 
pletely ceased to believe in Him, , although Ke, in His in- 
finite goodness and mercy, continued to heap blessings 
upon me." 

Then came the day when he felt "a complete desolation 
in spite of the material goods which I enjoyed... (be- 
cause of) my lack of religion... In such a frame of mind, 
I asked certain ministers of the Catholic Church to help 
me in regaining the Faith which I had professed by virtiio 
of my baptism... I am now therefore prepared to reenter 
my old Church and I fervently desire to bo readmitted 
therein. 1 want to be a Catholic again..." 

Quezon adds that he is abandoning Masonry and, there- 
fore, requests the Manila archbishop "to lift the eccle- 
siastical censure which I have incurred, in order that I 
may enjoy the spiritual benefits of the Catholic Faith." 
Signed by Quezon, the letter is attested to by Mrs. Quezon 
and one Carmen Pena, probably a member of the Quezon 

509 

household. It is dated "Meridian Day, August 18, 1930."^ 

'30 Bucks M. Appointment. While undergoing a thorough phy- 

sical examination in the Pottenger sanatorium, Quezon is 
informed of the appointment of Nicholas Roosevelt, cousin 
of President Theodore Roosevelt and special correspondent 



Quirino, op_. cit .. p. 208, quoting a family correspondence in Box 
No. 10, Quezon Papers, TNI. 
222/ .Quezonian Review, Vol. I, No. 9, August 30, 1947, pp. 55-38. Rivera 
Collection, Vol. II, pp. 851-855. 



- 103 - 



of tho New York Tinea , as vice-governor of the Philippines. 
From his hospital suito he addresses a letter to President 
Hoover, through the Secretary of War, strongly protesting 
the Roosevelt appointment. He bewails how "humiliating it 
will he for the Filipino people to have as head of their 
Department of Public Instruction one who has branded then 
as dishonest and deceitful, and how extremely embarrassing 
it will be for the Fii ipinos in pubUc 1±f Q to ^ Qff 

ly and socially with one who has written of them with con- 
tempt." In Manila, a mammoth parade is held featu- 
ring the burning of Roosevelt's offending book at the foot 
of the Bonifacio monument in Balintawak. 311 Consequent- 
ly, Roosevelt's appointment is withdrawn. In Congress se- 
veral bills restricting or prohibiting Filipino immigra- 
tion are disapproved largely because of Quezon's protest. 312 
•30 Nov.. IWratsJin. After a decade in limbo, the Democrats 
finally win control of tho U.S. House of Representatives, 
and breaks even in the Senate. 313 This is a good sign 
for the Philippine cause. 

' 3 ° RolaEse. = Late in the year, Quezon is on his way back to 

tho Philippines when he suffers a relapse from long and 
strenuous congressional hearings, forcing him to return to 
the Monrovia sanatorium. 314 

1931 Jan.-Apr. Worn. Quezon spends four long months, January to April, 
in the hospital. Fortunately, his wife, Dona Aurora, is with 
him, doing the house-keeping in a rented apartment at 193 
East Hillcrost in the dreary town of Monrovia. To ease the 
boredom of medical treatment and convalescence, Quezon 
leases a suite of rooms in a nearby hotel for his friends 
whom he has invited to play bridge with him. 31 5 About 
this tine, Sen. Harry Hawos, co-author of an independence 
bill, and Secretary of War Hurley have visited the Philip- 
pines, one after the other, to look into local conditions 
to reinforce their arguments, for or against the grant of 



212/ Caballero and Concepcion, cp_. cit. . , pp. 295-296. 

Kalaw, Aide-do-Camp, op. cit., p. 233. The book is entitled The Phi- 
^ ippines j_JLI rea3ure and a Problen . New York: J. H. Saer and Co.. 
Inc., 1926. ~ ' 

^ K alaw, Aide-do-Cnop r supra. .p. 235. 

212/ Zaido, History., .op., cit., Vol. II, p. 310. 

214/ Kalaw, Aide-de-C*m Pr supra , pp. 233-234. 

315/ Quirino, op_. ^it . , p. 209. , 



- 104 - 

31 6 

independence. 



XIX. O N THR ESHOLD OF INDEPENDENCE 

Oct. 22 Throe Formulas . Quezon returns to the Philippines with three 

concrete independence formulas for consideration by the Legisla- 
ture. He is optimistic that one of these formulas may bo adopted 
by the U*S. Congress if properly presented and supported by a 
Filipino delegation that should bo in Washington when the next 
Congress opens its sessions. He suggests that the Filipino mis- 
sioners this -time should try to submit their own proposals to 
the Congress instead of merely recommending those bills already 
introduced which approximate the desires of the Filipino people. 

Nov. 7 Either Or . The formulas presented by Quezon in his report are 
as follows: 

1 . Immediate establishment of an independent government with 
free trade for ten years; limited Filipino immigration; sugar 
exports pegged at one million tons, and coconut oil at current 
figure; or 

2. Immediate establishment of an autonomous government with 
all consequent powers, and with certain restrictions to safeguard 
the interests of American sovereignty. During the transition pe- 
riod of ten years, economic relations between the two countries 
will remain as in No. 1 . At the end of ten years, a plebiscite 
will be held to determine if Filipinos want complete independence 
or prefer to continue with the present form of government; or 

3. If neither of these two formulas is acceptable to the 

U.S. Congress, the Filipinos will accept any law granting inde-- 

31 7 

pendence under any circumstances. 

React ion. The three Quezon formulas meet with sharp criticic;:. 1 . 

from opposition quarters. Senator Sumulong declares that the for- 
mulas can be reduced to only one thing - autonomy. "It is a sign 
of disillusion," he says. "It proves that the campaign for inde- 
pendence should be taken away from politicians." Even the friend- 
ly Anti-Imperialist League in America lambasife the proposals for 
being a renunciation of the Philippines' traditional demand for 
immediate, complete and absolute independence. Consequently, the 
impression created in America, thanks to the pro-imperialist 



Caballero and Concepcion, op_. cj,t , . , pp. 298-299. 

Quirino, op. cit., p. 212; also in Kalaw, Aide-de-gamp. ojj. £iLu> 



_ 105 - 



press, is that the Filipinos are asking postponement of indepoa- 
denco . 

'31 Ind^ndgnce _in_Sight . With prophetic vision, Quezon, convince- 

that independence is so near and inevitable, then tenders his 
resignation a3 president of both the Senate and the Nacionalist . 
Party. Insofar as he is concerned, his ta3k his done. "My reaso:. ; 
says Quezon- in justifying his resignation, "is the absolute con - 
viction, arrived at after nature reflection, that I can now re- 
tire, with the tranquil conscience of one who has done what he 
could in the service of his country, to take the modest position 
of an ordinary Senator. . . Independence has never been so near. . . 
The solution of. the Filipino problem is so near at hand, a man 
of greater physical energies than I should direct it." ^ 1 9 

Quezo n Jjjg agjlo^ Quezon concludes his letter of resignation as ■ 
follows: "I confess that the circumstances under which I leave 
my office fill me with satisfaction and pride because our people 
have not withdrawn their confidence in mo. History offers but 
fow examples where a political chief voluntarily retired; and 
few occasions when one did not desire power for the sake of power 
itself but because of the service he could render. I want to giv, 
such an example to our people, because one of the dangers of 
democra cy is the love for power and the desire to preserve it 
in all its forms." (italics supplied.) 

Of dourse, Quezon's resignation is not accepted. However, 
he is given all the tine ho needs to rest and get well. 521 

'31 Nov. 7 For ewarning. Quezon sends a long cable to the two Filipino 

resident commissioners in Washington informing them that another 

independence mission is going to the United St tes to support tho 

bill providing for a definite date of the granting of independenc 

or a plebiscite in which the Filipino people will decide whether 

or not they prefer complete independence. Otherwise, Quezon warns 

then, the mission will be compelled to "support any independence 

bill however injurious to our economic life if it is the only 

322 

way of socuring a settlement of the Philippine question." 
'31 Nov. 8 12 l bs. Lost . Three noted physicians - Homer B. Whitney, 

213/ Kalaw, Aide-de-Camp. on. cit .. p. 237. 

112/ Ibid., pp. 235-236. 

120/ Ibid. 

221/ I&d., p. 236. 

122/ Pacis, op., cit., Vol. I, pp. 366-367, quoting a copy of the cable filed in 
the Bureau of Insular Affairs Papers, Archives, Washington, B.C. 



_ 106 



Andreas B. Trepp, and Antonio G. Sison - after a joint consulta- 
tion on Quezon's condition, conclude that while the leader's 
pulmonary lesion is without any distinct evidence of activity, 
yet his general health is impaired. "When he left Manila (for 
the United States) several months ago, he weighed 130 pounds. 
Today he weighs 118, having lost 12 pounds." They also recommend 

that Quezon be "relieved of his work," so that he can have 
323 

complete rest. y 



XX. OSROX MISSION 



'31 Dec. 5 0g£°g_^j:ggi_ o n Off. As recommended in the Quezon- report, .the 
9th Independence Mission jointly headed by Senate Protemporo 
Sergio Osmena and Speaker Roxas 3ails for the United States on 
the S.S. Presidont Coolidgft. The resolution sending the mission, 
the shortest ever, only provides that it should work for the 
early grant of independence, and that it should act with entire 
freedom to get the best out of any situation that may arise. 

'31 Dec. 7 Plethor a of_gills ^ The U.S. Congress opens with seven bills 
and resolutions on the Philippine question filed in the House, 
and five in the Senate. But because of the multiplicity of bills 
on the same subject, the Osrox mission decides to support only 
the Hawes-Cutting bill, capitalizing on the publicity already 
gained in previous sessions of Congress. A new bill will mean a 
new delay. J 

1932 Jan. 2 A rriva l_anj._Denial 4 The Osrox mission arrives in the American 
capital, and immediately checks in at the plush Willard Hotel, 
Osmena' s first act is to deny persistent rumors that the Fili- 
pinos have changed their stand from immediate and complete indo- 
pendence to autonomy. The rumors are subsequently found to be 

based on a wrong interpretation of the Quezon report to the Le- 
gislature cabled from the Philippines by traditional enemies of 
independence. For even Senator Hawes himself admits that Quezon's 
formulas are "a reaffirmation of my (Hawes) independence ideals^^ 



323/ Medical statement published in the Manila Tribune . November 10, 1 931 • 
Rivera Collection, Vol, II, p. 847. 

324/ Pacis, supra, p. 368. 

223/ Quirino, .oja. ci_b . , p. 222; also in Kalaw, Aide-de-Camp . op. cit .. p. 240. 

326/ Pacis, supra , p. 377. 

322/ Kalaw, Aide-de-Carnp . ££. cit., p. 237. 



- 107 - 



1 32 Jan. 23 First Appearance. Appearing before tho House Committee on In- 
sular Affairs, Osmena positively declares that the Filipinos hav . 
not abandoned their original demand for immediate and complete; 

independence. Roxas also testifies in the Senate and House Com.-- 
^528 

nittees. 

132 Two -Philip pine Bills^ The Hawes-Cutting bill as originally in • 

troduced and reported out by the Senate Committee on Territori ; 
and Insular Possessions provides for a) drafting of a constitute \i, 
b) its ratification, c) establishment of a more autonomous govern- 
ment, d) transition period of five years, and o) withdrawal of 
American sovereignty following an affirmative plebiscite. Re- 
introduced after the arrival of the Osrox mission, the Senate com- 
mittee adopts several amendments, to wit: a) transition period 
extended to 15 years; b) restriction on Philippine imports tight- 
ened; c) gradual application of the U.S. tariff inserted; and 
dj number of Filipino immigrants limited to 100 persons a year. ' 

The Hare bill sponsored by Rep. Butler Hare, chairman of th? 
House Committee on Insular Affairs, provides for a) transitory, 
period of oi^ht years; b) reduction of the immigration quota to 

50 annually; and c) dropping of the application of U.S. tariff 

331 

during the eight-year period. 

'32 Feb. 24 H- C Repor tedj3ut. The Hawes-Cutting bill, as amended, is 

favorably reported back to the Senate by tho House "despite the 
continued dilatory tactics of its Republican committee chairman,"^ 
(Hare). 

'32 Apr. 4 H are B ill Also Okayed. Speaker John Nancy Garner, after tho 
Democratic victory in the recent election roaulting in' the De- 
mocratic control of tho House, rushes approval of the Hare bill 
' by suspending the House rules and limiting the debate to 40 mi- 
nutes. Result: 306 vote yes, 47 no, and 79 abstain. When tho 
Hare bill reaches the Senate, the committee reports it back by 
insisting on the provision of tho Hawes-Cutting bill. Further 
consideration of the measure is suspended to enable both par- 
ties to prepare for the presidential election of November (1932). 

'32 June Come Homo. After the U.S. Congress ha3 adjourned for the pre- 

sidential election, Quezon wires the Osrox mission to como homo 



228/ Pacis, op., cit., Vol. I, p. 383. 

'222/ Quirino, cit., pp. 204-205. 

12Q/ Ibid., p. 222. 

221/ Ibi&., p. 223. 



1 



- 108 - 



so that the bills can be discussed by party leaders. But the mis 
sion cables back: "We consider it our duty to remain here: any 
other course, we are convinced, will bo misunderstood in America 
and will set back our campaign. 0 ur friQ nds in Congress have bee 
giving personal interest to our fight, placing their prestige at 
stake, and our departure at this time may be construed by thorn 
as running away from the fight and leaving them alone with burdc: 
But it seems that the reason why Osmena, in particular, pre- 
fers to stick it out in Washington is the belief that "whoever 
secured an independence bill would become the political darling 
of the Filipinos." 

XXI. OSROXJWTIVATIOIT 

I July Counterjeasuro. Because of the mission's refusal to return to 

the Philippines for consultation with party leaders, a joint com- 
mittee of the Legislature refuses to express confidence in the 
Osrox mission nor authorize it to remain in Washington. Conse- 
quently, funds for the mission's expenses are curtailed, and only 
the per dioms of Osmena and Roxas are allowed. 333 

^igSliJIjections. Quezon, in particular, objects to the pro- 
visions of the HHC bill regarding military and naval bases, the 
economic restrictions, and the powers granted the American High 
Commissioner. He wants the Osrox mission to withdraw its support 
of the bill or have certain provisions changed. 334 

Nov. the grant of independence to the Philippines 

included in the Democratic Party platform, presidential candidate 
Franklin D. Roosevelt, the popular and progressive governor of 
New York, carries 42 states and receives seven million more po- 
pular votes than re-electionist Herbert Hoover. Both houses of 
Congress go Democratic by a large majority. In addition, the 
Democrats win 29 out^of 34 gubernatorial seats at stake in the 
national election. 33 - i 

Aq uino_to_W ^S_. I n view of the Democratic Party victory, Quosori 
decides to send his lieutenant, Bonigno Aquino, Senate majority 
floor loader, to Washington with instruction to work for the ap- 
proval of the King bill granting immediate independence and, if 
that fails, to accept any alternative bill providing for a 



Quirino, .op.. pp , 224-225, quoting Lichauco, "Roxas," p. 85. 

Ibid., p. 224. 

Ka *aw, Aide-de-C*n ?r x>p. . Q it.. p. 241. 
Gavian and Hamm, cit . , pp. 676-677. 



- 109 - 



transition period of not more than ten years, limited power of 
the U.S. President to intervene in Philippine affairs, and a 
sugar quota of not less than 1 ,200,000 long tons. Quezon, however 
modifies his instruction after the Long anenduent cutting the ■ 
sugar quota to 585,000 tons and further tightening the immigra- 
tion restriction. He cables the Osrox mission to work for imme- 
diate independence or, if not possible, "let there be no bill" 
at all. 356 

'52 Dec « 8 " 17 H = CA pproved . After nine days of intermittent debate, the Itas- 
Cutting bill is approved by the Senate without a record vote. 537 
A conference committee immediately takes over the Hawes-Cutting 
and Hare bills and merges the two into a single measure, the 
Hare-Hawes-Cutting bill. The new legislation provides for the 
a) framing of a Philippine Constitution; b) establishment of an 
interim government for the next 10 years, headed by an elective 
President; c) an American High Commissioner to represent the U.S. 
president in Manila; d) quotas for the principal Philippine ox- 
ports to America; e) retention by the U.S. of "land or other pro- 
perty as heretofore boon designated by the President of the United 
States for military and other reservations." The Hare-Hawes-Cut- 
ting bill is promptly approved by Congress and forwarded to the 
White House. ^ 8 

52 Dec. j£Bl B2.^rnabgut . Within 24 hoi s after his arrival in Washington 

Aquino, instead of convincing Osmena and Roxas to adopt the Quezon 
position, is convinced by the latter that the IfflC is the "best 
bill possible." Accordingly, Aquino cables Quezon urging him to 
accept the bill, but tho latter wires back, "acceptable legisla- 
tion - or nothing." ^ 

— — SlS^yy^iS* ¥ith these nGW developments, the stage is set for 

a full-fledgod public discussion of tho merits and demerits of 
the HHC bill. Dean Jorge Bocobo, of the U.P. College of Law, calls 
a public meeting against the bill, insisting on the traditional 
nationalist demand for immediate, complete and absolute indepen- 
dence. Dean Maximo M. Kalaw, of the U.P. College of Liberal Arts, 
boldly como3 out for the acceptance of the bill. Pretty s.oon tho 
two stage a debate on the subject before the student body of the 



32 



y Quirino, op., cit., p. 226. 

2/ Pacis, op_. ci_t v Vol. II, p. 11 

§/ Ibid., pp. 11-12. 

2/ Quirino, .- supra , p. 232. 



110 



state university. 

'32 Osrox to MLQ . Perhaps foreseeing a presidential veto of the 

HHC bill, the Osrox mission renews its invitation to Quezon to 

cone to Washington, but the latter merely cables back some 
341 

suggestions. 

1 933 Jan « 15 Ho over Vet o. President Hoover finally vetoes the HHC bill, dec- 
laring that the proposed law "puts both our people and the Fili- 
pino people not on the road to liberty and safety, which we de- 
sire, but on the path leading to new and enlarged dangers to li- 
berty and freedom itself." ^ 2 

Osmena' s °-Z ££zgggg™gg|± Shortly after the Hoover veto, a group 
of senators and congressman sees Osnena and Roxas in the Willard 
Hotel to reassure them that they can muster enough votes to over- 
ride the veto. At this juncture, Roxas suggests that the Osrox 
mission wait for Quezon to come to Washington before having the 
bill passed. "No!" shouts Osmena, blushing and trembling with 
rage, "It cannot be done! The independence of the Philippines can-r 
not wait, happen what nay!" A biographer says "Osmena was so ob- 
sessed for Philippine freedom and independence that he could not 
conceive of any valid reason for delaying its attainment." ^ 
Before leaving, the American solons tell Osmena and Roxas that 
' they have 24 hours to nake up their mind3. ^ 

'33 Jan. 16 O srox Go Signal . Osmena and Roxas send a joint letter to Sen. 

Key Pittman, head of the American group, saying that the HHC bill- 
is satisfactory to them, and that it is their earnest desire that 
it receive final approval. ^ 

'33 Jan. 17 Congrejs^Ovorrides Ve to. The HHC bill finally becomes a law, tho 

House voting 274 to 94 to override the presidential veto, the 

Senate concurring with the House by a voto of 66 to '26. Tho 

HHC Act sets January 17, 1934, as deadline for tho acceptance by 

347 

the Philippines of the new law. 



219/ Kalaw, Aide-do-Camn . ojd. cit., p. 243. 

MJ Ibid . 

242/ Pacis, op., cit., Vol. II, p. 12. 

242/ ibid., p. 13. 

244/ Ibid. 

Ibid., PP. 13-14. 

216/ Quirino, o£. c£fc., pp. 236-238. 

242/ Pacis, op., cit., Vol. II, p. 78. 



- Ill - 



'33 



'33 Perhaps imagining that he, Osmena, as senior 

chairman of the Osrox mission, will be received in triumph upon 
his return, just like Quezon when he came back in 1916 with the 
Jones Act, the mission prepares to go home. Their work in Wash- 
ington is finished. 548 Osmena is speciallyT^tc, return be- 
cause his wife is ill. ^49 

'33 iMHSLJ^inila. ^e Osrox mission, of course, is mistaken. 

Quezon expresses serious doubt whether the mission's acceptance 
of the HHC bill has been wise, adding that it has not been em- 
powered to do so. In fact, he says, the mission has not obeyed 
its instructions from I-ianila. 350 Because of this new twist, 
acceptance of the HHC Act by the Legislature is quite uncertain. 
The opposition Partido Democrata is dissolved because it cannot 
agree on a common stand on the new independence law. 551 

XXII^ = EVE__OP BIG__PIGKT 

^1123=12^1^ Declaring that the independence provided in the 

HHC Act is fictitious, and that the law will lead to the economic 
strangulation of the Philippines, leaving no choice but to ask 
the United States to stay permanently in the country, Quezon an- 
nounces that he himself will go to Washington to secure a better- 
independence law. ^ 2 

g££gg-5g.g gg £gm ake r . At this point Alejandro Roces, owner of the 
influential TVT newspapers ( Tribune , Vanguardia and Taliba ), stops 
into the picture in order to avoid a second rift between Quezon 
and Osmena, both of whom are his good friends. With the help of 
Osmena' s private secretary, Eduardo do la Rosa, who is left behind 
in Manila, Roces tries, by cable, to reconcile the conflicting 
views of Osmena and Quezon, he asks the two leaders to each make 
a sacrifice in order to reach a common ground of understanding. 
Upon Roces' prodding, Quezon gives the assurance that if the Osro^- 
mission convinces him that no better legislation can be secured, 
and that under the IfflC Act the liberty and welfare of the Filipino 
people are amply protected and assured, he will not hesitate to 
support it. In view of this commitment, Roces in turn asks the 



34u/ Kalaw, Aide-de-Camp . op., cit . , p. 243. 

349/ Pacis, op., cit., Vol. II, p. . 

350/ Kalaw, supra , p. 243. 

351/ Ibj£. 

352/ p< ?Mt 



ID - 82 

- 112 - 

Osrox mission to come out with a statement to the effect that 
if its members can be convinced that a better independence law 
can be secured, they will prefer it to the present HHC law. 553 

153 522£2_t2 = 2£52S5 • s °ces, through de la Rosa, cables Osmena to 

wait for Quezon until April 15, adding that Quezon plans to 
"bring his family to Europe so as to have reason to remain there 
for more than a year after having had a conference with you ( Os- 
mena), and so that you would have a free hand in having the bill 
(HHC Act) accepted and implemented here (in the Philippines) with- 
out his intervention. I therofore request you again to wait for 
his arrival so as not to endanger the understanding previously 
made with him. Quezon will sail on March 18 via Europe to arrive 
in Washington about the end of April." 

'33 Mar. 18 !i^f£°?L ~-*'.-- 0 Sur °P e ' Quezon and the members of his mission larva 

~ ~ "SEC 

on the Italian liner S.S. Cpnte Verde for Europe. Carlos P. 

Romulo, editor-in-chief of the TVT newspapers, is included in 

. . 356 
the mission. 

Roces Suggestion. After Quezon's departure, Roces cables Osmoi.a 
to suggest that "you alone meet him in Cherbourg (France). I foar 
if Roxas is present at the first conference all might be lost be- 
cause there exists a rivalry between thorn. I have faith in your 
ability to avoid this difficulty. Quezon has fine feelings toward 
you and on this I base my optimism." On April 2, Osmona cablcn 

Roces that he is leaving for Europe the following Friday as per 
357 

his suggestion. 

'33 Apr. 17 Quezon, Osmona to US. After their closod-door meeting in Paris, 
Quezon and Osmena leave for New York. They propose to continue 
their conversations on the way across the Atlantic hoping to 
' effect a compromise plan which they will present to President 
Roosevelt for approval. They arrive in- New York on April 23. 

The Quezon and Osrox missions then move to Washington. 

h , 
Quezon in Wasington. The highlights of Quezon's brief ^ three or 

four days) stay in the American capital include 1 ) a courtesy 

call on the U. fc>. Secretary of War, 2) a luncheon in the office 

of Senator Pittman, who has now become the U.S. Senate president 

proteraporo; and 3) a luncheon in the -hite House. At the Pittman 



353/ Pacis, op_. ext., Vol. II, p. 19. 

354/ Ibid. . p. 24. 

355/ Ibid. 

356/ Kalaw, Aide-de-Camp . op. cit., p. 244. 

357/ Pacis, supra, p. 25. 

358/ Pacis, op., cit., Vol. II, p. 27. 



- 113 - 

luncheon, Quezon, being the guest of honor, presents his object- 
ions to the HHC Act. Senator Robinson, the Senate majority floor 
leader, fires "a series of fast questions in the manner of a pro- 
secuting attorney," and Quezon naturally feels irritated by Ro- 
binson's questioning. Continues an Osmena biographer: "At this • 
point, Quezon pushed back his chair. He said that he did not know 
that he was on trial. He begged to be excused, rose, and with gr^t 
dignity, thanked his host, bade goodbye, and walked out." 359 
After the White House luncheon, Quezon, Osmena, and the new mis- 
sion leave for New York, thence to Europe and Manila. 

■33 June 11 TwoJiplo naLA^iva l. The Quezon and Osrox missions arrive to 
find the Nacionalista Party split, rather "lopsidedly, " with the 
"Antis" (those opposed to the MIC Act) outnumbering the "Pros" 
(in favor of the law). As per Quezon's announcement in Hongkong 
en route to ^anila, no compromise between the two missions has 
been reached. 



'33 



'33 



XXIII. HHC "PROS" VS. "AFT IS" 

gattlg_is_On. The fuuc is lighted when Quezon calls the "Proc" 

imprudent, adding that no understanding is possible with them 
because of their rash or indiscreet behavior. The "Antis" then 
proceed to divide the country into seven regions, each under 
responsible leaders. The "Pros," in turn, organise their own com- 
mittees under the direction of Sen. Aquino. 361 

— S^i^ Judge s^ased^Out. The goernment revamp in the name of eco- 

nomy under Act Ho. 4006 or the Government Reorganization Law of 
1932 turns out to be a purge of public officials identified with 
the "Pros." Aside from eliminating many government positions, 
court judges are required to resign on pain of losing their joba 
unless reappointed. Consequently, many pro-Osrox judges fail to 
get back their jobs. U.P. President Palma himself is maneuvered 
into resigning after his salary and the appropriations for the 
state university have been drastically reduced. 

1933 July 19 Quezon Resigns. At this point, Osmena makes the fatal mistake 

of challenging Quezon to resign so that "the people could decide 
on the issue free from official pressure." Quezon accepts the 



22/ Ibid., p. 35. 
~M>J Ibid., pp. 4Q-49. 

Toodoro M. Kalaw, Aide-de-Cai.ro . o£. cit., p. 245. 
'Ml Pacis, op_. cit., Vol. II, pp. 48-49. 



- 114- 



challenge and tenders his resignation, and then follows this up 

with a marathon speech in the Senate lasting three consecutive 

days during which he attacks the Osrox mission, the "Pros," U.P. 

president Rafael Palma, and the entire state university for in- 

363 

dulging m. politics. Of course, Quezon's resignation is unr- 

364 

nimously rejected. 

133 July 20 goxa s_Pa lls. Taking the Quezon resignation as a cue, the House 

swiftly acts and ousts Speaker Roxa3 by simply declaring the of- 
fice of the Speaker vacant, 49 to 29. Rep. Quintin Paredes of Ab-- 
ra, an "Anti" follower, is quickly elected to succeed Roxas. Ano- 
ther "Pro" leader, Majority Floor Leader Pedro isabido is toppled 

365 

and replaced by Jose 2julueta. The Roxas ouster is witnessed 
by a crowd of about 2,000 jampackod in the House gallery. Roxas 
has become extremely popular especially among the youth after re- 
turning from a mission in the United States in ■ . late 1950 arid 
launching his Bagong Katipunan movement designed to promote Phi- 
lippine economic protectionism through patronage of locally made 
366 

goods. But before relinquishing the speakership which he fire 

assumed in 1923, Roxas delivers a well-applauded valedictory end-- 

ing with the famous remarks: "I am happier now because I fell 

367 

from the Speaker's chair into the arms of the people." 
Roxas' critics belf^ve that the power of the Speakership "was 
too early thrust upon a young head." Quezon comments on his for- 
mer protege's sad plight: "Mr. Roxas is a martyr of his own inooiji 

* rt 368 
petence. 

'33 July 25 V entu ra, Too. The reorganisation axe also falls on the neck of 
a lesser but equally important cog in the government machinery 
when Honorio Ventura, secretary of the interior, thrusts his 
lance at the Quezon windmill. Ventura, like many other "Pros," 
is not reappointed after resigning his position under Act No. 
4007. When Ventura, questioning Quezon' 3 integrity, expresses 
surprise at how a former muchacho to the friars during his 
student days could have become "an extremely rich man unless 
he had used his high office to line his pockets with gold," 
the Senate President delivers a three-day speech, containing 



3j>3/ Kalaw, Aide-de-Camp . op . cit . , pp. 245-246. 

'M/ Pacis, supra , p. 49. 

'^m Us2A»t P. 50; Kalaw, supra , p. 246. 

.165/ Kalaw, supra , p. 232. 

M/ Quirino, op., cit .. p. 244; Caballero and Concepcion, op_. cit., P. 319. 

.2.68/ Caballero and Concepcion, sunra . p. 319. 



- 115 - 



a Ions narrative of his life which is published in the major 
newspapers. p J . 

fiueson's Millions? "Where arc ay millions?" asks Quezon, "If 
body has proofs that I have more than I have enumerated let him - j 
it. If Ilr. Ventura wants authority fron me, I shall give it to :.: ' 
absolute and complete, so that ho may find out from every soi-.ro . 
possible if I have a fortune which he claims and which he known 
I do not have. He can go with that authority to all banks and >. .. 
will find that all I have in cash i„ a few thousand pesos, as 
against about ninety/thousand that I owe." 370 

SllLI^l' '•iuozon, of course, has tho last word in tho controver- 
sy. "But I do have socio property," ho admits. "That which I have 
related above, and which I hope will provide for tho education of 
my children. So Mr. V,ntura is right. I w,.s born poor and now I 
have a little property made by my brains and my industry, fir. 7v>~ 
tura was born rich and now ho has practically nothing, as ho oc 
fosses. 

"There you have two mon - one who made himself and the oth:-r 
who wasted his opportunities, tho self -made and tho solf-unnar-c 
man!" 371 

'33 Aug. 2 IS££iiSg = Vic t o . Quezon's victory in tho "Pro--Anti" fight ovai- 

tho MO Act is complete. After a roll call lasting five consocv.viv- 
days, 'iuozon's resignation as Senate President is rejected by h:.i 
colleagues, 16 to 5. But tho resignations of Oroona, Aquino, anc. • 
other "Pros" as chairmen of the various Senate standing oorwittccc 
are promptly accepted. Sen. Jose Clarin, who has no special quali- 
fication other than being a good party follower, is elected to 
succeed Osmona as Senate President protompore. In the state uni- 
versity, Dean Jorge Bocobo, a rabid "Anti," is elected by tho 
board of regents to succeed Palm.a as university president. I3ut 
Quezon's greatest political victory in this "battle of t he giants" 
is Claro M. Recto's shift of party loyalty to the Nacionalista 
Party after tho dissolution of the .Democrata Party as a result 
of internal dissolution over the ETC Act. Recto has been the 
opposition's most brilliant loader after the party breakup. Jl '~ 
Sen. iSlpidio Quirino is also elected majority floor leader. 

33 Aug. 15 =MS=~~~£2i In thG midst of the bitter accusations and countor- 
accusa^Tons In both houses of the Legislature, Carlos P. Romulo, 
who was with the Quezon mission that met Osmena in i'rance, resigns 
his editorship of the Thj^Trj^bime to become the publisher of a 

H/ ," An Al ^obiography,." Th e Trib une. J uly 26, 1933. 

p^ eZ 486 S " Autobi0t,?ra P hy '" Appendix III, in Caballero and Concepcion, p;o,,. pit. , 

ftt/ &id., p. 498. 

f iuirino, op_. cit . , pp. 247-243. 



- 116 _ 



newly organized newspaper syndicate, DMHM Newspapers ( Debate . 
buhay., Herald, and M onday Mail ). The loss of Alejandro Roces, 
whose papers are identified with the "Pros," is the *ain of the 
"Antio." JU 

133 Sept. 15 R^cj tg_B acks_^ezon . Breaking his long silence, Senator Recto como- 
out in favor of the rejection of the JilIC Act. Now Recto is with 
his former adversary (Quezon). 

'33 Sept. 17 Veterans_Agains t_fflIC . The Asociacionde los Veteranos de la Ke vo- 
lucion headed by General Aguinaldo approves a resolution rejecting-; 
the IfflC Act. 

'33 Sept. 20 Plebisc ite ? The HHC Act j>rovides that before its provisions can 
take effect, the Philippine Legislature or a Convention called 
for the purpose must first accept it. The Senate, concurring with 
the House, approves a resolution providing for the holding of r. 
plebiscite. The "Antis" and "Pros" seem to agree on the plebiscite 
except on the kind and number of questions to be asked in it. ' Ama- 
zon proposes that the HHC Act be first amended before the Phili'o*- 
pines accept or reject it. When Osmena takes the floor, accusing 
Quezon, of his many alleged inconsistences, the latter dares C'o- 
mena to present a motion for the acceptance of the Law so that 
the Senate can reject it immediately, thus ending all discus- 
sions. 

'33 Oct. 4 New Mission? Reacting to the suggestion of Sen. Manuel Brione.T , 

a staunch "Pro," that Washington be asked to clarify some contro- 
versial provisions of the IMC Act, Quezon proposes the sending 
of a new independence mission, saying it will be. idle to appro- . 
priate funds for the plebiscite because of irreconcilable dif- 
ferences bctwoony-the "Antis" and "Fros;" whereupon Osmena agrees 

376 

to abandon the plebiscite plan. 

'33 Oct. 10 T o Am end or Replace Law. Quezon formally files a resolution 

providing for tho sending of a now mission to have the HHC Act 
amended or replaced by a better law. However, U.S-. Attorney Gene- 
ral Homer S. Cunnings rules that the provision of the HHC Act 

that it be accepted or rejected on or before tho Jan. 17« 1934 

377 

deadline is mandatory. 
'33 Oct. 12 jggiglature 5 JojgctsJ|C = Act . The Senate £md House approve a con _ 



222/ I-acis, op_. olt .. Vol. II, p. 52. 

214/ Caballero and Concepcion, op_. cit . . p. 329. 

Pacis, supra , p. 55. 
IW Ibid. , p. 57. 
22/ Ibid., p. 58. 



* 

- 117 - 



current resolution stating, among other things, that the Philip- 
pine Legislature "declines to accept the said Law in its present ■ 
form because, in the opinion of the Legislature, the provisions 
of the Law affecting the trade relations between the United and 
the Philippine Islands would seriously imperil the economic, so- 
cial and political institutions of this country and might defeat 
its avowed purpose to secure independence to the Philippine Islands 
at the end of the transition period; because the immigration clruie . 
is objectionable and offensive to the Filipino people; because 
the powers of the High Commissioner are too indefinite; and, final- 
ly, because the military, naval and other reservations provided 
for in the said Act are inconsistent with true independence, vio- 
late national dignity, and are subject to misunderstanding." 578 
' r he vote for rejection of the Act is 1 5 to 4 in the Senate, 58 to. 
22 in the House. 379 

2lL:ii|l~~£S~i|~2d* A£ ter the rejection of the HHG Act, tho 

Senate promptly approves the resolution creating a new mission to 

seek a new legislation "that will fully satisfy tho aspirations 

of the Filipino people to become at the earliest practicable time 

a free and independent nation, under conditions and circumstances 

that will not imperil the political, social and economic stability 

of their country." She mission is headed by Senate President Que- 
380 

zon. 

XXIV. QUEZON'S GREATEST. TRIUMPH: 
TYDING3-MCDUFFIE LAW 

'33 Nov. 4 Qu ezon Mission . The 10th and last independence mission sails on 

the S.S. Hoover with Quezon as the chairman. Osraena has doclincd 
to go with the mission. 

'33 Hov. 14 Absolutoly_Freo. Stopping in Japan on route to t he U.S., Quezon 
tells the Pan-Pacific Club in Tokyo that "majority of Filipinos 
neither expect nor desire American military and naval protection 
after independence. . . Military and naval reservations in the 
Islands after independence (are) incompatible with the full and 
complete independence of our country. . . Military and naval 
reservations of tho United States may only cause misunderstanding, 
not only with the Filipinos but also with other nations having 
interests in tho Orient. People aspiring to be free must take 



21/ Ibid., PP. 58-59. 

22/ Ibid., pp. 58-60. 

M/ Ibid.., p. 62. 
221/ pp. 68-69. 



( 



_ 118 _ 



332 

their chances as other peoples have done." 

Indiscreti on? Osmona criticizes Quezon's statement in Tokyo air 

an indiscretion, but Recto, taking up the cudgels for Quezon, 

counters that "circumstances have changed. These are days of open, 
/diplomacy - of open 

/covenants openly arrived at. The charge that Quezon's frankness 

is undiplomatic is antiquated; it should have been made before l'r: 

sident v'J'ilson proclaimed a new diplomatic norm of frankness and 
n 303 

openness. 

Fo r American Co nsumption. Resident C omin i ss i onQ r Camilo Osias, who 

helped the Osrox mission get the KHC Act, issues a lengthy state- 
ment tending to discredit the Quezon mission. "The Filipinos,'' he 
says, "demand that iuezon secure an independence law as good or 
better than the HHC law which he and his henchmen killed." 

'33 Nov. 25 Roxas Promise? ' Still smarting from his "fall from the Speaker's 
chair into the arms of -the people," Roxas, now a plain representa- 
tive from Capiz, makes what may be considered a politician's pro- 
mise. "If Mr. Quezon comes back with any kind of an independence 
law," he says, quite seriously, "I shall march at the head of the 

parade which shall meet him at Pier 7. I shall kiss his hands, and 

385 

I shall pledge him support." 

'33 Nov. 29 Que zon in U .S. The Quezon mission arrives in San Francisco, Cali- 
fornia. One source says unlike the Osrox technique of approach, 
spending a lot of fire on a variety of fronts, the Quezon mission 
decides to concentrate on one target: newly elected Democratic 
President franklin D. Roosevelt. 586 "Unlike the. previous Congrcas," 
says Quezon, "in the new administration there will be a President 
(Roosevelt) and a Congress of the same party (Democratic Party) 
with full control of the executive and legislative branches of 
the government. They don't have to compromise to enact legislation 

but will have the power to pass the measure which will do honor 

387 

to their nation and justice to t he Filipino people." 

'33 Osias As Accuser. Resident c ommissioner Osias, one of the "Pro" 

stalwarts, returns to Manila and immediately becomes a crowd drawer 
in the anti-Quezon campaign. "I like nothing better than to ex- 



'MJ Ibid ., pp. 69-70. 

12/ Caballero and Concopcion, op. cit . , pp. 341-342. 

234/ Ibid., p. 352. 

'S/jJ Ibid., p. 361, quoting a news item appearing in The Tribune, November 25, 1933 

'MJ Ibid., p. 348. 

M/ Exclusive interview with the Sunday Trib une Magazine. January 22, 1933. Ri- 
vera Collection, Vol. II, pp. 970-975. 



r 



'33 



- 119 - 

s 

pose the assasination of the HHC law in Washington, he says 
quite proudly. ^ 88 

155 Doc. 19 Disappointed Man? A "Pro-Independence ifecionalista Parts"" has 

been organized in Manila, according to a dis patch appearing iu 

the New York Herald Tribune . The paper says the new party boli-v.vr.i 

"beyond the shadow of a doubt that Mr. Quezon will- be a vorv c'.i:.~ 

389 

appointed nan and that disappointment will crush him." 

With Tydings , McDuf f ie . After a few weeks in the American c . ; . -.1, 

Tydings invites -Quezon for a friendly chat. Nothing concrete '".;>- 
pens here. In another conference with Congressional leaders, 
eluding Rep. John KcDuffio, a Democrat from Alabama, Quezon pro- 
poses an alternative to the defunct HHC Act, providing for inde- 
pendence to the Philippines in two or three years, followed by 
free trade for ten years except a quota limitation of 1 ,000,000 

long tons of sugar, 200,000 tons of coconut oil, and 6,000,000 

390 

pounds of cordage. 

'33 Dec. 27 Quezon with 1 ! 'DR. Quezon finally goto a chance to meet the new 

Democratic President, who recalls that he first met Quezon when 
he (PDIl) wa3 assistant secretary of the navy during the Wilson 
administration. After Quezon has frankly discussed the purpose 
of his trip to America, Roosevelt asks him t . submit a memoran- 
dum. 591 

Osias Gadfly. Availing himself of his long stay in the U.S. Con 

gross, Osias, the "Pro" gadfly, lines up his friends among the 

American solons to block Quezon's move in 'Washington. He ae erases 

392 

Quezon of having "killed" the independence law. 

1934 Jan. 15 Quezon Memo. 'Aie Quezon mission finally submits a memorandum to 

President Roosevelt recommending the granting of independence 
within two or throe years, or as soon as the necessary constitu- 
tional steps for the establishment of the Philippine Republic 
shall have been taken. The mission also favors a special recipro- 
cal trade arrangement between the United States and the Philip- 

m 393 

pines at the end of ten years of trade relations. 

5-Point Alternative. If the proposal is not acceptablo to the 
administration, the memo offers a five-point alternative 



Caballero and Concepcion, ep_. cit . . p. 350. 
Ibid . . p. 349. 
Quirino, op., cit . . pp. 259-260. 
Caballero and Concepcion, op . cit., pp. 251-252. 
& 2 / Ibid., p. 352. 
t: 212/ Ibid., Appendix IV, pp. 499-500. 



_ 120 

including 

/ 1 ) recognition of the Philippine Republic on July 4, 1940; 
2) immediate establishment of a more autonomous government in 
the Philippines; 3) continuation of present trade relations, al- 
though slightly modified, up to July 4, 1940; 4) calling of an 
American-Philippine trade conference on reciprocal trade rela- 
tions; and 5) neutralization of the Philippines by international 
treaty. 

'54 Jan. 25 T^dings^C orr ec t e d . Quezon corrects Tydings' wrong information 

planted by Osias, that the Philippine Legislature has not ro,j.: «t- 

.ed the ffilC Act. In fact, the legislative rejection was inserted 

in the Congressional Record on January 4th. tydings accepts hie 
395 

error. 

'34 Peb. 1 T ydings M emo. Perhaps to make \ij> for his error, Tydings sends 

Quezon a memorandum marked "absolutely confidential," pending 
certain conditions to be enumerated later. Tydings says that ho 
"will be glad to negotiate an amendment to the present Filipino.. 
Independence bill" eliminating the array and navy clauses, after 
the establishment of independence. 

'34 Feb. 3 Quezo n Rc p.lv. Quezon says he will support the Independence Law 

rejected by the Legislature if "military and naval reservations 
are eliminated or the naval reservation is located where it can** 
not possibly jeopardize the independence of the Philippines, or 
be an obstacle to the neutralization of the Islands." He adds that 
a Congressional committee should go to the Philippines "to in- 
vestigate the situation in order to ascertain if further action 
by Congress is required to right some injustice that may be 
found in the law." 397 

'34 February Quirino Amendments, ^en. Quirino, a member of the Quezon mission, 

suggests that the transfer of sovereignty become automatic and the 

acceptance by the people of the law should be simultaneous with th 
plebiscite on the Constitution. 398 

Portho Record. Neither Osmena nor Roxas, although consulted 

by Tydings on^the Quezon amendments, goes on record as in favor 

of the proposed changes in the Independence L a w. They merely 

ask the extension of time for the acceptance of the HHC Act 

399 

after its rejection by the Legislature. 



~mJ Ibid. 

325/ Ibid., p. 356. 

226/ Ibid. , Appendix V. 

22/ Ibid., Appendix VI. 

238/ Ibid., P. 357. 

222/ Ibid. 



- 121 - 



Invitosjac Arthur. Certain that the Tydings-McDuff ie bill will 

be enacted into law, Quezon sees his friend, Gen. Douglas Mac- 
Arthur, in the latter 'a office in the War Department, and invitee 
him to come to the Philippines, after his stint as U.S. Amy 
chief of staff, to serve as military adviser to the President 
of the Philippines. 400 

Mar. 2 g^s_Recommendaj: ;ions . Roosevelt sends a message to the U.S. Con- 
gress recommending that the provision on military bases "be eli- 
minated from the law and that those bases be relinquished simul- 
taneously with the accomplishment of final Philippine Indepen- ■. 
dence. As to the naval bases, I recommend that the law be so a-, 
mended as to provide for the ultimate settlement of this matter 
on terns satisfactory to our own government and that of the 
Philippine Islands." 401 

Mar. 10 Tvo_in_0ne. Congressman HcDuffie introduces an independence bill 

described as a "word-for-word reproduction of the HHC Act," set- 

+ ^„m°$ er - 1 Jt 1954 as the ''deadline" for its acceptance. It siroviS 
ting/that military bases will be relinquished after the grant of 

independence, and that the President of the United States will 
gotiato concerning the naval bases. A similar bill has been intro- 
duced in the Senate by Sen. Tydings. Since both measures are r.d» 
ministration bills, final action on them is faster. The two mea- 
sures are consolidated under the new name Tydings-McDuff ie bill. 402 

Mar. "-24 ^ dirigs^Ic Duf f ie^Law . Approved in the U.S. House of Representa- 
tives on March 19, and in the Senate four days later, the Tydings- 
McDuff ie bill is signed into law by President Roosevelt in the 
White House in the presence of Quezon and the members of his Mis- 
sion. It becomes law Ho. 127 of the 73rd Congress of the United 
States. Recto describes Quezon's signal accomplishment as 
"the political miracle of the decade." 404 But the Tydings-Mc 
Duffie Law is scur grapes to Osias, saying that it, is the same 
HHC Act "but for a change of some fifty words." 405 

Apr. 12 j=gP jji_jffi c lamat ion . As per Quezon's request in a radiogram from' 
Washington, Governor-General Murphy in Manila issues a proclamation 
calling the Philippine Legislature to a special session on April 



Quezon, op. cit . . pp. 152-155. 

Teodoro M. Kalaw, Aide-de-Canrp . op. cit., p. 251. 
Quirino, on., cit . . pp. 262-263. 

Pacis, o£. cit . , Vol. 2, p. 07; Quirino, on. cit. . p. 263. 

Recto, "The Political Philosophy of M. L. Quezon." Speech delivered at the 
Philippine "Columbian Club, August 19, 1953. In: Quirino, "Appendix," 
fill* i PP- 391-403. 

Gabriel F. Isabella, "Manuel L. Quezon: An Appraisal," PHA Historical Bul- 
letin, Vol. VI, Wo. 3, September 1962. 



_ 122 



50th to accept tho Tydings-McDuf fie Independence Law and "to 
enact such legislation as may be necessary for the calling of a 
Constitutional Convention in case the Legislature should accept 

•a t ii 406 
said Law." 

XXV. SECOND TRIUMPHAL RjJTURN 

134 Apr. 30 Perfect timing, i'or the second time, i-juezon returns to the fhixi]}; 

pines in triumph, reminiscent of his arrival on September 28, 
1916. His arrival now is timed with the opening of a special c:. fu- 
sion of the Legislature called precisely to act on the Tydingc 1 - " 
McDuffie Law that will phase it out of existence. Hailed as "L'.e 
mastermind behind the Jones Law and the maker of a Governor-Gene- 
ral," Quezon at the pier is "carried on tlu; shoulders of men frcn 
the ship to his automobile and thence to a waiting crowd in tre 
Luneta," where he talks "like a returning conqueror." Then he 
proceeds to the Legislative building when.,- ho addresses the joint 
session. But, of course, Roxas is nowhere around to kiss Que- 
zon's hands for coming back with a new independence law. 

154 May 1 l£bor_of_Love. " ho Legislature in joint session unanimously ac- 

cepts tho Tydings-McDuff io Act, the second independence law se- 
cured by Quezon from tho United States in less than two decades 
of unrelenting struggle for his country's freedom. "In this so- 
lomn moment," he says, "let there be no exultation of victory. 
Let it bo a moment of consecration." 408 '■'■'his particular Nay 
First is doubtless the most significant Labor Day in the history 
of the Philippines. Tho Legislature also set3 the stage for the 
election of delegates to the Constitutional Convention on July 
409 

10th. * J 

•34 Juno 5 Election Rout . Coming close on tho heols of Quezon's return witl 

a new independence law, a decisive victory for the "Antis," the 
general election results in almost total rout of the "Pros." Cf 
the 11 Senate seats contested, the "Antis" elect 8 as against 3 
for the "Pros"; of 89 House seats, the former win 68, and the 
latter 19, with 2 seats going to the Sakdalista Party. And of 40 
provincial governors the "Antis" elect *4, and the "Pros," only 
4. 410 Such "Pro" stalwarts as Rupcrto Montinola of Iloilo, Ca- 
milo Osias of La Union, Pedro Guevara of Laguna, and Rafael Palm, 



106/ Pacis, on, cit., Vol. 2, p. 90. 

Ibid . . pp. 90-91 . 
.428/ Ibid., p. SU 

102/ Caballero and Concepcion, 0£. cit . , p. 360. 
iiQ/ Pacis. o-o. cit.. Vol. 2, p. 94. 



- 123 _ 



of Cavito are licked by literally unknown candidates of the "Ant. if 
Only Osmond, Roxas, Sunulong, and Francisco Varona of the "Pros" 
survive the "Anti" juggernaut. 411 
July 10 £2Sr££nJloction. Two hundred and two delegates to the Constitu- 
tional Convention are elected. Their main task: to write the 
Constitution of the Philippines, i.e., for both the Commonwealth 
and the Philippine Republic that will follow after a ten-year trar 
sition period. 412 

July 30 MLQ at Opening. A 

=== Quezon opens the Constitutional Convention under 

the temporary chairmanship of Delegate Jose P. Laurel of Batangas. 

Shortly afterwards, Delegate Claro M, Recto, senator from Batf-nffj.o 

is unanimously elected president of the convention. His joining 

the "Ant is," after the dissolution of the Democrata Party, has 

paid off. He is handpicked by «iuozon over Laurel, who has also 

sought the presidency of the Convention. 415 

Aug. 18 N-D Fusion. Uacionalistas and Democrat as who have successfully 
carried the fight of the "Antis" against the HHC Act, decided to 
fuse under the banner of Nacionalista-Dcmocrata Party with Quoaon 
as president, andParedes, Cuenco and Suraulong as first, second, 
and third vice-presidents, respectively. 414 

Aug. 23 Qf£_toJuro E o^ySA. With his health greatly impaired by his kid- 
ney stone, giving him acute pain, Quezon 3ails on the Dutch stee- 
per Tjibadak bound for Europe via Java. He plans to undergo sur- 
gery at the hands of Dr. Hugh Young, an outstanding urologist, r-.t 
the Johns Hopkins University hospital in Baltimore, Maryland. I'o 
is accompanied by Jorge B. Vargas, undersecretary of . agriculture 
and commerce, Dr. Januario ^strada, and an aide, Manuel Nieto. 415 

Ad^ice = to = Javans. Stopping briefly in Soerabaya, Quezon is invi- 
ted by native nationalists to their secret meeting being held in • 
a secluded and heavily guarded house. Asked how the Filipinos 
have succeeded in their struggle for independence, Quezon answers: 
"In the first place, open all these windows and shutters - take 
away all your guards, hold your meetings in the open and in front 
of the Dutch themselves, make yourselves heard - make a hell of 
a lot of noise - and if you do it long enough, you'll eventually 



Quirino, op., cit . , p. 267. 

Jose A. Lansang, "Genesis of the Constitution," The Development of the Philip- 
pine Constitution. Manila: Hational Media Production Center, 1974, pp. 84-38. 
Quirino, op_. cit., p. 268. 
Caballero and Concepcion, op., cit .. p. 367. 
I&id., p. 370. 



- 124 _ 



41 6 

get what you want ! " 

134 Oct. 2 Fr ench D ec oration. Quezon is officially honored in Paris with a • 

decoration and appointment as officer of the French Legion of 'Io~ 

417 

nor. The next day he leaves on the liner Majestic for New York. 

134 Oct. 12 WithJTydingg. Meeting Sea. Tydings in Washington, Quezon assures 
him that the Filipinos are satisfied with the Independence Law. 
He beams with pleasure when appraised of the favorable report '..-j . 
Sen. Carl Haydon of Arizona on economic conditions in the Philip- 
pines. Quezon has also a good word for the fine work of Governor 

... . 418 
Murphy. 

XXVI. QUEZON 'S "ULTIMO ADIOS" 

'34 Oct. 23 Farewell Lette rs. Uncertain that he will survive the operation 

for kidney 3tone, Quezon sees fit to write two letters, the first 
addressed toihe Filipino nation, and the second to his family, 
with specific instruction that the letters will not be mailed if 
the operation is successful. These are reminiscent of Rizal's let- 
ters written in Hongkong before his return to the Philippines 

where the Spanish authorities had laid a trap to imprison hi:. 1 

41 9 

for his "subversive" novels, Noli and j£ili. 

'34 Oct. 26 Successful Operation. Relieved of acute pain after the succor -!;'i.'.l 
operation, Quezon is in the best of spirits. "I am going to bor.t 
the record here," he says. "I thought I was an old man. But I'm 
not. In fifteen days I'll be dancing the tango. . ." 420 Then '..110- 
zon cracks a rib-tickling piece: 

Effervescent Humor. "When I left Manila, the doctors told me I. 
could drink nothing intoxicating. When 1 reached Java I saw a rioctor 
and he said, 'a glass of beer would not hurt.' So I drank beer 
from Java to Paris. .In Paris another doctor said: 'You should not 
drink beer; wine is the only thing. So I changed gratefully to 
white wine. Then a French specialist told mo: 'You should drink 
only champagne, it is the only thing for you.' So I drank cham- 
pagne for a time. Then I reached the United States, and here the 
physicians tell me: 'Don't drink any wine and beers at all. Whis- 
key ia the only proper drink. ' So now, if I want a drink, all 1 
have to do is to decide which physician I will obey!" 



Quirino, op,, cit . , p. 269. 
ill/ Caballero and Concepcion, op., cit . , p. 371 . 
^/ Sid., P.. 373. 

412/ Quezon's letters wore subsequently published in the Philippines Fr?e Pres j, of 
July 26, 1947. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, pp. 2515-2518. 

422/ Caballero and Concepcion, op., cit.., p. 376. 

431/ Ibid. 



- 125 - 



, % Dec. 22 quezonjtoborn. Sporting a pince-nez, 15 pounds heavier, and look-, 
ing 15 years younger than his age (56), Quezon returns from the 
United States. "I feel very much younger and rarin' to go," ho 
tells newsmen at the waterfront. He is accompanied by former l\£i. 
Sen. Harry 13. Hawes, who probably divines the Quezon mind, saving 
that in order to survive the country needs a "coalition of par- 
ties." Looking to the future, Quezon has prepared an eight-point 
program for the Commonwealth that will be established under the 
charter that is being drafted by the Constitutional Convention. 

^JgBgJ°LgQ!|s« Quezon plays host to a visiting mission headed by 

Sen. Tydings in his Pasay residence. "As to the future," he sr.ys 

the co-author of the Independence Law, "it lies entirely in the 

laps of the gods. I can see no reason why sensible men cannot sit 

around a conference table and discuss a plan mutually beneficial 

to both peoples." H 0 i s referring to the future readjustment of 

economic relations between the United States and the Philin- 
422 * 



pines. 



XXVII. PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION RATIFIED 



1935 Feb. 8 CharterDr^^d. On Recto's 45th birthday, the Constitutional 

Convention approves by a vote of 1 77 to 1 the draft of the Cons- 
titutiori originally prepared by a Special Committee of Seven and 
subsequently deliberated upon, line by line, word for word, on the 
convention floor. The lone dissenting vote is cast by the Lanao 
delegate. "I believe this is a good Constitution," says Rosas, one 
of the "seven wise men" of the convention. "I believe that it will 
promote the welfare and happiness of the Filipino people." ^ 

'35 Feb. 18 Unit y Man ifesto. A group of independent citizens issues a mani- 
festo calling on the Filipino people and their leaders to soevrro 
national unity in order to enable them to shoulder successfully 
the grave responsibilities arising from the new situation under 
the future Commonwealth. 

'35 Feb. 19 £nc = Stog = Ahead. Not to be outdone, the League of Provincial Gover- 
nors approves a resolution already proclaiming the candidacy of 

Que son and Csmena for President and vice/president * respectively, 

425 

of the future Philippine Commonwealth. 

Coalit ion ? "Anticipating a coalition of the "Antis" and "Pros," 
an organization is later formed calling itself "Coalition of the 



^ Md., P. 391. 

•^2/ Kalaw, Aide-de-Camn. op_. cit., p. 265. 

W Caballoro and Concopcion, op_. cit., p. 395. 
Ibid. 



_ 126 _ 



People," which proposes to fight the "Coalition of Leaders," rop- 

4.26 

resented by Quezon and Osmona. 

1^5 Mar 4 23 Ch ar ter Signed. President Roosevelt signs the Constitution oi 

the Philippines in tha presence of the Philippine mission composed 

of Quezon, Recto, Roxas, Quirino, and Miguel Cuaderno. Govornoi- 

General Murphy, who is in America, witnesses the charter sign- 
427 

ing. 

'55 April 27 Sumulong Bombshell . As the coalition idea is being hatched, bvu 
Sumulong, the unreconstructed oppositionist, drops a bombshell 
in the form of an article entitled, "After the Coalition, the 
Deluge." He says: "It is therefore evident that any union of the 
followers of Quezon and Osmena - call it fusion, coalition, coo- 
peration or conjunction - would mean the restoration, inexcusable 
from all angles, of the feared and detested oligarchy. It would 
not represent a progressive advance but a step backward, especial" 
ly destructive of the future of a sane and genuine democracy in 
the country." 

'35 May 2 Sakd al Revolt. The deluge predicted by Sumulong comes in the 

form of a Sakdal revolt in oari Ildefonoo (ftulacan) and Cabuyao 
(Laguna), resulting in the "unfortunate massacre of innocent dream- 
ers of good government." Quezon, who is still in Washington, 
sees the uprising as a harbinger of dark things to coma. He dec- 
lares that the limitations imposed on Philippine exports to tlv.. 
United States "would throw away many of our men and women out o.? 

work, lower the standards --of living with consequent hardships, .uvl 

429 

cause general discontent." 

'35 May 14 Constitution Ratified. *he Constitution is overwhelmingly rati* 

fied"in"the~plebiscite with 1,213,046 votes in favor, and only 

430 

44,9153 against. 

•35 June 3 ^ezon,, _Wurghy = Ar r ive . Quezon returns together with Governor- 

General Murphy\ Osmena goes out of his way to welcome Quezon on 
board the ship. Together they present a veritable picture of the 

4^1 

"Coalition in Person." 
'35 June, 15 Coalition Formalized. Meeting separately, the "Anti" and "Pro" 



IMA- 

&3J Molina, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 297. 

Philippines Herald . April 27, 1935. The original of the Sumulong article is 
in Spanish. 

£2/ Caballero and Concepcion, 0£> cit., PP« 399-403. 

423/ Molina, supra , p. 299. 

421/ Caballero and Concepcion, supra, p. 412. 



- 127 - 



factions of the Nacionalista and Democrats parties accept tho 

Coalition, and at tho same time nominate Quezon and Osmena for 

president and vice-president of the Commonwealth, respective- " 
ly. 

XXVIII. QUEZON HEADS COMMONWEALTH 

V) Sept. 17 Pre-Commonwealth Election TJi,v,^,-« ■, r, 

=======~==i5 £I^°g« Running under a Coalition ticket, 

Quezon and Osmena are elected president and vice-president of 

the Philippines, respectively. Quezon garners 695,332 voter,, 

more than the combined votes of his two opponents, General 4 1~ 

lie Aguinaldo, 179,349, and Bishop Gregorio Aglipay, 148,010. 

Osmena^with the solid backing of the Visayans, gets 812,352 , , 

votes. Commenting on the landslide scored by the Coalition, 

Editor Francisco Varona says: "Senor Sumulong's prophesy was , 

right. The deluge really came and it was a deluge of votes Ixx 

favor of President Quezon and Senator Osmena." ™ 

Nov. 15 £™nweal|hjnaugural. President Que,on is inducted into of- 

fice by Chief Justice Ramon Avancena of the Supreme Court at 
8:15 a.m., at a specially constructed grandstand in front of 
the Legislative building. As the first i'ilipino Chief executive' 
rises to tako his oath, the audience also rises and remains 
standing "until the gun salute, the ruffles and flourishes, and 
the playing of the Philippine National Anthem, in the order in- 
dicated, are completed.'' 435 Avancena then administers the oath o 
office to Vice-President-elect Osmena and the members-elect of th 
National Assembly. This is followed by the proclamation by U.S. 
Secretary of War George H. Dorn, on behalf of the President of 
tho United States, that tho "present Philippine Government has 
terminated, and that the new Government now enters upon its 
rights, privileges, powers, and duties, as provided in the Cons- 
titution of the Philippines." Afterwards, at about 8:45 a.m., 
Quezon delivers his inaugural address as "President of the 
Philippines," the official title as provided in Sec. 1, Art. 
VII - Executive Department - of the Constitution. 

~S~| = 2£_2i5gl : l|_|o|her. The inaugural ceremonies over, Que- 
zon accompanied by his staff headed by Presidential Secretary 
Jorge B. Vargas, proceeds to Halacanang the Spanish-built palace 
by the Pasig. Quezon recalls: "As I stepped out of the prosi- 

^44- > P. 414; Quirino, op. cit . , p. 278. 

Quirino, op. cit., p . 230. 

Caballero and Concepcion, op., cit., p. 446. 

'Blue Book of the Inauguration of the Commonwealth of the Philippines," 
Manila: November 1 5, 1 935, p. 1 1 . 



r 



_ 128 

dential car and walked over the marble floor of the entrance U-l~ 
(of KalacanangPalace), and up the wide stairway, I remembered ' V ■•) ' 
legend of the mother of Risal, the great Filipino martyr and he : , 
who went up those stairs on her knees to seek executive clemency 
from the cruel Spanish Governor-General Polavicja, that would c v . 
her son's life. This story had something to do with ny reluct.-.r.t - 
to believe that capital punishment should ever be carried out, la 
a matter of fact, during ray presidency, no nan ever went to to.s 

electric chair. At the last moment I always stayed the hand of 

a-i i . . 436 

the executioner. 

•35 Nov. 15 Loyalty an d Allegiance. Quezon's first official act as Prosido.rV 

of the Philippines is the issuance of Executive Order No. 1 requirir 
all officials of the government and the Armed Forces of the Philip- 
pines to take an oath of loyalty to the Constitution and of alle- 
giance to -the United States. L ^ J ^ He follows this up with Executive 
Order No. 2, assuming command of all the Armed Forces of the Phi- 
lippines. On the same day ho issues Proclamation No. 1 calling 
the National Assembly to a special session beginning November 
22nd. The date is later changed to November 25th. 

'35 First Cabinet. The following make up the first Quezon cabinet: r.' , 

Toofilo Sison, secretary of the interior; Elpidio Quirino, rjecro- 
tary of finance; Jose Yulo, secretary of justice; Eulogio Rodri- 
guez, secretary of agriculture and commerce; Antonio do las Alan, 
secretary of public works and communications; Ramon Torres, secre- 
tary of labor; and Joseph R. Haydon, secretary of public instruc- 
tion. Later on Vice-President Osmena will replace Hayden as secre- 
tary of public instruction. After one year:, the position of Jorge 

b. Vargas, secretary to the President, will be changed to Bxecu- 

439 

tive Scretary and raised to Cabinet rank. 

Avancena Appointed. , „ . , „. , . . .. , . . 

=====~===i=fe==:^=zz= One of '.iuczon's first ofucial acts, but not 

very much publicized, is his appointment of Chief Justice Ramon 
Avancena of the Supreme Coxirt. It should be noted that the 1935 . 
Constitution, instead of allowing the continued tenure of the .Jus- 
tices and judges and other members of the Judiciary, gives the 
President the power and responsibility of appointing new justices 
and judges within a period of one year from the date of the inau- 
guration of the Commonwealth, thus virtually entrusting him with 



Quezon, op., cit . . pp. 151-162. 
42/ J>uezo n. Messages . Vol. 1, Sp. Rev. M. , JBVFF, pp. 193-194. 
Ibid., p. 195'. 

•W "Blue Book of the Inauguration of the Commonwealth," op_. cit. ,-p. 93. 



_ 129 



Dec. 21 



the duty ef reorganise the entire Judiciary at the inception 
of the new regime. ^ 4U 

5 Nov. 16 MacArthur Appointed Th« • , . 

=======4iri^ • ih e President issues Executive Order lie. 3 

appointing Gen. Douglas MacArthur military adviser of the Common- 
wealth and creating the National Defense Council. 441 0n the ^ 
day, Quezon convenes the Couno-n ar *r\ a~t 

^ , A rr council and delivers a speech on IlacAr- 

thur's appointment. r 

Pirst = Law. Self-preservation being the first and supreme law of 
life, the first law enacted by the Commonwealth, under the leader- 
ship of Quezon, is Commonwealth Act No. 1 providing for "the na- 
tional defense of the Philippines. » Art. II, Sec. 2, of the Consti- 
tution, provides that "the defense of the State is a orime duty of 
gevernnont, and in the fulfillment of this duty all citizens may 
be required by l* w to render personal military or civil service." 
The defense plan provides for the annual military training of able- 
bodxea ,llip ino youth, 20 years old, so that by 1 94 6 the Philippines 
would have a citizen army of 400,000 strong. Commonwealth Act No. 
1 is drafted by Lt. Col. Dwight D. Eisenhower, chief of staff of 
MacArthur. Besides working in MacArthur- s office at No. 1 Victoria, 
Intramuros, Eisenhower is chief of the Army and Police Division in 
the Executive Office in lialacanan headed by Vargas. 445 
Nl^Created. Quezon signs Comonwoalth Act No. 2 creating the »U 
txonal Economic Council. In his scale of priorities, the national 
economy comes next after national defense. The President is a 
staunch advocate of econoraic planning. 444 

&g*dy Justice. The President signs Commonwealth. Act No. 3 red .- 
ciiig the number of justices of the Supreme Court and creating the 
Court of Appeals. Doubtless the objective is to secure' speedy 
adjudication of thousands of casus clogging the court dockets. '.ate- ' 
son is convinced that justice delayed is justice denied. 445 

Oovernment = ilevamg. To insure the smooth and efficient functioning . 
of the government machinery, Qezon also signs on the same day (Dec. 
31 ) Commonwealth Act No. 5 authorizing the President to "effect 
urgent reforms and changes in 3io government for the purpose of 
economy and efficiency, and creating the Government Survey 



Dec. 23 



Dec. 31 



^smLm^SS3L«MQS^!S.f November 10, 1936- 
^ e zoj L Me^sa £2 s > supra , p. 1 9 6. 
MR#37, TNL. 

Information supplied by Mr. Vargas in an interview in April 1977. 
^^jyessagos, Vol. 1, iip. rev. Ed., JEWF, p. 156. 
pp. 157-166. 



_ 130 

Board." 4 r6 With the signing of this law, the 46-day old Commonwealth 
government bids adieu to the year 1935. 
19 j6 Jan. 2 Merit Syste m. The President starts the new year by issuing Exe- 

cutive Order No. 8 enforcing the provisions of the Constitution 
on the Civil Service. Henceforth all government offices, agencies 
and instrumentalities are placed under the Civil S e rvice, and ap- 
pointments made strictly on the basis of merit alone. 447 

'36 Jan. 11 ^ it ar^ . Tra ining . Quezon issues Proclamation No. 23 calling u;:on 
all young men, citizens of the Philippines who shall attain the 
age of 20 years in 1936 and succeeding years, to register for 
military training in accordance with the National . Defense Law 
(Commonwealth Act No. 1). 448 

'36 Jan. 29 U^iJtl^Jthl ' To Estill discipline, especially in the 

military arm of the government, Quezon issues Administrative Order 
No. 1 discharging from military service several erring cadets of 
the Philippine Military Academy in Baguio. 449 

'36 Jan. 30 go^ggng j^SSiSg » T ho President follows this up with Administrative 
Order No. 2 removing from office Judge Geronimo Paredes of the 

Court of First Instance of Iloilo for "serious misconduct in of- 

„ 450 
nee," 

'36 Fob. 17 i~I=iH££i£igg£Z_ig^ico. Quezon issues Executive Order No. U. 

creating the P.ice Commission for the purpose of studying and ma:::iug 

the 

recommendations on ways and means of solving/recurrent rice crisic 
and insuring a permanent supply of rice at reasonable prices. 

'36 Feb. 19 IDduoational Informs. Also high on the President's scale of prio- 
rities io the education of the people. Quezon signs Executive Order 
No. 19 creating the National Council of Education to advice the 
government on educational policies and necessary reforms in the 
existing system of education. The first chairman of the Council 
is Dr. Rafael Palma, formerly president of the University of the 
Philippines. 4 ^ 2 

Pour J3ignif icant_Changus ; The NCE has introduced four important 
changes in public education, to wit: 1 ) Filipinization of educa- 
tional outlook, objectives, and teaching materials; 2) emphasis 



pp. 169-171 . 

442/ teojLifesgaijejs, Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFF, p. 607. 

s®J Sid., pp. 482-435. 

ILil., pp. 741-742/ 

^2/ Ibid., pp. 743-745. 

451/ Ibid., p p . 626-627. 

^2/ .Ibid., pp. 628-629. 



- 151 _ 



on character education; and 4) establishment of free and cocipulsory 
primary education. 

Mar. "gP jjj"_° n_War_Plan. The U.S. Amy and Navy members of the Join- 

Planning Committee, Joint Board of the Army and Navy, are reportedly 
"split" on the report on the Philippines and War Plan Orange-3. . 

Mar. 28 Doctor_of_Laws . Quezon is conferred the degree of Doctor of La-fO, 
honoris causa , by his alma mater, University of Sto. Toraas. 

Productive Year. Some of the significant laws signed by Quezon durin 
the year are the following: July 11, CA No. 20, acquisition of laidod 
estates used as homesites and resiling them to bonafido occupants; 
Sept. 15, CA 32, subdivision and sale of friar land, estates; Sept. 
30, CA 34, holding of a plebiscite on woman suffrage; Oct.- 20, CA 
57 and 58, creating cities of Iloilo and Cebu, respectively; Oct. 26, 
CA 79 f giving Filipino citizenship to former Governor-General Harri- 
son; Oct. 26, CA 80, creating the Office of Adult Education; Oct. 26, 
CA 88, organization of the State Police Force; Oct. 27, CA 94, coor- 
dinating information and publicity agencies of the government; Oct. 
29, CA 103, ci-eating the Court of Industrial Relations; Oct. 31, CA 
111, creating a public corporation known as the Boy Scouts Of the 
Philippines; 

Nov. 3, CA 120, creating the National Power Corporation; Nov. ' 
9, CA 152, declaring the second Sunday of January of every year 
"Unknown Citizens' Day," in honor of "all unknown patriotic Filipi- 
no citizens;" Nov. 12, CA 167, creating the Board of Censorship for. 
Moving Pictures; Nov. 13, CA 178, regulating landlord-tenant rela- 
tions ; Nov. 13, CA 181, creating the division of investigation (now 
NBl) under the department of justice; Nov. 13, CA 182, creating the 
National Development Company; Nov. 13, CA 184, establishing the Na- 
tional Language Institute; Nov. 14, CA 1 91 , authorizing the Presi- 
dent of th,-; Philippines to negotiate with the President of the Uni- 
ted States for the holding of an economic-trade conference; and No". 
20, CA 211, fixing a minimum daily wage for laborers employed in 
public work3. JJ ' . 

une ISS^Zi^HJL^HjZO^i* -kfter one year as military adviser, General Mac- 

Arthur submits his "Rer.ort on National Defense in the Philip- 
pines." 456 



Zaido, op_. cit. , Vol. II, pp. 322-323. 

'■Theodore Friend, Between Tw o Umpires : 'I'he Or dea l of the Philippines. 1929- 
1216. Manila: Solidaridad Publishing House, 1969, pp. 161-166. 

Jluezoiojfc^s^gos, Vol. 2, pp. 30-1283. 

friend, op_. cit., p. 274. 



- 132 _ 



,r ;? 7 Jan. 7 ^ISI^BS^l^' 0n tho evo of his departure for the United Stater, 

via China and Japan, Quezon saysthat he is going to confer with 
President Roosevelt and the State and War Departments on the 
immediate calling of a trade conference between the United Gtatec 
and the Philippines in order to "remedy the injustice and ineov.r.li- 
ties " in trade relations between the two countries under the Ty« 
dings-McDuff ie Act. He adds that ho wants to present "in its true 
light" the nature and objective of the national defense profeiw: . 
which has been the "subject of the most unfair and malicious at- 
tack" in the United States, i'or this reason, he has decided to 
take along his military adviser, Gen. Mac Arthur. 

—rr—iSI—EHillSl* To - ( ' ut a halt to Public speculations on who 
will be the power-holder in Malacanan after his departure, Quezon 
announces that there will be "no acting President" during his ab- 
sence as the "government will continue to be run and its official 
affairs transacted in the same manner as they are when I an in 
the Philippines." He explains that under the Constitution, and in 
spite of his absence from the national territory, "wherever he- 
goes, the President carries with him the authority and powers of 
his office and. he can exercise them as fully as if he were in his 
office ac the capital of the Philippines." ^ 8 

'31 Peb. 5 Ne ut ralizat ion_Ckay to Japs. At a banquet given in his honor in 

Tokyo, the Japanese foreign minister assures Quezon that "Japan : 
will gladly be a signatory to a treaty that will recognize the 
Philippines as a neutral territory once it shall have become in- 
dependent. . . Japan has no aggressive intentions towards- the 
Philippines. All we want is your trade - to buy your products 
and to sell you our goods." ' 

U.S. Press Reports Absurd. Quezon describes as absurd reports 
by American correspondents to t hu effect that the purpose of his 
trip was to "start negotiations with the Japanese government 
looking towards the neutralization of the Philippines." He says 
the United States exercises supervision and control of the foreign 
affairs of the Commonwealth and, therefore, "any negotiation 
having for its object the neutralization of the Philippines 
will have to be conducted by the United States." 

'37 Mar. 18 fjarl y Independence Urged . Quezon proposes to President Roossvclt 



Quezon, ,op. cit . , p. 174. 
t£2/ Press statement, December 7, 1936. Rivera Collection, Vol. Ill, p. 1426. 
i52/ Quezon, supra, pp. 177-178. 

:'ijO/ Press statement, July 19, 1938. Rivera Collection, Vol. IV, p. 1810. 



- 133 _ 



that the dato for the recognition of Philippine independence be 
advanced to either Decoder 30, 1938 or July 4, 1939, in order 
to remedy the uncertainty of future Philippine trade relations 
with the United States. Quezon explains further: "If, as long 
as the Philippines is under the American flag, Congress should 
feel at liberty to make changes in the trade relations between 
the two countries as in its judgment- may be necessary, then the 
enly remedy to the situation would be to place the trade rela- 
tions between the Philippines and the United States on the b,- 
sis of a treaty between the United States and an independent • 
Philippines." 4(3 1 

7 Mar. 22 Experts ^Agreenent. African and Filipino experts, at a confe- 

rence of the Interdepartmental Committee on Philippine Affairs 
presided over by Dr. Francis B, Sayre, agree to consider the 
bearing which the advancement in the date of independence would 
have on facilitating or retarding the execution of the future 
program of economic adjustment in the Philippines. The experts 
also agree that preferential trade relations between the two 
countries will be terminated at the earliest practicable date to 
gxve the Philippines ample opportunity to adjust her national 
economy. 

teon = Lo J ic. Explaining his proposal for an earlier indepen- 
dence grant to the Philippines, Quezon says: "I can see no valid 
reason why, if the Philippines can be. given independence in 1Q/.5, 
she may not have it in 1938 or in 1939. In the short s P an of se- 
ven years (l 939-1 946) the Filipino people can hardly do anything 
that would substantially change their present situation. Any. obs- 
tacles which would vitally affect the chances of a successful 
and lasting independent nationhood in 1939 cannot bo overcome 
by 1946 . . ." 463 

Then Quezon adds another plausible and convin- 
cing argument: "My main reason for asking that the independence 
of the Philippines be granted not later than the- 4th of JUly, 
1939, is that I am sincerely of the opinion that it will be to 
our best interests to secure independence during and under the 
administration of President Roosevelt. I know the President, 
his progressive and liberal ideas, his very deep sense of justice, 



Pn Ge ?nV^ a po l 3ular banquet in his lienor at the Rizal Memorial Stadium, Au^aci, 
cu > Mfl. :^z^njfessages f> Vol. 3, Part I, JI3VFF , p. 109. 

wf eS u ^ atewent on the Joint Preparatory Committee on Philippine Affairs, 
"arch 22, 1937; Ibid . . pp. 321-323. 

p. 212. 



- 134 - 



and friendship for and goodwill towards the Filipino people. I 
have no doubt that under his leadership we will receive from 
the government of the United States the fairest treatment that 

wc nay over expect to receive under the leadership of his suc- 

„ 464 
cessors." 

177 Apr. 17 Another D^LL. Quezon is honored with the degree of Doctor of 

Laws, honoris causa, by the Georgetown University, a Catholic 
institution of higher learning. 

'37 ==i2~2=Jl=iS£' From 'Washington ./.uoaon makes a sidetrip to Mexi- 

co to cement friendly relations with this former Spanish colony.. 
He has sent word that he is coming as a tourist, and does not 
want to be received with honors due him as head of state. But u- 
pon arrival at the Mexican border, there is the official car 
worth $500,000 sent by President Cardenas, together with a mili- 
tary detachment. A huge throng of Mexicans is also there to give 
him a rousing welcome. Quezon leaves Mexico impressed by • 
Cardenas land reforms. 

XXIX. ORIENTAL ARMAGEDDON 

'37 July Start of Fullscal e .War. Beginning of a fullscale war between 

China and Japan. 

'37 Sept. 22 Guevo-Barredo_Case . Not knowing that the case is sub .judice , 
President Quezon condemns as unjust the decision of a Manila 
CFI, and upheld by the Court of Appeals, denying the petitioner 
the right to be indemnified for the death of a laborer who wac-; 
drowned in the Pasig river in obedience of an order by an offi- 
cial of the Barredo and Co. In answer to his'-critios-that such 
a presidential condemnation of a court's decision is an encroach- 
ment on the independence of the judiciary, the President says 
that in his oath of office he is sworn to ; 'do justice to evcry 
man"; and therefore he interprets those words to mean that the 
Chief Executive must always be alert and vigilant so that justice 
may reign supreme over this land, and this he can accomplish on- 
ly by a careful and conscientious exorcise of his power to ap- 
■ point members of the judiciary, and by his readiness to take 
action, in the manner prescribed by lav/, against judges who 
may be derelict in the performance of their duties, or short of 
committing malfeasance in office (sic) to arraign them at the 
bar of public opinion, whenever, in his opinion, the denuncia- 
tion of any wrongful act, oven though performed in good faith, 



^ M>, PP. 214-215. 

^5/ Quezon Messages, Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, pp. 161-162. 
friend, on. cit . , pp. 169-183. 



- _ 



would be in the public service." 467 

Pr osidontialj hallenge. The President also dares his critics to 
impeach him before the National Assembly. "And if the National 
Assembly should condemn me," he says, "I would accept that vordio 
as the expression of the Filipino people's conception regarding 
the duties of the Chief Executive. In such a case, I would say 
without hesitation that I do not want to be the President of a 
people whose conception of the duties of the head of Government 
is to sit by and keep quiet when other branches of the government 
in his opinion, are doing wrong." Quezon adds that the "presides 
would be too high a price to pay for a man to be mum in the face 
of outrageous injustice." 468 

Nov. 12 S^sJorJjS. Quezon commends the work of the Joint Pre- 
paratory Committee on Philippine Affairs as the American panel 

leaves on the Pjresident Cooii^c to submit its report to Washing- 
4o _> 



■con. 



Nov. 15 E^lgJ^bolished. A centuries-old symbol of injustice is put 
to an end. today when President Quezon signs Commonwealth Act Ho. 
238 providing for th« abolition of the cedula tax. The signing c«- 
incides with the second anniversary of the Commonwealth. 470 

Mar. Reexamination? High Commissioner Paul V. McNutt proposes iju 

reexamination oi Philippine independence question in the li. ht of 
the worsening situation in Asia brought about by the Sino- Japanese 
conflict. Describing the existing policy as "scuttle and run," 
McNutt would give the Philippines,' instead of independence, ; 'uv en- 
ounce of domestic autonomy they can absorb - holding in our own 
hands foreign affairs, tariffs, immigration, currency, and public 

debt - scarcely more than marks of the necessary reservations of 
4-71 

a dominion. " ' 

^iS^^xaminatio^^T^eason. 3 0 mc Filipino leaders, it must be 
admitted, have Leon carried away by the McNutt proposal. Comments 
Quezon: "I have no objection/to t he reexamination, whether realis- 
tic or idealistic, when the reexamination is based upon the fear 
that we may not be economically self-sufficient or upon the fear 
that we may not be sufficiently strong to defend ourselves ag'tinst 



Joseph R. Ilayden, The Philippines: A Study in National Develop ment. New fork: 
flacaillan Company, 1947, pp. 71-74. 

Press statement on the Chief Executive's criticism of judicial decisions, 
kept. 25, 1937. Quezon Messages. Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, pp. 333-334. 

iiueaonJ^s.sa^es, vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, p. 344. 

Ii>M., Part II, P . 180-139. 

Friend, on. <->t+ r>r> i ap...h p.q 



- 136 - 



foreign aggression. But when reexamination is based upon the as- 
sumption that we will not know how to establish or .maintain in the 
Philippines a democracy, when the reexamination is based upon the 
belief or theory or assumption that we will bo more free under Ame- 
rican than wo will be under Filipinos, then I will say that it ia 
472 

almost treason." 

Mar. 17 Council of State, Quezon revives the Council of State, the hi-h- 
est advisory body, composed of the President, the Vice-Preside,:. t, 
the Senate President, the Speaker of the House, the Senate Presi- 
dent Protenporo, the Speaker Frotompore, the majority floor leaders 
of both houses of Congress, the former presidents of the Philippines 
and some three to five prominent citizens. ' 47 -* 

Nov. 29 JPCPA Report. Released simultaneously in Manila and in Washington, 
the report of the Joint Preparatory Committee on Philippine Affairs 
recommends that 1 ) political independence be granted to the Philip- 
pines on July 4, 1946, as provided for in the Tydings-HcDuf f io Law, 
and 2) Philippine-American trade relations be extended to December 
31, 1960. 474 

£Q L_kaw s _S ignod . The President during the year (l 938) signs 201 

bills into law*, but only a few arc truly outstanding. Among the 
significant measures enacted are the following: June 3, CA No. 238, 
providing pension for veterans of the Philippine Revolution or 
wars; June 9, CA 304, providing for the reforestation and afford 
station of watersheds , denuded areas, cogon or open lands; June 9, 
CA 313, authorizing the establishment of regional national voca- 
tional trade schools; June 10, CA 326, creating the City of Baco- 
lod; June 13, CA 332, establishing the National Abaca and Other 
Fibers Corporation; June 23, CA 343, abolishing the State Police 
Force, and reorganizing the Philippine Constabulary into a national 
police force; Aug. 23, CA 368, providing for a revolving fund for 
laborers' tenement houses; Aug. 23, CA 331, providing for the sup- 
port of primary and intermediate education; and Sept. 5, CA 332, 
adqpting the original authentic form of the Philippine National . • 
Anthem. 475 

July 2ILP_n_ Chart or_Changea . The ruling Iiacionalista Party holds a con- 



Draft of speech before the Civil Liberties Union of the Philippines, QF, H!;,"41 , 
TNI. 

Malcolm, George A., The F irst_H alayan. Republic . Boston: The Cristopher Publish- 
ing House, 1951. Quoted in Molina", op. cit., Vol. II, pp. 319-320. Also in 
Ijuezpn. jlojjsages, Vol. 4, Part I, JBVFF, p. 1506. 

^aido, op., cit., Vol. II, p. 332. 

-iaaasaMSfisafiOB. Vol. 4, Part II, JBVFF, pp. 3-1121. 



- 137 - 

vention to resolve certain amendments to the Constitution, one 
of which will permit the reelection of President Quezon. 476 
'39 Aug. 7 Mi2gg-|°£ia^owski = Dili. l n accordance with the JPCPA recom- 

mendations, the United States Congress enacts the Tydings-Kocial- 
kowski bill, otherwise called the Philippine Economic Readjust- 
ment Act, amending the economic provisions of the Tydings-McDuff ie 
Law. This calls for an amendment of the Ordinance appended to tlie 
Philippine Constitution. Accordingly, a plebiscite is held (Oct. 
24) ratifying the Constitutional amendment. 477 . 

•39 Sept. 1 i|Srt = o|JJorldJar = II. Hitler's troops invade Poland without a 
declaration of war. Great Britain and France promptly deliver an 
ultimatum to. Nazi Germany, demanding a satisfactory explanation 
within 24 hours. As the Nazis fail to give any reply, Britain and 
France mobilize their forces. The Second : .'orld War is on. Within 
a short period, German mechanized armies overrun Poland, Norway, 
Denmark, Holland, Belgium and Luxemburg. France herself is forced 



I-* 



17 



39 



to sue for peace. 



47' 



o 



39 Sept. - £iliilHli£gg£nt? Shocked by tho fall of Austria, Czechoslovakia, 
Nov. and Albania to superior and "determined industrial-military po- 

wers," Quezon is reported to bo losing faith in the HacArthur de- 
fense program for the Philippines. He is quoted as saying that 
the Philippines "could not be defended successfully even if evjry 
last Filipino wore armed," and that he ia convinced of tho "futi- 
lity of spending money to carry on our program of defendingtho 
Philippines from foreign aggression, and this objective cannot be 
attained with the limited resources of the country for many years 
to come.' 1 He therefore creates a new department - the Department 
of National Defense - reducing tho importance of KacArthur's of- 
fice. He calls on President Roosevelt to carry out tho neutrali- 
zation provision of the Tydings-IIcDuf f ie Act. Furthermore, ho let 

it be known that "the defense of the Philippines against external 

479 

aggression is the full responsibility of America." 

I mp ortant Laws. Of the 99 laws enacted during the year (1939)> 

the following are the most important: May 31, CA No. 429, autho- 
rizing the President of the Philippines to negotiate with th* 
President of the United States regarding the assignment of J'ili- 



il§j Zaide, on. cit., Vol. II, p. 333. 
£0/ Ibid., p. 332. 

£22/ C. Grove Kainess and Ross J.S. Hoffman, The Origins and Background of tho 
£ssond JLorldJf7ar. New York: 1947. Quoted in Zaide, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 
335. 

Friend, o^. cit., pp. 192-193. 



JO 



- 138 _ 



pinos to American embassies and/or consulates in foreign countries 
May 31 , CA 430, creating the Department of National Defense and 
the Department of Health and Public Welfare; June 3, CA 441, 
creating the National Land Settlement Administration; June 3, OA 
442, directing the transfer of the University of the Philippine.? 
to a site outside the City of Ilanila; June 3, CA 444, the 3i ff ht- 
Hour Labor Law; June 8, CA 449, authorizing the President to 
negotiate for the acquisition, aaangoaont and operation by the 
government of the Manila Electric Company, the Manila Gas Corpo- 
ration, the Philippine Lung Distance Telephone Company, and oth >r 
public utility firms; 

June 9, CA 458, creatine; the Agricultural and Industrial >.ri; 
Sept. 19, CA 492, submitting to a plebiscite the proposed amend- 
ments to the Constitution and to the ordinance appended thereto 
proposed by the National Assembly in resolutions adopted on Sep- 
tember 15, 1939; Sept. 30, CA 496, authorizing the President for- 
a limited period,, in view of the existing state of national emer- 
gency, to take over any public service or enterprise; Sept.. 30, 
CA 498, authorizing the President for a limited period to promul- 
gate rules and regulations and to take other necessary steps to 
effectuate the government's policy on the existing emergency; 
Spt. 30, CA 499, regulating for a limited period the transfer 
vessels and of shipping facilities; and Oct. 12, CA' 502, creating 
(•iuezon City. 

~====~~Z' Originally conceived as the site of the new capital 

city of the Philippines, President Quezon lay3 the cornerstone of 
the national capitol in what is new known as 'iuezon City. Upon re- 
commendation of the office of General MacArthur, the nation's ca- 
pital is to be transferred to a higher ground at the foot of the 
Sierra Madre, in Harikina, ltizal, Manila being bel:;w sea level 
and "militarily indefensible Since the University. of the Phi- 
lippines is also being moved t the now site, there is a suggest^ 
ion that the now capital be called University City. It is only 
months later that there will be a concensus of public opinion 
name the city after President Quezon, who is, after all, tho first 
to envision it. ° 

Apr. 1 Tagalo g B alarila. The President authorises the printing and pub- 

lication of the Tagalog grammar (balarila) and dictionary 



3^°Iliks8iy^l, Vol. 5, Part II, J3VPF, pp. 3-1036. 

Information supplied by former Executive Secretary Jorge B. Vargas. 



- 139 _ 



Dec. 2 



prepared by the Institute of National Language. He also orders the 
teaching of the national language based on Tagalog in all schools 
beginning the next academic year. Accordingly, the National Assem- 
bly will approve (on June 7) the bill (: C A No. 570) declaring the 
national language as ^official language in the Philippines bo- 
ginning July 4, 1 946^ 432 

Apr. 11 ProEoaod^^nts. Tho national Assembly approves three pro- 
posed amendments to the Constitution as prepared by Speaker J6o.» 
Yulo; naraely, l) the tenure of office of the President and the 
Vice-President be changed to four years with reelection for ano- 
ther tern; 2) the establishment of a bicameral Congress of the 
Philippines, with the Senate elected at large and the House of ; w > 
resentatives elected by districts; and 5) creation of an inde- 
pendent Commission on Elections to supervise all elections. 435 ' 

June 18 Amendments 2ati£igd. The proposed amendments to the Constitution 
(supra) are ratified in a plebiscite. 404 

SiJ^raChan^s. Presidcnt^oosovelt approves the amendments tc 
the Philippine Constitution. T ' 

l^^^Passed. T he President during the year (1940) signs 100 
bills into laws the most important of which are the following: 
April 25, CA No. 517, submitting to a plebiscite the proposed a- 
mendments to the Constitution and the ordinance appended thereto, 
proposed by the National Assembly in Resolution No. 38, adopted 
September 15, 1939, and as amended by Resolution No. 73, adopted 
April 11, 194O; flay 7, CA 518, establishing the National Coconut 
Corporation; May 7, CA 519, establishing the National Tobacco Cor- 
poration; May 26, CA 539, authorizing the President to acquire 
private lands for resale in small lots; 

May 26, CA 542, creating a corporation to be known as the 
Girl Scouts of the Philippines; June 7, CA 570, declaring the 
National Language based on Tagalog as one of the official languages 
beginning July 4, 1946; Aug. 19, CA 600, granting emergency po- 
wers to the President; Aug. 22, CA 605, providing for veterans' 
pensions; and Aug. 22, CA 607, providing for the organization of 
the Commission on Elections. 



0£f3£iaij3azette, Vol 38, No. 128, p. 2999. Also Vide Molina, op_. ext., Vol. II 

•' :,a idG, aa. .cit., Vol. ii, p. 333 p. 320. 

Hayden, on., cit.., p. 870. 

"-aide, supra, p. 333; and Molina, 0^. ext., Vol. II, p. 321. 

^-S^Gnjsgttes, Vol. 38, Nob. 52, 60, 61, 71, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 

20, 121 , 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131 , 142, 143, 152, 
153, and 154; Vol. 39, Nob. 4 and 5. 



- 140 _ 



XXX. THE WAR YEARS 

m Apr. 1 CJA_Croatod. By virtue of his emergency powers the President cre- 
ates tho Civilian Emergency Administration with branches in all 
provinces and towns. The CEA holds practice blackouts and air-raid 
drills, and establishes evacuation centers. 487 

'41 July 26 HacArthur Heads lISAjTFS. In view of the worsening Sino- Japanese <fcr 
that threatens to spill over the rest of Asia and the Far East, Lt. . 
Gen. Douglas HacArthur is called back to active service as comanaior 
of the newly formed United States Army Forces in the Far East 
(TJSAFFE). The 100,000 Filipino soldiers trained under Commonwealth 
Act No. 1 (National Defense Law) are incorporated into the 
USAJFE. 400 

'41 Nov. 11 (feggo^ Oaueaa Reelected. Quezon and Csmena are reelected provi- 
dent and vice-president of the Commonwealth, respectively, in tho 
last national election before the outbreak of the war. 

•41 Nov. 15 Pledge of Loyalty. Tho 6th anniversary celebration of tho Common- ' 
wealth is highlighted by '.uczon'n pledge of Philippine loyalty to 
the United States. 

'41 Nov. 26 U^_Hoto_Ignprod . U.S. Secretary of Skate Cordoll Hull submits 
a formal note to Japan, through Japanese Ambassador Kichisaburo- 
Nomura and Special Unvoy Saburo Kurusu, proposing a non-aggrossion 
treaty among the Pacific powers and providing for the withdrawal 
of Japanese troops from China and Indo-China, the abandonment by 
both tho United States and Japan of extra-territorial rights in- 
China, and the renewal of commercial relations between the two 
powers. J 

'41 Dec. 6 !£^_|oJIirohito. Uith the U.S. -Japan diplomatic talks getting 

no/whore, President Roosevelt send a last-minute personal appeal 
to liiuperor Ilirohito to avert the impending war between the two na- 
tions. 

'41 Doc. 8 Pearl_Karbor Atta cked . Japan's answer to Hie Roosevelt appeal is a 
sneak attack on Pearl Harbor, American naval base in Hawaii, at 
2:'30 a.m., Monday, Philippine time, crippling the U„S. Pacific 
Fleet. December 0, 1941 (December 7, American time) is described 
by Roosevelt as "a date which will live in infamy." ^® 



'41 



Vargas to Quezon. A s anti-aircraft guns around Manila go into 



48.7/ Zaide, op_. cit., Vol. II, p. 336. 
m/ Ibid. 



Hainess and Hoffman, op,, cit., p. 630; Zaide, History, pp. cit . . Vol. II, p. 
t 422/ Ibid., p. 640; Zaide, supra, p. 337. 



_ 141 



action at about 5 a.m., Monday, (Doc. 8), with searchlights proving 
the dark sky for encray pl.vnca that have been pounding the U.=S. . 
airbase at Clark ?ield, Pampanga, Vargas contact;.: the Phili . pine 
Army headquarters. Upon learning that war has broken out following 
the Japanono attack cn Pearl Karbor, he calls up the President i;; 
Baguio. -The Chief Executive, of course, can't believe that the 
Japanese would over darn attack Hawaii, "ait he- scon gats over 
with his initial surprise, and informs Vargas that ho is coming 
down to Manila tho samo morning. He tells the executive secret.- rj- 
to convene the Council of Utato early the next day not in Malac: 
but in his country home in Harikina,. Rizal. Thereafter -iuezon will 
hold airiest daily cabinet meetings until compelled by circumsta 1-- 
ces to evacuate to Corregidor. 

'41 Bee. 10 l-'irat Jap Landings . Japanese invasion troops effect their firs; 

laudings in Appari and Vigan in northern Luzon. Two days later, 
the enemy lands troops in Lcgaspi, Albay. ^ 2 

'41 Dec. 12 MacArthur to "-megon . MacArthur, in a brief message, asks the Pre- 
sident to consider the advisability of evacuating with his family 
to Corregidor. '•uoson's initial answer is a flat "Nor" This is 
understandable enough. However, he relents later on. Up to this 
time -uokjon is unaware of tho fact that the American airforce at 
Clark Field has been wiped out within hours after the start of 'chi 
war, and the American navy, based in Cavite, has left for unknown 
destination doubtless to avoid a repetition of the Pearl Harbor 
debacle. MacArthur, indeed, is apprehensive about the personal se- 
curity of the President because tho enemy can land invasion troop;: 
almost anywhere. 

'41 Doc. 14 2prd Wedding Da y. The President and Don-:'. Aurora receive felici- 
tations on their 23rd wedding anniversary from close friends, in- 
cluding General MacArthur, who is accompanied by his aide, Major 
Manuel A. Rc-as, a reserve officer called to active duty at the 
outbreak of the war. ' " ' 

41 Mid-Doc. Vargas 1 Role. In one of tho meetings of the ©abinot in Marikina, 

Vargas, who enjoys tho President's absolute confidence, is selected 
to stay in Manila, just in case 'iuezon and his Cabinet are forced 
to seek refuge in the ''Rock," another term for Corregidor. Since 



■'1J Malay, op. cit., pp. 0-10. 

2£/ ./Ids "Daily History of "Jar in the Philippines," The Philip rinef Pree Press , 
December 20, 1941, P . 2. -juotod in aaido, op_. cit., Vol. II, pp. 338-339. 

22/ Malay, .supra, p. 12. 

%l Ibid. 



- 142 _ 

under international law, officials of the national government 
are subject to capture and imprisonment by an invading army, 
while officials of local governments am not, the President has. 
decided to appoint Vargas mayor of Ilanila. Vargas' jurisdiction 
as mayor is later expanded to include the outlying cities and 
municipalities, hence the tons Greater kanila. This geopolitical 
jurisdiction continues throughout the Japanese occupation (1942- 
1345). Creator Kanila is the precursor of the present Metro rlanxia. 

Tear, arc Callod. Having made the Vargas selection, 'iuezon procoode 
to picL the membcrr of h:Lr, cabinet who will go \.ith him to Corr,?- 
gxdor. All want to go, but '..uoson, almost in tears, says there' a 
not enough room for then. To compose hie. war cabinet on the "Rock," 
he chooses Vice-President Csmona, as secretary of public instruc- 
tion, Chief Justice Jose Abad Santos as secretary of finance and 
agriculture, and Gen. liasilio J. Valdes as secretary of national 
defense and public works and communications , 495 
Laurel's "If." T 

— ^=== Laurel, who also wants to go with the President, is 

told to stay at his post, like. the other top officials, and "help 
Vargas protect the people." Ait Laurel answers back, "Mr. President 
if I cannot join you, I will go to • the mountains and defy tho Ja- 
panese." 

"No, no," iuezon aayfi excitedly, "you can't do that. The 
people must have their leaders. Cooperate with them (the Japanese), 
but don't take an oath of allegiance to tho >.iperor." 495 

Vargas Rcassxircd. Aside from the President's instruction, Vargas 
wants to be reassured, particulr.ry in connection with his now jot 
as mayor of Greater ilanila, so he proceeds to MacArthur'o head- 
quarters at To. 1 Victoria, Intramurous . "George," the general . 
tolls him, "there's nothing you can do about it. Just oboy their 
(tho Japanese) orders. Do anything they want you to do, but don't 
take an oath of allegiance." 

■A .')oc. 24 juaa onjto "-to ok./ 1 The President and his family, at 3 p.m., leave 
their hurl inn residence for the waterfront to board the s.s. 11a- 
yon for Corregidor. LVfore going, however, he has a few words for 
his faithful Executive Secretary. "God blesn you, George, and load 
3'ou in the right path. You have my absolute confidence, and I am 
av.ro you wr'Jl rot fail mo, Good-by. And Vargas replies: "Mr. Pre- 
sident, no matter what happens, you can count on me, whether here 



W 'Iuezon, op. cipt., p. 223. 
dS§/ Malay, pp.. cit . , p. 15. 
.£2/ Ibid.., pp. 15-16. 



143 



in Malacanan, if tho Japanese allow mo to renain, or in my house 
in hawilihan." 498 

1 Dec. 26 Manila in officially declared an open city. 499 

1 Uqc - 28 mR,B Soloma flodgc. As the U&AFFB'.s northern and southern ar.uy 
groups are retreat in** to Bataan for a protracted defensive war, 
President Roosevelt sends a heart-warming message, to the i'ili r i;.o 
people. "I give tho people of the Philippines," he daclarss, *ix? 
solemn pledge that their freedom will be rodoeaed and their inde- 
pendence establi:,hod and protected." b0 ° 

Doc. 30 QrQ_3ooond I'arm. Elected in the Hovw-bur 11th poll, ■'.uezon and 
Onmena are sworn in by Chief Justice Abaci Santos for their tocund 
term - for auazon, two mere years to complete eight years in office 
as president of the Philippines, as per constitutional mandate ar/ 
limitation; for Gsmena, four more years, the vice-presidency not 
being limited by the charter to eight years. 501 On the same day, 
at the residence of Speaker and iionator-eloct Jose Yulo in Fena- 
francia, Paco, the members of the new Congress of the Philippines 
are also inducted into office by Justice Jose P. Hcloncio. 502 

ijg ggiafgB 1 Le - W 3» Among the significant laws signed by President 

Quezon during the year ( 1 941 ) are the following: Juno. 4, CA To. 

616, penalizing espionage and other offenses against the national 

security; June 7, CA 621, amending Act Wo. 3896, authorizing the 

organization oi rural banks throughout the country; June 7, CA 524, 

appropriating ?1 0,000,000 for civilian defense; June 10, CA 52a, 

creating a Code Committee; June 10, CA 634, penalizing disrespect 

to the Philippine National anthom; June 14, CA 647, granting ma- 

tornity leave to married women in the service; of the govornm :.nt :v 
,„„ .... .. Juno 16, CA 643, creating, the National Housing Comr ittee; 

any uf xtu instrumentalities;/ Juno 21 ,- Cn bbf, requiring fin- ' 

gor-printing of aliens; June 21, CA ;V»7, reorganizing the Commis- 
sion on Elections; and Doc. 16, CA 671, declaring a state of to- 
tal emergency as a result of the war involving the Philippines, 

and authorizing tho President to promulgate rules and regulations 

'50'' 

to meet such emergency. J 



iueaon, nu^fe,^ . 210-211. 
Jiiid. , p. 222 • 
Ibid., pp. 232-233. 
Ibid., p. 229. 

"aide, on. cit . , Vol. II, p. 341. 
-£&£^~£^q$J&, Vols. 39-40. 



_ 144 



' ' XXXI. WASHIHBTOH CALLING ' ' : ' ; 

{942 Jan. 1 Invitation to U.S. nac/r-l-h,,^ 

===========i=* -wcirthur imorms '.uezon of a Washington in- 
vitation to President ' ; ue,on to establish tho Commonwealth govern- 
nent-in-exile abroad .here he regain as the » 8yi abo.i of the 

redemption of tho ^hiH^ixxeo." ^on's war -cabinet favors 
tance of the invitation because they ^ ov that the ,il-h,ino 
want, their President to be saved fro, falling into enemy ban..,, or 
fro, being IcLUod. Instead of weakening the ,'iH* W will io 
fight, the cabinet believes a u W 0 departure for hasten 
facilitate the timely arrival of help from t he United States esx- 
cially to the troops in the field. 504 

'42 Jan. 1 Japs ii'nter He nils • a« . 

==±=====£=^^1. ivfa per tjiair timetable, advanced units of the 

Japanese Imperial Army enter Manila on New Year's Day, the "offi- 
cial" birthday of the Japanese ^peror. According to Vargas, the 
Japanese ^oeror's birthday ia "officially" celebrated on Januarv 
1st, irrespective of th „ ftctual rL , tfi ho WM bom> The Jang 
diately contact Mayor Vargas in his office at the City flail. Th* 
announcement of Fares' appointment as. mayor of Greater Man: la v«, 
been deliberately withheld until a few hours before the Jn,„n,se 
arrival so that h, could function as caretaker of tho national go- 
Vermont after huoaon's departure on Christmas eve for Correal-/ 



'42 Jan. 3 



'42 Jan. 



dor. 



^1 " P r^M - ? ;• '*V:?? n ioauBB his firGt Proclamation fro,; tho 
tfoch enjoining tno ,'ilipino people bo continue standing by "our 
Piloted word, by the loyalty that we have r.led,;ed to America "t; 

L^h-^-V ^ re0d0B5 ' 1 d °—^ ^ - Hberty. 'S 1 ^ fight- 
tJnv W I? /■'■'• 1: ' pln ".?° 0 V le b « kh « asters of their own doc- 
tiny ana tn,t every Filipino not only of this generation but also' 
ol the generations to cone 2 a ; . be able to live in peace c and tran- 
quility in tiie full enjoyment of liberty and freedom." 5 06 

iHggt^Jgrgas. The Japanese High Command orders Vargas "to orga- 
nise who Aeainifitrative Constitution as soon as possible. "507 w 
i-llipiuo leaderu, in interviews with Japanese officials, h-^ve been 
told cnat the Japanese, under the circumstances, could do any 
three things: i) impose a milcd-f irst policy; ;?) form a purpot 
government; or ;>) allow tho old Commonwealth government to conti- 
nue. However, the last alternative has been ruled out immediat 
because of -uocon's hostile acts against the Japanese. 508 

42 Jan * 10 Yaldes to grout, i'o gut a full ana accurate picture of the situa- 
tion ^011 th-riJnfrian front, and to build ir the troops' morale, the 
President dispatches General "'/aides, Philippine Army chief of staff 
and acting secretary of national defense, accompanied by Col. hanuel 
hieto, the presidential aide. Encouraged by the Valdes report, we- 
sson wires: President Roosevslt expressing his ;, beliof and desire' 
that the whole force of America should be directed against Ja'oan in 

C Ml 'Quezon, op.. cit.7~p7~2^7~ 

ill "^rview with Vargas in April 1977. 
?n( 0 ^ aon » suura, p. 243. 

^OPJ>^l Gazette., January, 1942. Vol. I, Mo. 1, p. 15 Quoted in iiaide, or., eit., 
■■ m / T I°r n ' P« >"3; also in Malay, , pp. 51-62. 

^ Malay, or>. cjjt . , p. 56. 



r 



_ 145 



the Far East," this being also the prevailing sentiment among 
American officers in Corregidor. ^ 

142 Jan. 23 Respon3e_and _0r de r. With Vargas heading a group of thirty "men of 
importance," a "letter of response" is handed to the Japanese High 
Command, stating that "we have constituted ourselves into a pro- 
visional Council of State and we are immediately proceeding to 

510 

draft our Articles of Organization." Right after Vargas and 

Company have delivered the "response," a Japanese spokesman reads 

"Order No. 1" from the "Commander-in-chief of the Imperial Japareso 

Forces," appointing Vargas chairman of an "Executive Commission," 

which "shall proceed with the immediate coordination of the existir.. 

central administrative organs in the Philippines, and with the fxe- 

cution of administration under the commands and orders of the Ocm- 

511 

mander-in-@hief of the Imperial Japanese Forces," 

Attack A fter Inspection. Suffering from high fever after a brief 
inspection of coast artillery batteries on Corregidor, Quezon hfo 
a second severe attack of asthma with spasmodic coughing, leavir<? 
him breathless and almost suffocated. Ke is taken out by ambularao 
to a cottage near that of MacArthur' s. A tent is set up at the end 
of the "hospital" outside the Malinta tunnel, where the President 
stays beginning January 26th until he leaves the "Rock" three weaks 
later. 512 

'42 Jan. 28 Formation and Ab solution. On hearing a Tokyo radio broadcast re- 
nouncing the establishment of a "new government in the Philipwir.es. 
pledged to adhere to Japan's Greater Bast Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere 
and the names of Filipino leaders constituting the government, Que- 
zon immediately expresses his confidence in their "loyalty to the 
United States as well as (in) their personal loyalty to me." He 
adds that "they could be depended upon under any and all circums- 
tance to commit no act of disloyalty, either to .America, to ths 

513 

Philippines, or to me, the head of government." 

'42 No Quislings. Quezon, in a letter to MacArthur, says that every 

one of the men who have accepted positions in the Philippine Exe- 
cutive Commission "wanted to come to Corregidor, but you (MacAr- 
thur) told me that there was no room for them here. They are not 
'quislings.' The 'quislings' are the men who betray their country 
to the enemy. These men did what they have been asked to do, while 



503/ Quezon, o_p.. p,j,t> r p. 248. 

510/ Malay, p_a. ci£. , p. 67. 

5H/ Ibid.., p. .72. 

512/ Quezon, suprq f p. 254. 

513/ ibid.., p P . 255-256. 

1 



- 146 

they were free, under the protection of their government. Today 
they are virtually prisoners of the enemy. I am sure they are the 
victims of the adverse fortunes of war and that they have no choice. 
Besides it is most probable that they accepted their positions ir 
order to safeguard the welfare of the civilian population in the, 
occupied areas. I think, under the circumstances, America should 
look upon their situation sympath^ally and understand. 514 ' 

'h^2k*lJmiJ™*22*±on? " My loyalty mi the loyalty Qf the F±1 . _ 
Pino people have been proven beyond question, " Quezon adds in his 
letter. "Now we are fighting by her (U.S.) side under your commard, 
despite overwhelming odds. But, j, t seems to me nu^.in^.^,^ 

b e ypnd itP . JdJ U^^^^^Miit^^ render n ^„ a1 Tfcjg, 

^^LJLCLt_pX^iaLJa^ . . Despite all this, we never hesitated 
for a moment in our stand." 

BL±°JMi^' The Quezon letter expressing anxiety about tho Icng- 
awaitod American reinforcement to the Bataan defenders, is referred 
by MacArthur to President Roosevelt, i" reply, FDR assures Quezon 
that "every vessel available is bearing to the Southwest Pacific 
the strength that will eventually crush the enemy and liberate ycur 
native land." 516 

\ 

February ^onJ^FDR. Expressing fear of the effect on the Filipino poc- 
ple, especially on the loss educated classes, of Premier To jo's 
promise of independence to the Philippines and Burma, made before 
the 79th session of the Japanese Diet (Jan. 21st), Quezon asks 
Roosevelt to authorise him to issue a public manifesto "asking tt.it 
the government of the United States grant immediate, .complete and 
absolute independence to the Philippines; that the neutralization 
of the Philippines be agreed at. once by the United States and the 
Imperial Japanese government; that within a reasonable period of 
time, both armies, American and Japanese, be withdrawn; that neither' 
nation should occupy bases in the Philippines; that the Philippics 
Army be demobilized, the only organized force remaining in the Is- 
lands to be the Philippine Constabulary for the maintenance of lew 
and order; that Japanese and American noncombatants who so desire 
be evacuated with their own army under reciprocal and fitting sti- 
pulation. " Quezon adds that he is anxious to "achieve independence 

.Quezon to M a c Arthur, commenting on the establishment by the Japanese of the 

« lA i«n iB * a, *" wk1vo Commission, JaiN»<ory 23, 1942. Rivera -Collection, Vol. V, 
P. ODY. * 

.Ibisl. 

PP. 261-262. 



_ 147 _ 



j for my people under the Americans. I wanted it done before the 

Japanese who played no part in this development- could claim credit 
for it." 57 

jgg^g-gg^Z- Roosevelt points out the "hollow duplicity" of the 
Japanese promise of independence, adding that "the present suffe- 
rings of the Filipino people, cruel as they may be, are infinitely' 
less than the sufferings and permanent enslavement which will in- 
evitably follow acceptance of Japanese promises. . ." By. contrast, 
FDR says, "we have undertaken to protect you to the uttermost of 
our power until the time of your ultimate independence has arrived. 
Our soldiers in the Philippines are now engaged in fulfilling that 
purpose. We propose that it be carried out regardless of its cost. 
So long as the flag of the United States flies on Filipino soil as 

a pledge of our duty to your people, it will be defended by our 

518 

own men to the death. . ." 

^ezonSees^U^t. . FDR's reply softens Quezon's stand. "When I 
realized that lie (FDR) was big enough to assume and place the 
burden of the defense of my country upon the sacrifice and heroism 
of his own people alone, I swore to myself and to the God of my 
ancestors that as long as I live I would stand by .America regard- 
less of the consequences to my people and myself. Wo could not ir 
doconsy be loss gonorous or loss determined than President Roose- . 
velt." 519 

'42 Feb. 16 T o_ j^ee_T er r it orv . MacArthur informs Washington that Quezon plans 
to transfer the seat of the Philippine government to some free tcr- 
ritory in the Visayas. He ask3 for authority to use submarine to 
get the Quezon party out of Corregidor. 

'42 Feb. 20 " Que^n3 _L eave^Rock^ The Quezons and some members of his official 
family leave Corregidor aboard the submarine S wordfish at 11 p.m. 
They are seen off by Mac Arthur and members of the High Command. 
Left behind is Manuel A. Roxas, newly designated secretary to the 
President who, under Fixecutive Order No. 390 issued by President 
Quezon on December 22, 1941, is the first to succeed to the "Pre- 
sidency of the Philippines in case of failure to qualify, removal, 
termination of the right thereto, death, resignation, or inabili- 
ty to discharge the powers and duties of the office by both the 

President or President-elect and the Vice President or Vice-Prcsj- 

520 

dent-elect, as the case may be." After the secretary to the 

22/ i5srr^i69. ^ 

W U&d., pp.' 272-274. 
^ p . 275. 

W Quezon to Roxas dated Corregidor, February 18, 1942. Rivera Collection, Vol. 
v > P. 2372. 



_ 148 _ 



President, tho following is tho ordor of precedence of the Presi- 
dential succession: secretary of finance, secretary of national 
defense, secretary of justice, secretary of agriculture and coii".iraroi 
secretary of public works and communications, secretary of public 

instruction, secretary of labor, and secretary of health and pul- 
521 

lie welfare. 

The other members of the presidential party who have left 
earlier on the s.s. Don, E steb . a n include Lt. Col. Velasquez, aide- 
de-camp, Lt. Col. iindres Soriano, Serapio Cancer an, and the Pre- 
sident's physician. 

Tho President's itinerary includes the following: San Joso 
de Buenavista, Feb. 22; proceed to Uoilo and Ajui in a couple 
of days; thence to Bacolod and then to Dumaguete, Feb. 27; by Pi- 
boats to Oroquiota in Mis amis Oriental; by motor to Dansalan, er.d 
finally to Del Monte, Bukidnon. 

Auth or ' g Note : The Executive Order (No. 390 ) mentioned above we 8 
prepared by the office of Executive Secretary Vargas before the 
President's departure for Corregidor. For obvious reasons it was 
not published in tho newspapers, although it appeared in the Offi- 
cial Gazette . Vol. 40, Nos. 23-26, December 6 to 27, 1941. It's 
possible that only the office of tho Presidont had obtained a 
copy of this issue because tho situation in Manila by this time 
was rather confused since everybody was expecting the arrival mo- 
mentarily of the advanced units of the Japanese Imperial Forces." 

In Negros Island, the President issued a similar Executive 
Order, but unnumbered, on the presidential succession. The three- 
paragraph order reads: 

"Whereas, the danger of the President of the Philippines 
being either killed or captured by the enemy is always present; 
and , " . 

"Whereas, public interest demands that the succession to 
Presidency be provided for so that at no time may the country find 
itself without a lawful head of the Government of the Commonwealth; 

"That in case I or Vice President Osmefia should be unable 

to perform those duties, the secretary to the President should 

522 

become the President." 
'42 Mar. 17 Mac/g thur Invitatio n. In Cebu, Quezon receives a letter from . 

MaZ^hur" in Mindanao, brought by Col. Soriano, inviting tho Pre- 
sident to join him in Australia where Mac/rthur has been designs.-, 
ted by Roosevelt to set up his headquaters as commander of the 



W Ibid., p. 278. Also O ff^l Ghetto . Vol. 40, Nos. 23-26, December 6-27, 1541. 
522/ Rivera Collection, Vo3 . V, p. 2376". 



- 149 - 

* 

forthcoming offensive campaign to the Philippines. Mac/irthur loft 
Corregidor on March 11, by two PT boats, proceeding to Mindanao, 
whence he flow to Melbourne, Australia, arriving there on March 
17. Upon his arrival in Melbourne Mac.'irthur makes a startling an- 
nouncement that will keep alive the hopes of millions of Filipiros 
for eventual redemption: "I came through and I shall return." 

'42 Mar. 26 Donation_ and_Dep artur e . A few hours before flying to Melbourne ■ 

on one of three Flying Fortresses 3ent by Mac.'rthur to fetch the 

President and members of his party, the Chief Executive signs p. 

deed of donation turning over to the Philippine government oil tits 

papers, an accumulation of nearly 40 years of public service. ■ ^ 

These archival materials are known as the "Quezon Papers." The ; 

President's plane takes off from the Del Monte airfield at 10: 3C 

524 

p.m., arriving m Australia nine hours later. 

'42 Apr. 9 Fall of Bat a an. After an all-out enemy offensive lasting six dfys, 

Bat nan falls to the Japanese. "Bat aan has fallen," the USAFFE rsdio 

station Voice of Freedom announces sadly but proudly, "but the 

spirit that made it stand - a beacon to all the liberty-loving 

525 

people of . the world - cannot fall!" About 36,000 Filipino Td 
American soldiers and 11 generals (six Filipinos, and five Ameri- 
cana) lay down their arms. All of them are to make the "Death 
March" from Bat aan to San Fernando, Pampanga, and finally by trfin 

to the enemy concentration camps at Capas, Tarlac. Hundreds of v. ar 

526 

prisoners die before reaching their destination. 

'42 May 6 Fall of Corregidor. Hardly one month after 3 at aan, the once im- 

pregnable fortress of Corregidor also falls to the enemy. Some 
12,000 Filipino and American soldiers are taken prisoner. General 
Jonathan Wainwright, who succeeded HacArthur, goes on the' radio . 
the following night to broadcast an order to all" sector commanders 
throughout the Philippines to cease further resistance. The Ameri- 
cans surrender, but a great many Filipino officers refuse to give 
up their arms, and join thousands of Filipino civilians who have 
decided to take over where the military have left off, launching 

a fulls c ale and relentless guerrilla war that will last during the 
527 

next three years. 

''' 2 H ay 0 Quezon in U.S. From 'wstralia, the Quezon party crosses the Paci- 

fic on the Resident Coolidgs., converted into a transport ship, 
arriving in San Francisco 18 days later. They are met on their 

&2/ Zaido, sol, _cjjb., Vol. II, p. 345. 
52.V Quiri.no f , p . 348. 

S S^ 6 ' auaca* p. 346. 

W ; Mb., pp. 346-347. 
-■■J M£,, p. 347. 



_ 150 _ 

arrival by high-ranking American officials from Washington. Roose- 
velt has earlier sent a special train to San Francisco to fetch 
the Quezon party. The /jnorican President himself and a specie! 
reception committee nade up of Sabinot members and all the livirg 
former governors general and high commissioners give them a >mrE 
welcome at the Union Station. The Quezons are overnight guests ft 
the White House. 528 

Ho:i :ji- £g.l In a special broadcast to the Philippines 
upon his arrival in the United States, Quezon says that "though 
the Japanese invader may for a brief moment conquer the Philip ;. i ncc,- 
the Filipinos' "minds and souls remain free. And behind this spirit, 
there lives in all of us a confidence that the day of liberation is 
surely coming. The great and free people of the United States will 
not permit you to remain in bondage. Led by their noble statesmen- 
and generals, they will rescue the Philippines (and) break the Ja- 
panese yoke which now oppresses you. Stand firm, hold on to your 
faith! The forces of freedom are on the march. The day approaches ■ 
when you shall joyously welcome them to our shores." ^ 

XXXII COMOWTB.'iLTII G0VERNTG] NT-IN-EXILE 

42 May 13 Gove rnmen t-in-Exile . Quezon sets up the Commonwealth governmont- 

in-exile in Washington, D.C., which function s for more than 

two years until October 3, 1944, two months after .his death, and 
shortly after President Osraeila's departure from Washington to jcin 
MacJirhtur's triumphal return to the Philippines. ^ 

42 June 2 Quezo n B efore House. .Addressing the U.S. House of Representatives, 

Quezon recalls his seven-year stint in the chamber (1909-1916) 

during which "I pleaded the cause of my people, their freedom, jnd 

independence." Then he adds: "It took me seven years of constant 

, pleading before I secured the enactment of the Jones Law." Many 

years later, says Quezon, ho secured another Act of Congress "which 

fixed the year 1946 for the granting of complete independence tc 

the Philippines," Consequently, he was elected first Presidont cf 
the Commonwealth. But then the war broke out, and the Filipino 
people found themselves fighting side by side with the .American ' , 
people in defense of a common cause. 

"I shall not tell you, Mr. Speaker," say3 Quezon, in the 
concluding portion of his speech, "I shall not tell the House of 



528/ Quezon, o£. ^ii, , p. 325. 

W Special broadcast to the Philippines, May 8, 1942. QP, HR#45, TNL. 
520/ Zaido, p_p.. jpji., Vol. II, p. 343- 



c 



- 151 - 

Representatives, I shall not tell the Senate of the United States, 
I shall not tell the government and the people of .America what they 
should do for us in the days to come. All I want to say is that 
death, ruin, and destruction have never daunted our spirit or les- 
sened our faith in the United States." Afterwards, Quezon is presen- 
ted to the members of the House individually by the gentleman from 
New York (Mr. Bloom). 531 

'42 June 4 ' " Reme m ber_th e_ghi liggingg Addressing the U.S. Senate, Quezon any a 
he is not in the United States "to persuade you to send forces at 
once to the Philippines to drive the invader out of my beloved fa- 
therland. Nor will I try to convince you that the Pacific is more 
important than the European or the Atlantic theatres of war. . . 
(But) you will always have in mind, I am sure, that only in the 
Philippines has your flag, the Stars and Stripes, been hauled down 
and replaced by the flag of the Rising Sun. In view of this tragic 
event, I do hope that the American people, in this hour of their 
great responsibility to the world, will always keep before them the 
memory of the devotion and sacrifices of the people of the Philip- 
pines. Let me ask them, in turn, that your people adopt still 

532 

another slogan - "Remember the Philippines!" 

'42 Juno 14 Vir t ually Inde pe ndent . The Philippines becomes a d , e facto inde- ■ 
pendent nation when it is admitted to the United Nations and is 

given a seat in the Pacific War Council. It is also invited to jcr- 

533 

ticipate in several international conference. 

'42 Early Summer Pre sident Without his Co untr y. Quezon, at a luncheon given in honor 
of Son. Dwight D. Eisenhower, says the last time they were together, 
"not so long ago," "Ike" was just a lieutenant colonel, who was la- 
ter ordered back to Washington. "Today, I am an exile in this city 
(Washington, D.C.), a President without his country, and he is £ 
major general who has almost reached the climax of 'his glory as a 

soldiur. ]&\^W?M>J'JU. yo u hear much of General Eisenhower an 

the weeks and months to |Qmo." Indeed, the Quezon prophesy has now 
b1Tcoine~part of history . 



521/ Address before the House of Representatives, 77th Congress of the United St c tec. 

Second Session, Juno 2, 1942. In: Oo^s^iS^ak-^SiTAf House, Vol. 88, Part 4, 

pp. 4789-4791. Rivera .Collection, Vol. VI, pp. 81-93. 
522/ Speech in the U.S. Senate, June 4, 1942. In: jC^niires^i,pnn3. Roco!^, Senate, Vol. 

88, Part 4, p. 4856. Rivera Collection, Vol. VI, pp. 94-98. 

522/ Zaide, 0^. , Vol. II, p. 343- 

524/ Speech, "A President Without His Country," at the luncheon in honor 

of Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower at the Mayflower Hotel in Washington, D.-. 
Rivera Collection, Vol. VI, p. 99. 



• - 152 _ 

<i : 2 Aug. 9 Atlantic Ch arter. The roal tost of the Atlantic Charter, Quezor 

says in a radio broadcast, "would come after the victory of the 
United Nations. Then we shall be faced with that task of making 
the postwar sacrifices that will take the principles of freedom 
out of a charter and put there into everyday lives. We shall ombfrlr: 
on the gigantic task of creating a world without fear and without 
want, a world where all of us can live in freedom to speak .and 
worship, a world where evil men can no longer break the peace." 555 

'42 Aug. 19 lkii==5|i°5|S=I' "Africa," says Quezon in a radio address on the 
occasion of his 64th birthday, "through the plighted word of its 
great leader, President Roosevelt, has assured me that, our freedom 
will be redeemed, and 'our independence established and protected. 
Indeed, I have already achieved, since I came to this country, what, 
in effect, amounts to the recognition of full Philippine nationhood 
when, in the month of June last, I signed the Atlantic Charter ?nd 
took my seat in the Pacific War Council. We are now a member of the 
United Nations, the nations that are united in the common purpose ■ 
and the firm determination to .destroy the Axis Powers and bring 
about the birth of a new world ..." ^ 

! 42 Nov. 15 |ilipi no_ Rocord. "The battle record of the Filipino people," Que- 
zon states in the 7th Commonwealth anniversary ceremonies in Wash- 
ington, D.C., "bears a glorious testimony to the differences between 
freedom and oppression, between the principle of human equality pnd 
the exploded idea of race superiority. That is why our Commonwof 1th 

Day this year is more than a Philippine anniversary. It is an orni- 

5 '-57 

versary pregnant with a raes3age for the whole human race.'" " 

'42 Dec. 30 Rizal's Message. Prom childhood, according to Quezon, Rizal's 

thoughts and deeds had but one purpose - the freedom of tho Fili- 
pino people. Rizal, on the eve. of his death, did not think of his 
past life. Ho saw only the dawn that would come, and the bright 
day ahead. The Filipinos, the President adds, have beon fighting 

side by side with the Americans "in defense of your (American) flag 
and of our own land. . . And there, in the East, whero the sun 
rises, we see already the glimmerings of dawn. .Already the gloorr of 
night is softening and soon the new day will break, 'flooding us 
all with the bright sun of. liberty. 



£15/ Radio talk over the Columbia Broadcasting Station, August 9, 1942. Rivera Cclr 
lection, Vol. VI, pp. 100-101. 

W Quezon 1 3 birthday speech published in full as Extension of Remarks of Son. Mil- 
lard E. Tyding 3 of Maryland in tho U.S. Senate, August 20, 1942. In: Congres- 
sional Record, Senate, Vol. 88, Part 10, p. A3116. Rivera Collection, Vol. VI, 
PP. 102-105. 

£2/ Seventh Commonwealth Day speech, Washington, D.C., November 15, 1942. 
Vol. VI, pp. 106-111. - 



_ 153 _ • 
Then the dream of Rizal will come true." 



XXXIII. DEB J' I . AND FULFILLMENT 

'4-5 Jan. 6 ' Wants _Roxa.3 Rescued . Quezon sends an urgent note to General Mao- 
Arthur, asking him to "try to get Roxas out of Mindanao. I reiterate 
that request. To me it is of the utmost importance to save Roxas • 
and bring him to the United States." But Mac Arthur, after exerting 
all his efforts, replies on June 14th that "there is small chance 

of getting Roxas out. It would appear that he is in Manila restric- 

539 

ted to his own house." 

'43 Jan 21 Ti me to Strike Ja pjan. If Japan turns the raw materials she has ap- 

propriated in her conquered territories into finished war materials, 
Quezon says in an interview with an taierican correspondent at his 
sickbed in the Shoreham hotel, "then the ,job of whipping her will to 
ten times harder. Besides, it should be borne in mind that only in 
the Philippines your (-American) flag has been lowered, and it seems 
to me this offense. .to your national dignity should be repaired au 
soon, as possible. It is time to strike at Japan and I hope yoa do it 
with all the power you have." 

'43 Feb. 20 Em pty P romise. Japan has promised to grant independence to the Phi- 
lippines. "What would that mean?" Quezon asks. "It would mean that 
the Philippines would be another Manchukuo - a government without 
rights, without powers, without authority ... It would be worse 

than folly to rely on any promise made by the Japanese government. . 

541 

Don't lot the Japanese fool you." 

'43 Apr. 28 Secret Mi s sion . Having received disturbing rumors that some Fili- 
pino leaders he left behind were "gravitating toward the Japanese 
co-prosperity sphere," Quezon bares to his attending physician, Lt. 
Col. Emigdio Cruz, that he is at a loss as to whom to send to the ( 
Philippines on a secret mission. The President says all the men he 
has previously sent to the Philippines have failed to reach Manila, 
hence ho has no cloar idea of tho real situation obtaining in the 
country. Whereupon Cruz volunteers to go, but Quezon has serious 
doubts about his ability to infiltrate enemy lines, not being a 

W Ri Za i Day speech broadcast from Washington, D.C. December 30, 1942. Th^JJnJJjg.d. 
.5aiAojaaJ£axittHf Vol. HI, No. 1, January 15, 1943, pp. 34-35. Also Rivera Col- 
lection, Vol. VI, pp. 117-121. 

539/ IMA., Vol. VI, pp. 122-124. 
5W ibid., p. 133 

W Radio address to the Filipino people from Washington, D.C., February 20, 1943. 
Vol. VI, pp. 134-141. - 



- 154 - 

: trained secret agent. Finally, after consulting with BofLa We, 

the President gives Cruz permission to go. 542 Consequently, Cruz 
leaves UasMngton on May 8th, arriving in Australia on June 9 th. 5A '{ 
. 43 tag. 19 Bgat^ft. President Roosevelt in his speech on Occupation Day, 

August 13th, promised that the liberation of the Philippines "vn.ll 
come as surely as there is a God in heaven." This speech, says Quezon, 
"is the best gift that you and I can receive on this anniversary of 
my birthday." 544 . , 

■43 Sept. p Liberty or D 6 ^u "My political philosophy, " Quezon writes the :!„ ' 
York He r^d . . T _ _U auift, "is old-fashioned. It is still that of Patrick ..- 
Henry: 'Liberty or death.; This philosophy has inspired me to loeA 
my people to fight to the bitter end by the side of the United' Strtct 
• against Japan. . . The all-important thing is that wo fought and are . 
still fighting for right and liberty regardless of consequencos. 
Right and liberty are more precious than life." 

teL^Jte* "Governor, do you know why I am ill Just now?" 

Quezon asks former Governor -General Henry L. Stimson, the Presidents 
visitor at Saranac Lake. "I am ill because of worrying over th.r Ja- 
panese offer of independence to the Philippines. I am afraid that 
my people will bo so misled by the enemy that when we go back there 
they might fight on the Japanese side. I would rather die before I 
see that day." When Stimson asks Quezon what is on his mind, the let- 
tor replies, "I wish you would see President Roosevelt and ask him 
to get Congress pass a joint resolution granting independence to the 
Philippines immediately." This Stimson agrees to do. 546 

'43 Oct. 6 FDR_to_Congress. Doubtless as a result of Stimson's intervention, . 

President Roosevelt sends a message to the U.S. Congress recommending 

passage of "legislation giving the President the authority, after 

consultation with the President of the Commonwealth of the Philip- 
pine Islands, to advance the date provided in existing law and 
to proclaim the legal independence of the Philippines, as a separate 
and self-governing nation, as soon as feasible." 

Roosevelt also recommends l) that the U.S. Congress authorise 
_______ the President of. the United States and the President of the 

^ \l^° T «l ^ onci110 ' ^Jkl^fi^ears.: Jjmm^J^jmt^Jji the Phmnnlnfta, 
1941-45. 2 Vols. Vol. II, pp. 791-792. 

W "The Morning of August 1st (Philippine Time) or August 2nd ('U.S. Time, 1944.)" 
Excerpts from "Quezon's Secret Igent," by Lt. Col. Emigdio Cruz, MC, as told to., 
Dr. Conrado M a ta and published in the Philippin es _Fr_e_o, Pre.q s ,, Jan. 31 and Feb. 
7 and 14, 1948. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, pp. 2521-2526. 

W Radio address beamed to the Philippines on Quezon's 65th anniversary, '.August IS, 
1943. The Philippines, Vol. Ill, Ho. 6, August 31, 1943. Also in Rivera Oollec- 
tion, Vol.- VI, pp. .163-165. 

W Letter to the New York Herald Tribune^ . September 30, 1943. _U_L&. j pp. 171-172. 

W, The United Na tion Review,, Vol. Ill, No. 11, (November 15, 1943. .IfcLA. » P- 175. ' 



_ 155 _ 

Commohwealth to enter into immediate negotiations and take the ne- 
cessary steps to provide for full security for the Philippines, for 
the mutual protection of the Islands and of the United States, and 
for the maintenance of peace in the Pacific; 2) that Congress pro- 
vide for determining the adjustments necessary in the economic re- 
lations between the two countries; and 3) that Congress provide for 

the physical and economic rehabilitation of the Philippines from tr 
54-7 

ravages of war. 

Oct. 15 Loj^JoggJijrFg^ . Informed of the establishment of the Jep,,nes 
sponsored Philippine Republic, Quezon immediately goes on the air 
to remind the Filipino people of Philippine ties of loyalty and rx f - 
titudc to the United States, and of President Roosevelt's pled«o ' 
that "the freedom of the Philippines will be redeemed and their in- 
dependence established and protected." 

Quezon, for his part, makes the solemn pledge that "I will 
return with General M a c/irthur. .ind I hope and expect that the Fili- 
pino people, when that day comes, will fight on the aide of the- li- 
berating forces and not allow themselves to be used by Japan who is 
. responsible for the thousands of lives lost, the hardships and suf- 
ferings of our people, and the devatation of our country. Filipinos, 
my beloved countrymen, keep your faith in .Smorioa. Let us be with 
her in victory as we have been with her in defeat." 548 

Oct. 25 £™L2l|etsJkxil. H °anwhile, Lt. Col. Cruz the physician turned 
secret agent, having arrived in the Philippines by submarine from 
Australia, succeeds in meeting Roxas in the evening at 893 Lopanto, 
Sampaloc, Manila. Apprised of the Quezon instructions, Roxas tells 
Cruz: "Toll President Quezon and General Mactethur that there is nc 
doubt about the loyalty of the Filipinos, including those who are 
holding positions in the government. It can be safely stated that 
95 per cent of the entire Filipino people are true and loyal' to 
-Imorica and the leadership of President Quezon." ^ 

O n Succe ssion Question. One of Cruz's instructions is -to sound out 
Filipinos leaders on the question of presidential succession sinoo 
November 14, 1943 is the last day of President Quezon's second torn 
as President of the Philippines, and under Section 5, Article T7 TX of 
the amended Constitution of the Philippines "no person shall serve 
as President for more than eight consecutive years." The times are 
abnormal, and there is absolutely no possibility of holding an 



TilG .SaagEaflsionql Record, Vol. 89, Part 6, pp. 7812-7813. 

SjaJatifid., Nations. jjfflflflgi v °l- m » No « 11 Nov « 1 5» 1943, PP. 47-48. Rivera 
collection, Vol. V, p . 2461. 

' Will0 » i&^u^TejsEa, .Qja- flit., v ol. 11 , P- 793. 



- 156 _ 



election. Because of the war the Constitution itself has "become n. 
shambles and is no longer in operative in the Philippines." In the 
succeeding days, Cruz has mot several more Filipino leaders, inclu- 
ding Chief Justice Yulo and Rafael .Hunan. Xulo, like Roxas, favors 
Quezon's continuance} as President of the Coramonwe alth even after 
November 14th, while ALunan, although a Quezon man, believes that 

Quezon should give way to Osmena in accordance with the oonstitutio- 

. . 550 . 
nal provision. 

T wo Scho ols of _Thought. Quezon and Osmena hold varying but not ir- 
reconcilable views on the question of Presidential, succession, to 
wit: 

Quezon: "The Japanese invasion has destroyed all semblance 

s . . 

of constitutional government and its institution in the Philippines , 
and it seems to me that legally I should remain in office until I rn 
return/bV the sovereign power of the United States to the constitu- 
tional and lawful seat of my government, and become, in fact es well 
as in law, once more the President of the Philippines exercising .ju- 
risdiction over the whole territory of the Philippines, and until 
the Philippine courts are reestablished and functioning normally 
under the Constitution adopted by the Filipino people. 

" u nder international law, the right and responsibility for 
reestablishing constitutional government and constitutional processes 
in the Philippines rest with the United States. Furthermore, the; 
Philippine Independence Act approved by Congros3, ani. the Constitu- 
tion of the Philippines specifically authorize the President of the 
United States to intervene when, as now, constitutional government 
in the Philippines is overthrown. Finally, the power and authority 
to determine and, recognize who is the head of a government in exile 
in Washington rest exclusively with the President of the United 
States." 551 

Osmeft>: (He does not subscribe to the Quezon thesis that the 
Constitution is no longer operative in the Philippines.) "We were, 
in fact, spending the people's money because of the authority of the 
Constitution, and I could not agree that ours was merely an interiir 
government. I thought it was the legitimate government of the 
Philippines." 552 



558/ IbJLi., pp. 794-808. 

W Quezon to Roosevelt. Earlier in the letter, Quezon points out. 12 facts under- 
lying his acceptance of the Roosevelt invitation to come to Washington as the 
head of the government of the Commonweal th-in-oxile and as the symbol of the 
redemption of the Philippines. " 

552/ ilgoncillo. suT3ra r p. 



~ 157- - 

Icko^Jun. Secretary of the Interior Harold Ickes, in . letter 
to President Roosevelt, 5ays that ,, fsllup(| to upho] _ d ^ Constituticn 
would be a serious blow to the cause of future representative govern- 
ment in the Philippines, and that it would offer the enemy an oppor- 
tunity for adverse propaganda among the Filipinos under their con- • 
trol." 3 Secretary of State Cordel Hull, on the other hand, warns 
the President that "if the will 0 f the Filipinos as expressed i„ t.o: ir 
Constitution is ignored by the Commonwealth authorities at Washi^tcm 
so as to alter the right of succession to the Presidency, it is be- 
lieved that the reaction in the Philippines cannot but be unfavorable 
and that such a deviation would be looked upon as a contravention of 
democratic principles of government . " 554 

'« ^on^octod. Receiving no reply from the White House to his lot- 

tor sent two weeks earlier, Quezon calls up Osmefia and bares his dis- 
appointment. "Well," he tells the Vice President, "they're goin £ ; to 
throw me out into the street. . . I sent a letter to the White House 
two weeks ago, and they haven't even acknowledged it. They want to 
get rid of me." Osmefia, however, reassures Quezon that no one- is 
trying to get rid of him. He says that should he succeed to the Pre- 
sidency he would appoint Quezon head of the Council of State with 
headquarters at the Shoreham. 555 



'•;:5 



'43 



*£™*JtoJtemfa, Quezon, in a handwritten letter, tells Osmefia thet 
while his personal preference is to leave the Presidency, he certain- 
ly "would do it now, if I could do so without becoming guilty of 
abandoning the position at a critical epoch in the life of our peo- 
ple." He adds that "if I were convinced that the Constitution con- 
tinues to be in force, I would refuse absolutely to r amain in the 
position,, even if the President (Roosevelt) would desire it." Final- 
ly, ho declares that "I have to continue in the position until the 
President says I am through or until the government of the Commons 
wealth may function anew constitutionally, at which moment I will 
automatically be relieved by you, until another President has bbtm 
elected and has assumed office." 



StimsonJj^Opinion. Secretary of War Stimson, when consulted by 

Osmefia on the matter, places emphasis on the unity of Filipino S at 
= s==== _ = _______ the crucial stage of the war. In other words, he is for Quezon's 

553/ Ickes to Roosevelt, September 1, 1943. 
5W Hull to Roosevelt, September 8, 1943. 

^ pp. 302-809. 



_ 158 _ 

continuance in office as President of the Philippines "for the 
duration of the war." ^7 

143 Irked by jfob i ne t . Wishing to sound out the opinion of his own Ca- 

binet on the question of presidential succession, Quezon singles 
out .Auditor -General Jaime Hernandez, who is not his appointee but 
is assured of his tenure under the Constitution. "What do you thiai.? 
he asks. Hernandez, straightening himself, answers slowly: "Mr. Pre- 
sident,, in view of the importance of the issue, I would like to bo 
given more time to study it before giving my opinion." At thitr joint 
Quezon flares up, and turning to General V aides, shouts: "Genj.L'i;!, 
tell ,'iurora to pack up. I will no longer be President." Turnin. : .. to 
the other members of the Qabinot, he says: "All right, gentlemen, 
this is resolved. I am going to California. Congratulations, Mr. " ■ 
Vice -President." 558 

ator 

Osmen a_ Al ternatives : Osmeila confers with Son/ Tydings, co-author 

of the Tydings-McDuffie ,\ct and chairman of the Senate Committee or 
Territories and Insular Affairs, and presents two alternatives, to 
wit: l) suspension by the taerican Congress of the term of office 
of all Filipino officials, their terms to begin one month after thi 
liberation of the country from the enemy; and 2) keeping Quezon and 
Osmena in their positions. Tydings prefers the latter. 

'43 Nov. 5 Key^o_ProJlom. Uith thc h °lP ° f Tydings, a lotter addressed to 

Tydings and to his counterpart, in the House, Rep. Jasper Bell, ia 
drafted, to be signed by the entire Quezon Sabinet. The letter sub- 
mits the question of presidential succession to Congress, requesting 
that "they review the whole situation and take such actions as in 
their wisdom will bust serve the interest of the Filipino peoplo, 
their constitutional government, and the government of the United 

* 

States during this emergency. Congress may feel free to consider 
whether it would be to the best interest of both peoples to allow 
changes in the direction of the Commonwealth government during the 
emergency tp cpnti nue the status quo until such time as the consti- 
tutional and democratic processes are fully reestablished in the 

Philippines, or to follow such other course of action as, in their- 

559 ' 

opinion, is required by the circumstances." 

'43 Nov. Joint Resolution No. 95. After a little discussion in the Senate, 

but much heated debate in the House, the U.S. Congress finally a.pr . 
proves Joint Resolution No. 95 stating that "notwithstanding the 
provisions of Section 5 of Article VII of the amended Constitution 



552/ im., p. 808. " 

55-8/ Jm., p. 810. ator 

552/ Letter of the Quezon cabinet to Sen/ Tydings and Rep. Bell, November 5, 1945. 



f 



- 159 _ 

of the Philippines, the present President and Vice President of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines shall continue in their respective 
offices until the President of the United States proclaims that their 
successors have been duly elected- and qualified in accordance wi :.h 
the Sonstitution and laws of the Philippines." Quezon wins his l*gt 
major figh^t for political supremacy in the Philippines. 560 

XXXIV. ¥ITHOUT__b^NG__raE_^A_m 

>,<4 Feb. 22 Ma n_of _Fai th . 0 n this 212th birthday anniversary of George Wash-.rv-- 
ton, the father of his country, Lt. Col. Cruz returns from his sac- ' 
ret mission to the Philippines to report to M aC Arthur in the lather's 
headquarters in Australia. "Welcome back, Cruz!" the General say:/, 
standing up and embracing the brave medical officer. When Cruz nar- 
rates how the people at a large general assembly in the Philippines 
wept upon being told by a pro- Japanese speaker that MacArthur could 
never return to the Philippines, the general is visibly moved. In ? 
tremulous voice, M a c Arthur, who was once described by Quezon as a 
man of faith, says with much feeling: "I shall go back and liberate, 
the Philippines if it is my last act on earth!" After resting for 
two days in Brisbane, Cruz is presented with the Distinguished Sor- ' 
vice Cross by Mac Arthur for his signal achievement. 5Sl 

U4 Peb. Mission Accomplished. Cruz reports on his mission to President Que- 

zon who is "very ill in bed" in Miami, Florida. Por the second time 
he is honored for his successful mission. From his sickbed' the Pre- 
sident confers on Cruz the Congressional Medal of Valor, the highest 
military decoration of the Philippines. Cruz is the first and only 
Filipino to receive the award. He is appointed permanent major in 
the Philippine Army and promoted to the temporary rank of lieutenant 
colonel. 562 

Tears and a Wish. The President is obviously satisfied with the 
= = has 

Cruz report, reassured of the loyalty of the men he /left behind in 
the Philippines. But he breaks into tears when Cruz describes the 
suffering of the people. Examining * eZ chest and back, Cruz finds 
the President in a critical condition. "I only wish," the President 
3ays softly, "I could go back to the Philippines even if I died tJ'.s 
day after my arrival." Of. course, the fulfillment of this wish roots 
with M ac Arthur who, back in Corrcgtdor, had assured the President 
that he would bring him back in triumphal entry into Manila, "borne 



^ pp. 815-822. 

ifil/ "The Morning of August 1st," lap.. jjifc. In: Rivera Collection, Vol. V, p. 255 
^/ Rivera Collection,. sup K a f p. 2524. 



160 



on the bayonets of the USAFFE." 

July 4 .Last = Jul^4th = Eessage. Another great achievement of President 

Quezon in Washington whj.ch is not widely, known is the adoption by 
the V.". government of a policy to advance the grant of Fhilippir*' 
independence. In hio last July Fourth tnesysge in Washington, 
reveals that President Roosevelt has signed Joint Resolution 
93 of the U.S. Congress "advancing Philippine independence prior 
to July 4, 1946." Quezon concludes hps brief message as follovc: 
"The forces of freedom and democracy are marching onward irresi*- . 
tibly. As wo commemorate today's American Independence Lay, lot us 
take renewed strength in the confident expectation that soon our 
. own Fotrrth of July from Japanese oppression will dawn for us. It 
will not take long now." J 

_^______ ~=^i~=~= = £2* Pertinent portions of the resolution 

follow: 

"Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in congress assembled. That it is hereby 
declared to be the policy of the Congress that the United Statcn 
shall drive tho treacherous, invading 'Japanese from the Phil* -snip's 
Islands, restore as quickly as possible tht orderly and free demo- 
cratic processes of government to the Filipino people, and there- 
upon establish the complete independence of the Philippine Islands " 
as a separate and self-governing nation. 

* * * 

"SEC. 3, In order speedily to effectuate the policy declared 
in Section 1, the President of the United States is hereby autho- 
rized, after proclaiming that constitutional processes and normal 
functions' of government have been restored in the Philippine Islands 
and after consultation with the President of the Commonwealth of 
the Philippines, to advance the date of the independence of the 
Philippine Islands by proclaiming their independence as a separate 
and self-governing nation pjripx to July 4, 1946." 

(.Note: President Roosevelt signed the resolution on June 
29,. 1944.) 

Aug. 1 "blessed are_they__.__._j/ Lt. Col. Cruz, the physician turned sec- 

ret agent No.- 1, is on duty, attending to President Quezon, this 

bright sunny morning, on the comfortable sleeping porch of the for- 
mer hunting ledge at Camp McMartin, in Saranac Lake, N ew York. The 
President asks Cruz to read the bible. The physician starts reading 
the Sjrraon on the Mount, as directed by the- patient. "Blessed are 
the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingodra of heaven; blessed 

Agoncillo, Jtoofl&YjwKa, £P.. , Vol. II, p. 823. 

PsLSo^ss^DSSLt August 1944, p. 27. Rivera Collection, Vol. VT, p. 240 



r 

r 

r 



365/ Quirino, sUiT, p. 383. 
^ p. 381. 



_ 161 

are the meek, for they shall possess the ea*th; blessed are'thoy 
who mourn, for they shall be comforted ...» 

M2j22Jiles ! The past few days the President has beoome so ' 
weak and tired that he is compelled to use the sign language, for' 
even slight talk can "induce a fit of coughing with sputum 
flecked with blood." - > 5 If s time for the news broadcast cm* the 
radio. The President snaps his fingers, and Cruz sees him pointing 
at the back of his left wrist (referring to his watch). Univer,,! ' 
interest is now focused on the development of the war in the P-cifric. 
The /ilied offensive is scoring one victory after another. "Gen. ' 
MacArthur made a successful Landing on Hoonfur just 600 miles from 
the Philippines," ooraes the announcement. There is almost simulta- ' 
neous clapping of hands. "It won't be long now," the President says, 
at the same time motioning Cruz to step out of the room to look for 
the attendant, a Porto Kj.can male nurse. 

^| = llht = |£lore. The night before this, while saying the- rosary, 
tho President struggled painfully with both elbows to rise in bed, •. 
but having failed ho just whispered to Dr. Benvenuto R. Dino, tha 
attending physician on the night shift. "Dino, pray for me - pray 
for me so that God will .allow ne to return to the Philippines ! I 
feel so weak that I am afraid I may not make it." 566 

=^l~£5«^s« °ncc outside tho room, Cruz hears a noise. He rushes 
back into the room and finds tho President coughing spasmodically, 
with blood coming out of his mouth and nose. "Trepp, " he faintly 
whispers. Cruz quickly runs downstairs and calls Dr. Tropp. He also' 
dashes to the chapel to inform. Mrs. Quezon about tho President's 
condition. He asks her to pray hard for him. Cruz finds the patient 
in " a very cyanotic condition," hi's skin and face turning bluish I . - 
cause of insufficient aeration of the blood. Mrs. Quezon and the 
children come in, but the sick man motions them to stay outside, tc 
spare them the anguish of seeing him in his last difficult moments. 
The bedsheets, streaked with blood, are in complete disarray because 
of his struggle and contortions. Gasping for breath, he is turned 
upside down, and a big clot is removed out of his air passage. Ho », 
seems to have recovered, but lie has lost consciousness, his head 
listing to the right udgo of the bed, and blood oozing freely from 
his mouth. 

Dr. Trepp shakes his head and whispers, "He is going to die." 
Whereupon the family group fall to their knees as the chaplain, Fx . 



_ 162 



Pacifico Ortiz, S.J. , leads in reciting the Lord's prayer. A fuw 
brief moments later, after receiving the extreme unction, the Pre- 
sident breathes his last. It is 10:15 a.m., August 1st (Philippine 

time), 1944, nineteen months and three days before the Philiprdr-33 

567 

gains her independence. 

The President dies without seeing the dawn of freedom that 

is his chief handiwork and greatest contribution to his native- 

■> a 563 
land. 

XXXV. _^IG__P;.GB VBALIK 

'44 -Aifl. 2 Death_ Enounced. By order of the U.3. Secretary of War, General 

George C. Marshall, chief of staff, issues General Orders No. 62 
announcing "with deep regret" the death of President Quezon. Says 
Marshall: "Prosident Quezon was a most effective leader of the Fili- 
pino people in their long struggle for self-government and indepen- 
dence. The establishment of the Philippine Commonwealth has been ir 
a large measure due to his courage and intelligence. Ho was a strorg 
and appreciative friend of the United States, 'is a result of his 
efforts, throughout the agonies of the Japanese invasion, and in 
spite of all the efforts of our enemies, the Filipino people have 
remained loyal to our government. The people of the Philippine Com- 
monwealth and liberty-loving people everywhere have lost an out- 

56Q 

standing leader in the death of President Quezon." 

'44 Aug. 3 Honors _ at Washington. At 8 p.m., Quezon's mortal remains are 

' * ■ 

brought to Washington, D.C., by special train from Saranac Lake, 

New York. On hand to meet the train at the Union Station are newly 

inducted President Osmona and members of his Qabinet, representatives 

of the U.S. department of state and department of the interior, as 

well as friends and admirers. Eight armored cars of the U.S. army 

and a formation of motorcycle cops escort the casket to St. Matthew's 

Cathedral where it will lie in state until the next morning. 

Members of the different services of the U.S. army take turns 

s 

in keeping vigil. Foreign embassies in Washington fly their flag at 
half-mast ' for the departed leader. The St. Matthew's 

■Si/ Quirino, p_p_. jai£. , pp. 385-385. *lso "The Morning of August 1st," las.. Siil- 
Rivora Collection, Vol. V, pp. 2525-2526. 

W Thcj President's death is reminiscent of the mysterious stranger (Elias), in 

Rizal's Ngjj,, his face turned to the Bast and whispering a prayer. Pretty soon 
his body will turn to ashes as the fire consumes the great pile of firewood 
turned into a funeral pyre. He tells the dumbfounded Basilio: "Nothing will 
remain of me ... I die without seeing the sun ri30 on my country. You who are 
to see the dawn, welcome it, and do not forget those who fell during the night!" 
MS®. Guerrero's translation of the Noli, £E> JLUl* » P« 402. 

W Rivera Collection, Vol. V, p. 2528. 



f 



- 163 



Cathedral is almost filled with "so many flowers" sent by Chiefs of 
State and friends not only in the United States but also in other 
countries, particularly the South American Republics, -After high 
mass on August 4th, the funeral cortege loaves the Cathedral for 
Arlington National Cemetery where the body is interred tor.pc- 
rarily until it can be shipped to the Philippines. 570 

, , Oct. 20 MM^hurHeturns. An /merican armada of 650 ships lands four arm;/ 
divisions at strategic points of Leyte province, \fter the initio, 
wave of assault troops has made a beachhead, General Mac^rthur, ac- 
companied by President Osmc-ha, Brig. Gen. Romulo, and members of 
the High Comraand, wades, ashore. M a cArthur then tells the Filipino 
people by radio: "I have returned." 571 

Oct. 23 Commonwealth Restored. M a cArthur issues a proclamation declarant 
the restoration of the Commonwealth government on Philippine soil. 
Leyte is made the temporary capital of the Philippines, pending the 
liberation of Manila. 572 

'45 Fob, 27 ^ --^-—^M' -'roidst simple ceremonies at Malacaiiang, 

the Commonwealth government is formally reestablished throughout 
the Philippines. But it will take nearly six months before the en- 
tire country is liberated from the enemy. ^ 

'45 T 'ar. 7 Bxejutive^^p__ar tmen ts . President Osmena issues an Executive Order 

providing for the restoration of the executive department^ the 
government as they existed before the war. The next day (March s) 
Osmena inducts into offioe the new members of . the Cabinet. ^ 7/ ' 

'45 June 9 Co ngre s s_ Co nvc ne d . The Congress of the Philippines, whose members 

were elected on November 11, 1941 but could not function because. of 
the war, is convened in special session by Osmena. In this session 
Senator Manuel A. Roxas is elected president of the Senate, and 
Senator Elpidio Quirino, Senate President protempore. 

'45 July 5 Co untr y Liberated. MacArthur announces that the "entire Philippine 

Islands are now liberated and the Philippine campaign can be re- 

576 

garded as virtually closed." 



"AV "honors at Washington" by Serapio D. Canccran, private secretary to the lat^ 
President Quezon. In: Quo^on Memorial Book. Manila: Quezon Memorial Committee, 
1952, p. 62. 

W Z P .ide, o_d • cjJi., Vol. II, p. 356. 

W Ibid. 

W -Vjoncillo and Guerrero, .QiJt. , p. 483. 

W JtttiL., p. 491. 

35/ Zaide, .ojd. .ext.., Vol. II, p. 363. 

.'■W .^aJJlUJUjjjjingg, Manila, July 5, 1946. Quoted in Zaide, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 



_ 164 



■■■r6 



Mg» 15 . £ a Ejg_gurrender3 . Reeling under the impact of two devastating atorr: ' ■■ 
bombs, the first dropped on Hiroshima on .August 6, and the seco:id 
on Nagasaki on August 9, the Imperial Japanese government decides 
to surrender unconditionally, The formal surrender ceremonies are 
held aboard the battleship USS Mjs^pur jL on September 2nd, marking 
the termination of the Pacific War. ^ 

Apr. 23 =|il = =£™~=li~ = ~ii* For the secon d time in hi3 political life 
Osmeha meets defeat at the hands of a secessionist when Senator Ro- 
xas, who has left the Hacionalista Party to form a splinter group 
known as the "Liberal v/ing" (eventually the Liberal p arty) , licks 

him in the presidential election by a narrow margin, despito the 

t 

fact that Osmeha, refusing to campaign, has delivered only one , - 
speech. Roxas' running mate, Senator Elpidio Quirino, is also elec- 
ted ¥ice Bresident. Roxas is reported to have been supported by Mac- 
Arthur and McNutt. 578 

•46 May 8 Off to U.S. Accompanied by McNutt, President-elect Roxas flies tc 

the United States purportedly "to discuss with the .Imerican autho- 

' 579 

rities vital natters affecting the Philippines." 

1 .;.6 May 28 Roxas Inau gura l. Roxaa is inducted as the second regularly elected 

■ President of the Commonwealth which is to cease formally in less 
than two months after his inauguration, and replaced by the Republic 
of the Philippines in accordance with the Tydings-McDuffie Indepen- 
dence Law which Quezon uecured, almost single handedly, and in spite 
of the taunting by Roxas himself. 

It will be recalled that after the rejection of the Haro- 
Hawes-Gutting ..let by the Philippine Legislature, Roxas publicly dec- 
lared that "if he (Quezon) comes back with a new law, I shall march 
at the hea'dof the parade which shall meet him ... I shall kiss 
his hand and , . . pledge him my support." However, Roxas was not 

around at the pier when Queeon returned on Kay 1, 1934, bringing 

580 

the Tydings-McDuffie Act. 

Quezon^ s _Log a cy. Quezon was certain the Philippines would gain 
her independence on July 4, 1946 - or even much earlier under Joint 
Resolution Ho. 93 - had he lived long enough to come back with Mac- 
Arthur's liberation, forces. In a letter addressed to the Filipino 
nation, dated October 23, 1934, two days before his operation for 
kidney stone at the Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, Maryland, 



.117/ Ibid., p. 361. 

328/ iigoncillo and Guerrero, p_p.. stUi»i p. 497. 

W Zaido, oj>. cjJi. , Vol. II, p. 364. 

W Quirino, ssli.»t PP« 266-267. 



r 



_ 165 

Quezon says with prophetic insight: 

"I have served you, land that I love, to the full extent of 
my capacity. You in turn have shown mo a true and sincere faith. I 
will never forget till the last beat of my heart what you have shovm 
me. I r Q ff ret ^ K^X ^^^^ ^ in t ^ for ^ no ^ hmn . , hft „ 

but a s hort wav . " ' 1 

nf July 4 Birth of Republic. /midst impressive ceremonies at the Luneta, Rc~ 

xas is inducted president of .the new Republic of the Philippines as 
provided for in the Tydings-McDuffie Act. The Truman proclamation ' 
announcing to the world the withdrawal of American sovereignty and 
the recognition of Philippine independence is read by U.S. High 
Commissioner McNutt. 582 

'46 July 27 BggkHome^ay^ The body of President Quezon arrives on board ' 
the aircraft carrier Uj& 2Einsatan, accompanied by U.S. Supreme 
Court Justice Frank Murphy, personal representative of President 
Truman and former governor general and high commissioner to the 
Philippines. Quezon returns to his native Land not "borne on the 
bayonets" of M a cArthur's troops, who have already liberated the 
Philippines, but on one of America's mightiest carriers afloat. 583 

Freedom having been won, thanks to Quezon's patriotism and 
unceasing struggle for nearly half a century , it may well be said 
that he has returned in triumph for the third and last time in his 
colorful career, And doubtless this is the ultimate triumph as well 
as the greatest achievement - independence - without which life, 
for self-respecting peoples and nations, will not be worth living. 584 

'46 Aug. 1 v ConsumnatumJ3st. Manuel Luis Quezon, father of Philippine indepen- 
dence, is laid to rest at high noon at the Manila North Cemetery. 



W "Last Message," Rivera Collection, Vol. V, pp. 2515-2518. 
582/ Zaide, pja. ci£., pp. 366- 367. 



58' 



The sole mission of the USS Princeton was to bring the Quezon remains back to 
the Philippines. For this special task, the U.S. government spent about Pi, 344, 
880 - quite a tidy sum in 1946 when the official exchange rate was F2.00 to 
JL.00 Vide "The Story of the USS Princeton," Evening Hows r August 2, 1946, Also 
•feojLi^oxii^B^k., op. cit. . pp. 72-74. 

W "Independence is Above Any Price," Says Quezon. In: Interview with S.J. Woolf ■ 
of the NgiLYai&J&ii&a, May 16, 1935. Rivera Collection, Vol.. Ill, pp. 1156-1157. 

%ch 9, 1978 
%dt f Cavite 

# # ■# 



lf(a) 



; ' ' PART . II: 
QUEZON READER 



. 1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 
. 7. 

8. 

9. 
10. 
11 . 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16^ 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 

27. 

28. 

29. ' 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 



Academic Freedom 
American Imperialism 
Ar erica's Tribute 
Anti-Filipino 
Anti-Independence 
Boy Scouts 
Business 
Capital 

Capital Punishment 

Census . " 

Character Assassination 

Character Building ' 

Christianity 

Church and State 

Citizens // Citizenship 

Civil Service 

Coalition 

Code of Ethics 

Colectivista // Majority 

Colonial Mentality 

Common Man 

Commonwealth 

Concept of Duty 

Constitution 

Democracy 

Dictatorship 

Economic Nationalism . , 

Economic Planning 

Economic Readjustment 

Economic Self-Suff xciency 

Education 

Elections 

Employment 

Encomium 



35. 

36. 

37. 

38. 

39. 

40. 

41. 
' 42. 
. 43. 

44. 

45. 

46. 

47. 

48. 

49. 
50. 
51. 
52. 
53. 
"54. 
55. 
56. 
57. 
58. 
59. 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 



English Language* 
Fil-American Relations 
Filipinism 
Filipino Flag 
Filipino Hospitality • 
Filipino People '. 
Filipino Soldier 
Filipino Women 
Finance 

Freedom of Speech 
Friendship Policy 
Good Government 

Hare-Hawes-Cutting Controversy 
Health 

Heroes // Heroism 
History 

Housing . • 

Human Rights 

Immigration 

Independence 

Independence Prayer 

Industry 

International 1 Relations 

Invasion 

Jones Law 

Judiciary 

Justice 

Labor . 

Labor-Capital Relations 

Labor Unions 

Land 

Landed Estates 1 

Land Question 

Laws 



Sources: 

1. "Quezon Papers." Fifty-four microfilm rcels'plus 18 boxes of uncatalogued 

materials, Filipiniana and Asia Division, the National 
Library. These papers were donated to the government by President Quezon 
on March 26, 1942, in Del Monte, Bukidnon, shortly before flying to' 
Melbourne, Australia, en route to the United States to establish the 
Commonwealth governuent-in-exile in Washington, D.C. 

2 * Messages of the Pr esident. Ten volumes of President Quezon's messages, 

speeches, proclamations, administrative orders, 
executive orders, general orders, and Commonwealth Acts passed by the 
First and Second National Assembly from December 21, 1935 to December 1ft, 
1941 . Available at the Jorge B. Vargas Filipiniana Foundation, Kawilihan 
Mandaluyong, Metro Manila. * 

3* "Quezon in Action." Six volumes of Quezoniana (speeches, messages, article 

memoranda, letters, cables and newspaper clippings) 
compiled by Prof. Juan F. Rivera of the U. P. Law Center, Dilinan, Quezon 
City. Available at the Archives Section, Main Library of the University, 
of the Philippines. • •> . 



11(b) • ' 

- «r - ■ . 

QUEZON READER 
(Continued). 



69. 


Lawyers 


1 05. 


Quezon Dictum 


70. 


iiG gl S J.Q b 1 0 11 


1 06. 


Quezon ilouse-C leaning 


71. 


Legislature 


1 07. 


Quezon Humor 


72. 

73. 


MacArthur 


108. 


Quezon Illness 


Military 


1 09. 


Quezon Independence Stand 


74. 


Minu.aiT.ao jLLiaiifa. 


1 1 0. 


Quezon on Manglapus 


75. 


Minimum Wage 


111. 


Quezon on Rizal 


76. 


t% Miscellany 


1 12. 


Quezon-Osmena Controversy 


77. 


Nation xJuiiamg 


113. 


Quezon-Sumulong Controversy 


78. 


National Defense 


114. 


Quezon-Wood Controversy 


79. 


National Discipline 


115. 


Quezon Partyless Democracy 


80. 


National Economy 


1 16. 


Quezon Retraction 


81 . 


National Identity 


117. 


Quezon: The Man 


82. 


National Language 


118. 


Quezon's "Ultimo Adios" 


83. 


National unity 


119. 


Religion 


84. 


Nationalist! 


1 20. 


Scholarship 


85. 


Nepotism // Favoritism 


121 . 


Science 


86. 


Neutrality 


122. 


Self-Rule 


37. 


Neutralization 


123. 


Self -Sacrifice 


83. 


No Acting President 


1 24. 


Separation of Powers . 


89. 


No Filipino Quisling 


125. 


.Social Justice 


'90. 


Opposition // Minority 


1 26. 


Social Revolution 


91 • 


Patriotism 


1 27. 


Social Security 


92. 


Peace and Order' 


1 28. 


Sports , 


93. 


Philippines 


1 29. 


State and Individual 


94. 


Police 


130, 


Strikes . 


50. 


Jtr Oil TjICS 


1 J \ • 


ouuversion , 


96. 


Poll Frauds 


132. 


Sugar Industry 


97. 


Poverty 


133. 


Taxation 


93. 


Presidency 


134. 


Teaching Profession 


99. 


Presidential Reelection 


135. 


Tenant -Land lord Relations 


100. 


Public Decorum 


136. 


Tourism ' ; 


101. 


Public Service 


137. 


Trade 


102. 


Quezon and Critics 


138. 


Tydings-McDuff ie Act 


103. 


Quezon and Cuevo-Barredo Case 


139. 


University of the Philippines 


104. 


Quezon and Independence 


140. 


Woman Suffrage 



»' . '■ f 



Il-'i 

- m - 

IjART'II 
1. ACADEMIC FREEDOM ' 
Afl ADEMIG FREEDOM CA N'T BE USED 'TO SUBVERT LOVE OF COUNTRY 

Under our Constitution, academic freedom in the Philippines imposes certain 
restraints, such as that which requires that no man shall preach in the country- 
theories and philosophies destructive of Filipino patriotism. 1 

O^ZONJfjgTS^^ COURAGEOUS THINKING 

I encourage academic freedom because I want to see some courageous thinking 
among our people. I do not want the Filipino people to be just repeating what they 
have read somewhere or what has been taught them by someone. I want- our race to' 

continue the knowledge of mankind by postulating itself on the theories of govern 

: • 2 . • 

mfeiiit. . 

iuLQ_BBLI EVES IN j) C£]fflIC. ggjgPOMi BUT WITH DUE RE.'ffON SIBlLITY 

*. 

I believe in academic freedom. As far as I am concerned, not only the pro- 
fessor's of a university but everybody can speak his head off. 

I believe, however, that there is something that should be borne in mind 
when you speak of academic freedom. My friends, every right as you know - for 
this is commonplace - carries with it a corresponding responsibility. 

Academic freedom imposes definite responsibilities upon the professors of *• 
university. Ono is the duty of every member of the faculty to know his subject 
thoroughly, for when a professor of an instittition of learning speaks, people 
give weight to what ho says, because they assime that he knows what he- is talking . 
about . 

Academic freedom, therefore, ■ imposes upon every member of the faculty the 

obligation to keep his mouth shut until he is certain about what he wants to say- 

When he is certain, in his own mind, through long and constant study of his sub- • 

joct, that ho has come to a definite conclusion and that such conclusion is his 

real conviction, then he can speak and, as far, as I am concerned, ho can speak 

3 

against the President, against the government, against the whole world. 

1/ Speech at the Senior Teachers' .Assembly, Bagnio City, May 22, 1936. In: 

Messages of /t;h o P resident . Vol, 2, Part I, p. 93. Manila: ' Bureau of Printing, 
1937. Available at the Jorge^ B. Vargas Filipiniana Foundation, Mandaluyong, 
Metro Manila. Hereinafter to' be referred to as ikeaflfl. JkfiflflgQ.a > JBVFF. 

2/ Speech at the open forum of the U.P. Alumni Association, August ?, 1940.. 
In: "Quezon In Action, " a six-volume Quezoniana Collection of Prof. Juan P. 
'Rivera, U.P. Law Center, . Diliman, Quezon City,. Hereinafter' to be referred to 
as Rivera Ool?.ection, Vol. V, p. 2245. ■ 

2/ Baa* ' " 



II-2 ' 

iV^IDENTj rALUES OPINIONS OF POLITICAL SCIENTISTS . ■ 

According to, a noted Harvard professors, "There is in reality no distinction, 
between the so-called theoretical and practical men." A sound theory ought to work 
in practice. 

A political scientist deals with facts and deduces his conclusions from 
those facts. Political science, you see, is not an exact science because of the hu- 
moti factors involved. The conclusion that a political scientist reaches, however, 
is more dependable than that of anyone who has not had any training at all in poli- 
tical science, because of the political scientist's scientific method of" approach. 
For, of all men, hd is best prepared to deal, with political probloms. His mind is 

alert and his power of analysis greater than that of an ordinary layman - for 

4 

instance, v we, the ordinary laymen., . • '> ':.'-,. ' 

2. AMERICAN IMPERIALISTS 
HLQ FLAYS AMERICAN IMPEMALI3T3 JjjMJ.S. CONGRESS . :' i 

Strange as it may seem, you will find here (U.S. Congress) illustrious citi- 
zens and distinguished statesmen who will toll you: "Thero is nothing, in the Decla- 
ration of Independence that prohibits .this country (U.S.) from governing an alien 
pooplo against their express will." 

Of course, I do not refer to those imperialists who avow that in the consi- 

deration of colonial" problems, they do not care a whit about principles, their onl- 

concorn^ being their pockets. They are not worthy of mention on this occasion. This 

day is too sacred to talk about men whoso code of morals is nothing but Big Business 

(.'.pplause. ) To them the declaration of Independence is a scrap of paper, worthy only 

' 1 

of 'dreamers whom a utopic world knows by the idle name of patriots. 
QUEZON'S ARGUMENT .'fl4INST U.S. IMPERIALIST IRREFUTABLE 

Let us address ourselves to those who, in advocating colonial policy for the 
united States, honestly think 1 that they are so doing without disregard of either 
the Declaration of Independence or the Constitution; and who say that their mission 
in the Philippines is a divine mission for the purpose of uplifting the Filipino 
people ... In my opinion, in the opinion of the Filipino people, and, I believe in 
the opinion of the large majority of the American people, they are wrong. How could 
my one sustain the proposition that any country on the face of the earth, no mat- 
ter how strong, no matter how advanced, no matter how altruistic and noble its 
motives may be, has the right to govern a foreig n people without their consent, in 
defiance of the principles proclaimed in the Declaration of Independence? 

The consent of the governed is the base of all just government, the 

V Ibid.., p. 2244. 1 * 
ll Speech at Tammany Hall, New York City, July -4, 1911. Rivera Collection, 

Vol. i, p. 88. - ; 



II-3 . 

IT* ~ 

Pool axation says. It is, therefore, in utter contradiction not only of the spirit 

but also of the very letter of the Declaration to impose a government upon any 

.2 
people by force. 

3E SIPEH T COMMISSIONER REBUTS FAL SE ST '2ETI ENT3 IN "NEW YORK HERALD" 

Supposing that 250 businessmen of Manila, of whom 225 are Americans and 
other foreigners and twenty-five are Filipinos, were against Philippine independor' 
■is that a good reason for withholding from us our inherent right? Should 225 out-' 
siders and twenty-five natives have more right than 7,000,000 Filipinos in the 
affairs of the la J tor's land? Supposing that there may be business unrest because 
of a change of government, is this enough reason for not establishing an indepen- 
dent Philippine government? To establish the Republic of the United States cost 
almost the total destruction of business in this country for several years,' and 
yet this was not considered a serious objection to American independence. 

■ QUEZON EXPLAI N S WHY IMPERIALISTS FLY AT EACH OTHER'S THRO /J 

Why is it that the small nation today is the underdog? The first excuse fv-j. 

the present policy of imperialism which has caught up the nations of Europe is thai 

tho small nation needs the protection of the large and powerful nation, Nations ' 

4 

becoming drunk with power cannot help flying at one another's throat J 
EXPERIENCE SHOWS IMPERIALIST'! LESS PROFIT, 'J3L E 

The experience of the United States in the Philippines shows that American 
capital did less business in the Philippines during the days of the Empire - as the 
period when the Filipinos had so little share in the management of their own af- 
fairs is generally known - than it does and will do under the present government 
tho Filipinos themselves... I therefore believe that the consequence of the enact- 
ment of the Jones Bill will reach far beyond the limits of the Philippine Islands, 
and will affect the present status* of other dependent peoples the world over, in 

that their respective metropolises will sooner or- later come to the realization 

5 

that it ls+both just and profitable to free the whole human race, ■ 
MLQ DESCRIBES WOR ST ENEMIES OF PHILIPPINE INDEPE NDENCE 

______ In connection with the problem of our independence there are two kinds of 

2j .Article, "The Declaration of Independence: An Analysis , " "Thj_Jlli_ojjaa People t 
Vol. I, No. 5, January 1913. I » P.-'lH. 

2/ Article, "False Statements ,'tnswered, "''T__ SUULniflR People. Vol. I, No. 8, ■ 
April 1913. Rivera Collection, Vol. I, pp... 145-147.. 

V Speech before tho Cosmopolitan Club of New York , . De cember 9, 1914. In: T___ 
Filipinn PfinnTn. Vnl . Ill, No. 4, December 1914. .JUeULm. Vo1 » I » P« 327. 

V Article, "Tho Jones Law: Its Effect on the United States* the Philippines, and 
Other Subject Peoples," Tho Philippine Review. Vol. II* No. 12, November 1917. 
liisL., Vol. I,' p. .447. " # ' 



n-4; ... 

- Xft- - 

mericans that are working against it - the so-called imperialists and the Anerioa 
businessmen in the Philippines. 

I do not need to describe to you who the first is, because you know him as 
well as I do. The American business interests are our worst enemy for the realiza- 
tion of our independence. He is against our most cherished ideal because he bolicv- 
it will work against his business... H 0 is af rfiuid that Jppan would inVade ug ffid 
destroy his business. Ke is afraid that a revolution would start the moment we aro 
sot free and endanger his business. He has representatives working among the 
congressmen of America against our independence. 

Of course, these representatives never say that the .American businessmen in 
the Islands are against giving us our freedom because their business interests 
would be endanger, because to do so the motive would seem selfish. Their argument 
is that independence is not good for us yet, that it is to our best interest that 
wo should wait a while, and that they favor independence, but that for our own sake 
it should not be granted yet. ■ 

Let me tell you that it is this kind of Americans that killed the Clarke 
/isendment and the Jones Bill No. 1. It is they that made me work hard to get the'- " 
Jones Bill No. 2 through Congress. They are the worst enemies of our independence., 
POLONIES 3REED WAR AMONG IMPERI ALIST STATES _ QUEZON 

Q. - You think colonial possessions are mischievous? 

A. - I think they tend to breed war. It is a historical fact that they have 
bred war. They bred the World War (i). Germany came upon the international scene ' 
lato. Earth's treasure grounds had been parceled out to her rivals. She wanted 
colonies. She felt that her greatness, actual, and latent, demanded colonies. She 
was willing to fight for them. She fought and was crushed, but the world was ter- 
ribly crippled in the process. Colonies are still with us and still a source of bit- 
terness, unrest and possible war. Nations must give up the idea of seizure, of 

domination, of obtaining new raw materials and trade anyhow, of force - if they 
7 

want peace. 

P.I. INDEPEND3NC E GRANT COULD END ERA OF IMPERIALISM 

To take over a weak people and hold them permanently against their will ia 
not new in the history of the relationship between the weak and strong. But to o^fn 
?. colony and deliberately set it free was never before done by a powerful nation, 
• ; merica can do this, and she has promised to do this. When she does, it, the era 

&/ Address at a labor assembly, at the Manila Grand Opera House, June 22, 1920, 

'J^IhXXi&QXn&^eyXejU. Vol. V, No. 9, September 1920. Rivera Collection, Vol. I, 
P. 531. 

2/ Exclusive interview with Edward Price Bell for the Chicago Dailv Npwfl r 1925. 
Ins The- Phjg jLppine Rep ubJ r ^,q r published monthly in Washington, D.C., and 
edited by Clyde K. T a venner. Ibid., Vol. II, p. 768. 



II-5 ' 

would. 

of imperialism will have come to an end, for all nations, of the world/be compelled 

8 

to follow her humanitarian example?. . 

3.- AMERICA'S TRIBUTE 
OJS^ON DID FOR HIS COUifTHY MO REjmAN UjY TITO MEN CO ULD HAVE DOME} 

Philippine Resident Ooramissioner Quezon is one of the most brillian^speak- • 
ers , and one of the f rarest debaters, in the U. S. House of Representatives. He is 
nltso one of the most popular, if not the most popular, member of the House. ■ 

Whenever it becomes known that he is to address the House, it is wholly- un- 
necessary to call for a quorum. A quorum is always on hand. He did more for his 
country's cause than any. two men his people could have sent here. 1 • 

10*! A aBPRB^M ^TVIjJ.^AYS PLOWING T R IBUTE TO QUEZON 

Mr. TOWER: I do not desire to take the gentleman's time. I think it may 
perhaps be fitting for a member of the minority to say that while he has not 
always been able to agree with the Resident Commissioner from the Philippine Is- 
lands, he is ready to say that he has never known any man more devoted to the 
interests of his people, as he understood those interests, than has been the 
gentleman from the Philippine Islands. (Applause.) In season and out of season, 
with an ability and persistence rare and creditable to any representative in any . ■ 
parliament in the world, this gentleman has worked for his people. . 

•And I desire to say that, so far as my belief is concerned, there never 

has been in any legislative body a representative of a people such 'as the, Filipi- 

n6s, who has ropresente- 1 : them more ably and faithfully than the gentleman who now * 

2 

nddrosses the House of Representatives (f'r. Quezon). (Applause.) 
QUEZON TOASTED BY HIS OWN PEERS I N F^vELh_3/Jj!jUET 

TNotc: On the night of 29 August 1916, the day the. Jones Act was signed by 
President Woodrow WiLson, a despodida was given in Washington, D. C., in honor of 
retiring Philippine Resident Commissioner Manuel L. Quezon. The farewell banquet ' 
was describe d by Patrick Gallagher, editor of the Par Eastern Bureau, as "without 
parallel in the parliamentary history of the world." Prominent American legislator? 
including Speaker Champ Clark of the U.S. House of Representatives, took turns 
praising Quezon's brilliant record during his seven-year stint in the Congress of 
the United States ( 1909-1916). Hereunder are some of the tributes paid the 38- 
year-old Filipj.no leader who was destined to be the first President of the 



3/ Address before tie American Academy of Political and Social Soienoe, Phila- 
delphia, November 25, 1927. In: Tj^ J hjJjJ223J2S^^^ Yo1 ' Y > No * 2 ' 
March 15, 1928. Ibid. . Vol. II, pp. .803-804. « 

1/ Press statement issued by Speaker Champ Clark, U.S. House of Representatives. 
In: The Philippine Republic, March- April 1961. Mm v °1« 11 1 P« 

2] Interpellation by U.S. Representative Towner, of "J 0 ^. in t • 

the U.S. House of Representatives, August 18, 1916. Rivera Collection, Vol. I, 

P. 365. 



niilippineB.. - AB'S.~| . • 

,^0^ niTOS_qUEZO N WITHOUT EQUAL AS INDEPENDENCE AUVn:,TO 

>* ■ 

Rep. HENRY ALLEN COOPER of Wisconsin: I do not believe any country wherever 
situated in the whole history of the world has had a representative to advocate its 
cause as the cause of the Philippine Islands has been advocated by Manuel L. Quo hot. 
('.ppla.se J Wo all know that - we in the House, who know what that "man (Quezon) 
>g been through while he has been advocating the cause of the Philippines. (Ap- 
plause.) The baseless slanders that he has been called .upon to encounter and en- 
dure have taught "is to admire his unfailing tact and courtesy. 

Mr. Toastmaster (Quezon), I want to say a word to you directly. Your con- 
duct in the advocacy of that most difficult cause, in the Congress and through- 
out the country, illustrates a very important and oft-forgotten truth - that a man 
may be always fearless and determined and yet ever just and fair; and that, in 
public life,' it is possible for a man to be ambitious and yet never cease to be a 
gentleman. (Loud cheers.) I cordially cencur in the sontiments expressed by the 
gentleman from Missouri (Sen. Stone). I m g i ad to be here but sorry it is in the 
nature of a farewell. 

Mr. Quezon has deserved and surely he will receive the thanks and the honor 
- the highest honor within the gift of the Filipino people! (Cheers.) ^ 

F RIENDS AND FOES OF T.I. INDEPENDENCE LAUD Q UEZON'S W'ORK ■ 

Rep. TAVENNKH of Illinois: I understand the members of Congress may be 
divided into three groups on the question of Philippine independence: those who 
fivor immediate independence, those who are for ultimate independence, and a few 
who are against independence at any time, now or in the future. All these groups 
have on e good thing in common: none yielded to the other in their admiration of the 
worth and respect for the work of Mr. Quezon. (Cheers.) 

Now, Gentlemen, I wish to present him with a slight token of our admiration 
and appreciation of his excellent services. The thing (gold watch) that I nm goin^ 
to present to him ticks. And, Mr. Quezon, it is our hope that it will tick for y^u 
throughout a long, prosperous and happy lifetime." (Cheers.) . 

(The gold watch bore the fol3.owing inscription; "Presented to Hon. Manuel 
L. Quezon by his admirers in the U.S. House of Representatives, ' in appreciation 
of his splendid services in the cause of Philippine independence. August, 1916.") 

In response, Mr. Quezon said:" I shall treasure this watch as my most pre- 
cious possession, and if in the fickleness of fate the day should ever. come when 
a great? misfortune should overtake' me, I shall find, in this token of your affec- 
tion for mo, the balm that shall yot make me gratcf\il that I have been born. I 

2/'. Article, "Quezon's Farewell to Congress that Becomes Congress Farewell to 
' Quezon," by Patrick Gallagher, editor, Far Eastern Bureau. In: Tfra gfrlllEBinS 
Jk&SE,, Vol.' I, No. 10, pp. 11-20. (October 1916). Also in Rivera Collection, 
Vol. I, p P , 388-402. 



no 

rao 



IIr-7 

thank you. "(Prolonged cheers.) 4 ' ' v \ • . ; 

?tISSOUBI SENATOR PRAISES ^TONCT^^ER lL pj ffig tOTj.'ai 

Sen. "GUMSHOE BILL 1 ' STONE of MiqumiTT »• 

* oi nissouri: Nme years ago it was ray privilege 

to visit the Philippine Islands. During my journeys through the Islands I had the 
honor of being entertained by our distinguished host, then Governor of .his pro- 
vince Never in my life was I the recipient of a sweeter, more delicate or more 
effecting courtesy than he extended to me. ( Applause. ) 

I am sure, Gentlemen, that those of us who have been associated with him 
here (U.S. Congress) have esteemed him for his own sterling worth, for his charac- 
ter, for his patriotism; our friendship ■ and goodwill in every way will follow him- 

natter how far or how hifjh he c-oei (Ch^c-™ ) t „i n 

b-i £oes. sneers.; I ask you, Gentlemen, to rise with 

and drink this toast to our host, (Cheers.) 5 ' 
U.J. Huubtt SPisAtaiit llm&s KU Kk fljgjflft g To uuaZUM 

SPhi..UG3Il CK/SMP CLARK: I have frooiion+lv +ni h ™ . ■. . 

nave irequently told people with whom I have con- 
versed the remarkable story of Quezon - not having been able to speak a word of 
English ten years ago, and now being ono of the best speakers on the floor of the 
Mouse of Representatives. (Cheers.) His case is very similar to that of Cnrl ' •' ' 
■Bchurz, who became in his time the best speaker and writer of English in' the Uni- 
ted States, although when he came first from Germany he could not utter a word of 
English. He spoke book English. He learned how to speak and write from the best ■ 
sources; and in addition to that, he happened to be in Congress, the world's great- 
est educational forum. (Laughter and cheers.) As with Carl Schurz, so, too, has it 
boon with our brilliant riend from the Philippines., 

The chief reason why we arc here is that we all like the Commissioner from 
the Philippines. I do not see how we couldn't help liking him. (Cheers. )' The so-- 
oond reason is that the American people have a very great sympathy with the Fill- 
Pino people in the efforts they have been making, and are now making, to better 
their condition. - . 

T hey say that wise men change their opinions and fools never do. Our dis- 
tinguished friend from the Philippines is a wise man. Vie all know that. (Cheers.) 
->ow, Mr. Quezon, has said that he is going away, never to come back. I hope he will 
change his opinion and come back. (Cheers.) 

With all respect to the other good men they may have, I think he could do ■ 
more good for them than any other two men they could send here. .(Prolonged cheor3.) 

Srz^j ^i^P^ J-^S QUEZON MOS T SINCERE, DEVOTED TO P.I. CAUSE 

Rop. TOWNER of Iq wa : I should like to add a word to what has been' Said, 
V I&d^p, 393. 

V. -JteU., pp. 391-392. , ♦ ' 

~ 6 -/ Xto&t PP. 394-395. 



11-8 

- m - 

particularly by. the Speaker (Champ Clark), residing the itesident Commissioner '-. ' 
from the Philippines. I entirely agree with the Speaker that there are no two men 
in the Philippines who could be sent here who oould do more for the Philippines 
than can the present Commissioner. (Cheers.) The present Commissioner has won the 
hearts of Congress because of his perfect candor and sincerity; because he'h a s 
been an eloquent, earnest and consistent advocate of liberty and freedom - and th: 
Boots with the earnest and immediate response of every American citizen.. (Cheers.) 

It is because of those considerations that we are always ready to hear him 
r nd to give him, a3 the representative of his people, * more re-ady acceptance -than 
vo Possibly could others who might be sent here - that wo- believe him to be entire 
ly sincere and devoted to the cause which he advocates. (Cheers.) 7 

S^^^^^^^^^^J^EJGR^^jjj PRESIDENT 

U.S. House Floor Leader CLAUDE KITCHIN of North Carolina: I do not think 
I could express more feelingly the high honor and deep affection in which we hold 
the gentleman from the Philippines than by saying frankly that we excused our- 
selves from the U.S. President's table, or rather made the President excuse him- 
self from feasting us, in order to. come down hero and say godspeed to Que s on. 
(Chuors.) Wo are .delighted to be here to pay our respects to our distinguished has 
who is as able, as wise, as tactful, as loyal a representative as any one pooplo 
has ever sought. (Cheers.) 

I am glad I have remained in Congress long enough to see the enactment of 
., such largo a measure of self-government for the Filipino people as that signed, 
today (the Jonas Act) by the President; and I hope that I shall live long, enough ' 
(and not bo a much older man at that) to see another act passed giving to tho 
Filipino people a full measure of independent government. ( c hocrs.) 

Our friend from tho Philippines has told us that if the Filipinos hpd.a 
voice in tho election of tho next President (of the United States), their votos 
would all bo cast for the gentleman from Missouri, now sitting by my side. I can't 
say how the Filipinos may feel about this matter, but I know without a doubt that 
if the people of the United States had their way they would unanimously vote for 
our distinguished host as the President of the Philippine itepublic, when it comes; 
in" fact, I nominate him now for that great honor. (Prolonged cheers.) 8 

I2 = ^|^L^ T gpgg_l^' T ^P TO T AKE C 'M OF HIMSELF Tll .'jJ QUEZON 

Pep. PHILIP CAMPBELL of Kansas: I cannot permit this occasion to pass 
without joining in this tribute of affectionate farewell to our host and friend. 
T 'fe.do not hs^e to agree with him always in order to admire and love him. (Choors.) 
I have said on several occasions, and I take pleasure in repeating it here, that 

2/ P. 395. ' •• . 

3/ Ibid.., p. 396. " * 



II-9 

- m - 

there is no man in the American Congress better able to take care of himself on the 
floor of the House than the representative of the Philippine Islands. (Cheers.) I 
wish him godspeed, and his people peace, progress and prosperity under this new • 
act (Jones Act) which he has won for them, and hope that he will reconsider his 
resolution and come back again here to give us the happiness and decided advan- 
tage of his presence and participation in the work of Congress. (Cheers.) 9 

CJUjijPR^A^i^OCT^s^sTnff^mr. for filip ino cause ■ 

Sen. PRELAW of California: I feel that, coming from California, I am the 
nearest neighbor of the Filipino people, and, therefore, we take an. especially deep 
interest in their welfare. There is, however, another reason why personally I feel 
strongly moved by their efforts to attain their aspirations as a people; for I, 
too, am sprung from a subject race. Perhaps that has given me sympathy and intelli- 
gence in approaching their problems. 

You can win these people from whom I have sprung by their affections, but 
you can never reconcile them to their chains. (Cheers.) Hence, I am glad, tonight, . 
to see that our great government has risen to the position where it, too, can 
comprehend the needs and interests of a people who by reason of their weakness 
have been subjected to centuries of tyranny, and that we have, at last, determined 
to act towards thorn under a high and deep sense of justice and generosity. (Cheers./ 

I wish we could have gone further and given them all they askod of us. It 
should not concern us what kind of government they give themselves. It is not our 
government, but their government. Tonight we see the triump h of generous sentiment' 
over commercial cupidity. (Cheers.) 

Gratitude is wor+h something. 1 read the other day of two Cuban officers in 
the service of Mexico, who, when it looked like trie certainty of trouble between 
'Mexico and the United States, laid down their arms because, they said, they could 
not fight against the United States, because the United States had made Cuba free. 
(Cheers.) The gratitude of Cuba is ours today, and if need were to arrive the poople 
of Cuba would stand shoulder to shoulder with us, because we have made Cuba free. 

The same truth applies to the Philippines. God forbid that this country of- 
ours should ever be plunged into war; but if trouble should come, if only we carry 
out the policy of which we have now given a positive pledge, the people of the 
•Philippines will be our friends, because we shall have treated them with justice 
and with generosity. (Cheers.) 10 

gP;|30J^S_INTENSE_L0Y ALTY T O FILIPINO CAU SE EL ICITS j;|AISE 

Rep. BORLAND of Missouri: There are two very impressive facts which stand 
out in this gathering. One is the splendid tribute that has been paid to the 
Commissioner from the Philippine Islands,, not only for his integrity and ability 

& Ibid-, P. 397. 
A2/ Ibid.. . 



11-10 



- ro - 



a3 a man, but also for his intense loyalty to the cause for which he spoke/ (Cheers. 
U is our love of loyalty which bespeaks the broad spirit of American life. 

The second fact is conta-inpH i>, +v„- 

contained m the words of the Commissioner himself, when 

.0 said that he is returning to his r,nrmio it-s+k ■ 

g w ms poople with no intention of coming back to us.. 

-is work has received the cordial amilmiw -p • j 

1 applause of friends and foes. I know of no better 

•vsaago, no more splendid lesson that he can taW» wi- +.«'v,- , ^ 

in- cd.n Tai„e back to his people than this. 

jjacauso he has worked at all times unselfi "Vn-,r -p~~ v,- 

unstiiiohly for his people, the heart of Congress 

i-.as gc .o out to him. That should be an insnir»i+iA„ ~-p i • , . 

1 in ^Piration of his own people as it is an 

.-•■cemplification of the broad spirit n-f o ±. 

pint 01 ta irness and toleration in which Congress 

flavors to work for the American people. (Cheers.) U 

Rep. MOORE of Pennsylvania: I' have a very high opinion of the gentleman" ' 
from the Philippines. He has interested me more than most men ever since I have 
known him. He has been a marvel for energy, for wisdom, and for ability, and the 
tributes that have been paid him in this room have not miscarried or been 
-jxaggerated. (Cheers.) 

No man could be more deserving of the acclaim of his people than Mr. Quezon 
i, when he returns to the Philippine Islands. He is a remarkable man with a very 
remarkable history. 

When a mere boy he had a military career - one which would have done credit 
to any man in the United States. H G had an educational career, more thorough in 
it. scope, more- lasting in its influence, than that of many men in the United States 
vbo have given themselves wholly to the cultivation of the mind. We have learned 
. 3 u C h from him during his career in this country as the chosen representative of his 
. 'ople . 

The mind of a man who could not speak English nine years ago and tonight 
^ooks English as grammatically, as eloquently, as can any man educated in the 
United States, must undoubtedly have some views of interest and importance to the 
People of the United States, not to speak of his own people. (Cheers.) 

I trust that when he goes back to the Philippine Islands' he will be chari- 
table in the expression of such views as he has formed about us. He has had a 
v-onderful career, while still a young man. The best part of his life is still be- 
'° M hlm * Since 1 haTC known him I may say frankly that I have envied him the op- 
portunity which he has of becoming a real leader of mankind - one of the leading 
statesman of the earth. (Cheers.) 

There are few men at this table who can hope to hold the place which will 
^ given to Kr. Quezon among the champions of the rights of the people in the 
aistory of the whole world. (Cheers.) His name will stand out in lurid letters for 
all time - a name which will be dear to all lovers of human liberty - Manuel L. 
■iuozon. (Cheers.) All honor to Mr. Jones, whose name is attached to this legisla- 
- honor to him, because ho has deserved it. (Cheer3.) But, if we have our- 



11-11 . x 

■ . - *2» _ 

Washington in this country, if the English people have their Wellington, and the 

Uerraan people their Bismark, history will record that they have their Quezon in 
the Philippines. (Prolonged Cheers.) 12 

mmW SQLON^MTS^UEZQN^O^SMM N IN WASHIN GTON 



Sen. SHAFROTII of Colorado, who was responsible for securing final action by 
the Senate on the Jones Bill, said:' 

I have been gratified very much by the expressions so deservedly used' re- 
r o-iir.p our friend and host. I want to say to you that today I wrote a letter to 
Cbvernor-General Harrison, and in that letter I said that the Philippines could 
not get along without Mr. Quezon here, and that he should bo returned to Congress 
whether he desired it or not. (Cheers.) I would regard it as almost a fatal mistake 
not to have him here, and I hope that when he gets to the Islands and observes the 
sentiments there - which I am sure are even stronger than they are here, strong as 
these sentiments are - that he will reconsider his decision and return here. (Cheer 
Da have done something for the Philippines, at last. (Cheers.), but something more 
has got to bo done in order to accomplish the great work to which he has devoted 
his talents... Mr. Quezon takes back with him to the Philippines a substantial 
proof of actual accomplishments. If he remains adamant in Ms present determination 
he will still be with us, if not in person, then in spirit. I hope and believe 'that 
Ma recognition in the Philippines will be all that which he friends, here would 
wish him, and more. (Cheers.) ^ J 

y TBZ0N ^IANDS_JOI;[|S _LA¥ AUTHOR CUP OF RECOGNITION- 

Resident Commissioner QUEZON:- Gentlemen, as I sat here tonight listening to 
the generous remarks made by the several speakers, I wondered if it could be true 
that they were referring to me. I wish to thank you all- for your kind expressions. 
To me, they show, more than anything else, the broadness of mind and the greatness 
of heart of the American citizen. That men who hold opposite views to mine on the 
Philippine question and who have, therefore, fought me tooth and nail, should be - 
so generous in their commendation of my work is something that, I dara- v say, can 
happen only in this land. Love for fair play is truly an American trait. 

It is the lot of some men to be instruments whereby their country accomp- 
lishes great deeds. Both the present administration and Cengress are entitled to 
the credit for the enactment of the Jones Bill, but the name of its author will go 
down in history prominently associated with this great piece of legislation,* and 
Nr. Jones deserves it. I have seen him from the first day I entered the halls of 
Congress deeply interested in the welfare of my country. Ill as "he has been for. . 
some time, he has worked faithfully and laboriously to secure for us this new Magna 
Chart a of our rights. 1 shall present you tonight, Mr. Jones, with a memento which 
1 beg you to take as an evidence of the everlasting devotion and gratitude to you, 



11-12 



both of all the people of the Philippines and of roysolf. . 

The host (Quezon) then handed a magnificent silver cup to Mr .. Jones , on 
which these words are engraved: 

"To Hon. William Atkinson Jones of Virginia, chairman of the House Committee 
on Insular Affairs ^author of the Jones Bill, a token of love and gratitude, 
t'anuel L. Quezon." ■ 

■V0N3S TELLS HOW Q UEZON W ORKED TIRELESSLY FOR FILIPTWO CAUSE • ' 



Rep. WILLIAM ATKINSON JONES of Virginia: My heart is stirred to its very ' 
(V; P ths. I should be insensible to the very sentiments of life, to love itself, to" 
a sense of gratitude, to the pulse-beat of my own. heart, if I did not feel pro- , ~ 
foimdly stirred by the action of the gentleman from the Philippines, my dear Mr. 
Quezon, in presenting me with this beautiful tribute... I could add nothing if I 
yyro to attempt to add to the beautiful, sincere and the just tributes already'said 
to our dear friend here tonight. There is not one of us who does not know that 
every word said was more than deserved by him. (Cheers.) 

However feeble my efforts may have been, I have striven as best I could • 
to secure through Congress a declaration on the part of the people of the United 
States as to what -should be the future status of the Philippines. I tried my best 
to create a sentiment in Congress favorable to action on this great question, and 
it is naturally a source of very groat satisfaction to me that at last I have • 
lived to see the Congress of the United States give to the people of : tho Philippines, 
this substance of self-government with {ho hope that in the near future they will 
be fdven its title. (Cheers.) 

I wish I had the eloquence of our dear friend from the Philippines, so that 
1 could express myself more clearly and more fully. He is about to return to Ills 
people. I know that he will receive such an ovation, such a heartfelt welcome, as 
never yet accorded to any mortal man within the Philippine ' Islands . (Cheers.) 
And in my judgment he well deserves this great reception which surely will be 
his. (Cheers.) 

During the seven years in which he has represented his people - and I think 
I had a better opportunity of observing his work than any other man in Congress - 
ho has not only worked without a single hour's cessation to create a sentiment in 
favor of the independence of his country; his own noble words and acts and, I 
%iow I can honestly add, his thoughts, have been the very best advertisement of 
his People's fitness for independence. (Cheers.) 

I share the sentiments expressed this evening that it will be a great loss 
to us, as well as a loss to the Filipino interests here, if the gentleman who is 
n Pw going from us insists upon refusing re-election as the representative of his 
people in the capital of the United States; and yet, I came .not prepared to -say 



Ihid. . pp. 399. 



•400 



- 383ft' - 

that his decision in this . matter is not a wise decision. 

Under the act just passed the Filipino people will establish a new govern- 
P :,nt. They will be called upon to exercise new legislative powers; and it seems 
to me that this is a patriotic thing for the gentleman who sits by my side, to 
decline a renomination to Congress when, ' largely because of his own great and 
good work, the place would mean, to a certain' extent, an easy sinecure, and, 
instead of coming here, where he has made so many permanent friends, to stay wher 
the. -hard work will be now, to re-main among his own people and to give them the 
bonefit of his own great experience in' legislative matters and knowledge of the 
things that will help them to utilize to the best purpose this new liberal 
government which we have given them. (Cheers - .) ' 

I do believe that they will need his counsel and his experience there in 
hanila more than they will need him here in Washington. Yet I do beli6ve that the 
day is not. far distant when conditions will be reversed; then the stable govern- 
,apnt predicated in our promise will have been established, when by their own 
acts they will have proved that they deserve independence. (Cheers.) ' 

And when they have demonstrated that fact, not only to the people of the 
United States but to the whole world, they will surely send once more to the . 
Congress of the United States the Hon. Manuel L. Quezon (prolonged cheers) to tel? 
us that -they now expect us to carry out the covenant wo have this day made with 
them, that when they shall have. established a stable government they shall -bo 
given their freedom, their independence. (Cheers.) 

We. shall all welcome him when ho comes back. (Cheers.) I may not be'horb 
to. join with you in welcoming him'but I know that you will give him a greeting 
worthy of his place in the life of his people, worthy of his part in the history 
of the world, worthy of this Congress which wo are all proud to serve. .(Cheers.) 
I believe, too, that Congress will stand ready to make good the solemn promise 
contained in the bill to which the President of -the United States affixed his 
signature this morning. (Cheers.) 

Mr. Quezon, I believe when' you land at Manila, the people of your country 
will say to you, '"Well done, good and faithful servant" and that every honor they 
can confer will bo conferred upon you. (Cheers.) 15 

F|MM_AMERICA|^SOLON_LAUI)S QUEZON AFTER T-M ACT APPROVAL 

Rep. JOHN A. MARTIN of Colorado: Mr. Speaker, I deem it a privilege to 
have been present in the- House of Representatives today and to have participated 
in the applause when the name of the Honorable Manuel L. Quezon, the President of 
tho Philippine Senate, and former Resident Commissioner to Congress from the 
Philippine Islands, was mentioned by Mr. (John R.) McDuffie, the Chairman of the 
Ooamittee on Insular Affairs, during his presentation of H. R. 8573, to provide 
for^the complete independence of the Philippine Islands. * . 

A5/ Ibid., pp. 400-402. '. • 



The applauso was a deserved tr-i hn+.-. j.u, 

UiveQ x ™uty to the man who,wa8 a pioneer in Congros 

■: n thc> cause of the independence of his counH-vv , 

lu - is cQuntry, and perhaps there is no member of 

' Congress who has any better title than I on +w • • ' 

uu b 0XltiU ± t on historic occasion, to pay an 

c-dded tribute- to him. As the members annlmixin-i ■>--: ~ - ' T , , , 

° . lb applauded nis name I looked across at him 

coated in the Hall and my memory bridged the gap of 25 long years since I first. 
,aw him in the House of Representatives in 19(09 'and listened to his maiden speech 
iu Congress, a brilliant and masterly effort which won him instant recognition as 
^statesman, although at that time he was perhaps under 30 years of age. 

Four years latur I dropped out of Congress, . but I have kept track of his " 
career during all this long interval, a career devoted to the service, of his' 
country and the cause of its independence. It is my sincere wish that not only' 
ray he live to . see his life work crowned with success, but that his distinguished" 
abilities and unswerving record of loyalty and service to his country may bo 
finally crowned^and awarded by his election as the first President of the Philip- 
pine Republic. 

4. A N T I - f' I I, I p. I N 0 

The immediate cause for the passage of this resolution is the series of dis- 
patches sent by an American correspondent to his papers in the United States mis^ 
representing the stand of the Filipino people and their leaders as being for some 
kind of autonomous government under the United States. . 

I particularly want to give the lie to two of his statements; one, where he 
■says that I have given up hope for immediate independence, and the other, where* ho 
quotes me as having said to him that I. told the Governor-General "that I would 
shoot him if he did not approve a certain bill." 

for. Hoock must have boon under the influence of a nightmare when he wrote k ' 
this. 1 ■ . ' * ■ 

Ten years ago, on the eve of the call on the Philippines of the first (U.S.) 
congressional committee ever to visit these Islands on an official investigation 
ol conditions hero, a certain section of the pres3 started a systematic campaign 
of misrepresentation and vilification of the Filipino people, which aroused general 
indignation and culminated, among other things, in a general walkout of all 
Filipino reporters and printers working for that particular section of the press, 
as an external' expression of the people's protest against the defamatory campaign 
chon being wag^d. 

W Speech in the U.S. House of Representatives, March 19, 1934. In: Congressional 
focord . March 22, 1934, Vol. 78, No. 46, Rivera Collection, Vol. II, pp. 1091- 
1092. . 

1/ Press statement, 1926, n.d.m. (no day and month). Quezon Papers, Microfilm . 
•Reel No. 29,' The National Library. Hereinafter to be referred to as QP; MR# 
29, TN'L. ■ • 



• 11-15 

And it was thus that tho founding „ ■» ^ . '. 

xounamg and publication of tho Philippines 

►braid was rendered possible. Had it not boon fnr> ' • « . ~ , 

■ " uu 0< - on lor tho civicism of these my bono- 

r ,olc associates in the first attempt to publish a newspaper in English - an ' 
undertaking which they, all knew would cost hundreds of thousandths - the 
Filipino people's voice would not. have been uttered for the past' ten years, . 
directly, without/median of a translator and in print, in the language of the 
' sovereign. 1 want to name them all here that the Filipino people may know those ' ' 
,,o sacrificed money, wordly possession, without hope of gain or profit", but 
:; rely through their adherence to the principles of nationalism - a free and ' ' ' 
independent Philippines. 

5. AHTI-INDEPE N D E N C E 
q UgZON REFUTES ANTI-IITOEPKTOfCE STAND QPOardikal GIBBONS 

I had been informed sometime ago that the Catholic clergy of this country 
(11.3.) and, in general, all the organizations of the Church were earnestly oppo- 
sing Philippine independence.... I had also seen certain resolutions sent to various 
congressmen by Catholic organizations in their respective districts urging their 
representatives to vote against Philippine independence, and stating that every : 
Catholic organization in this country was opposed to the freedom of these Islands. 

Yet '/spite of all this, I. should never have believed that the Catholic 
Church of the United States as a whole was really opposed to Philippine indepen- 
dence, if I had not seen the interview [which Jar.es Cardinal Gibbons of Baltimore 
navo on Philippine independence and published by tho American press on 20th Feb- 
ruary 1913 - ABSj which I am forced to believe must have been authorised by your 
iilnincnco ... , 

I do not understand why the Catholic Church of tho United States 
should oppose Philippine independence. Seven and a half million out of eight mil- 
lion Filipinos are good Catholics, and their ancestors have -been so for centuries. 
Tuo influence of our religion has boon exercised for hundreds of years upon this 
poopie, and has had its effect in developing good citizenship and in fitting the 
population for self-government... We Filipinos are proud to say that . . , the 
Church has given to eight million souls in the Far East the best that Occidental 
civilization had, instilling into their minds and hearts the sentiments of freedom 
and popular government. 

Can it be that the history of some Latin Republics... has influenced tho 
attitude of the Catholic hierarchy in this country? Does, it fear that tho Fili- 
pinos, if given their independence, would seize the property of the Catholic 
Church. in the Islands or fail to respect their rights? 

I solemnly assure your Eminence that there is not the slightest foundation- 
--Lf in this - rGS P ec t • T he Filipinos, if given their independence, will respect 

ll Press statement on/ launching of the Philippines Herald. July 18, 1930. 
QP> MR#31, TNL. 



H-16 «■ . • , 

W d protect every right of tho Church and maintain absolutely intact its property 
in the Philippine Islands. : 

Tho best proof that such is tho disposition of the Filipinos is found in. 
the fact that the groat majority of the native priests as well as native bishops- 

of tho Catholic Church in the Philippines are earnestly in favor of Philippine 

, . 1(a) 

independence. 

&E3B0NS: I am convinced that, for the present, at least, the welfare of the 
Philippine Islands will- bo bettor safeguarded under the care and diroctipn of the 
•United States. There is a great difference between independence and liberty. There 
arc countries which have independence but no liberty or freedom, whereas. the Philip 
pine islands, although for the present not enjoying. independence ,. have freedom and 
liberty. (Gibbons to Quezon, February 28, 1915.) 

QUEZON: Your Eminence's viev/on the question of Philippine independence - 
soem to be so firmly fixed, that any further correspondence on my, part would be • 
unnecessary. 

lour Eminence, however, makes an assertion which- 1 fuel bound to rectify. 
You said that, although the Philippine Islands' are not for the present enjoying 
independence, they have freedom and liberty. 

I beg to remind your Eminence of the fact that the customs duties in the 
Philippines are levied by the Congress of the United States, and that the internal 
revenue, land and other taxe3 have been levied by the Philippine Commission 
(appointed by the President of the United States - ABS). In other words, the 
people of the Philippines have had no share in the imposition of their taxes. It 
if.', an American maxim that "taxation without representation is tyranny." (Quezon ' 
to Gibbons, ; March 3, 1913.) 2 

6. BOY SCOUTS 

The Boy Scouts of the Philippines is a vital force in the building of 
otrong character and high ideals in the youth of our land. .\ ' " 

l^J£2^g_P4Y_l|TAB^SH|U = TO_S TRESS_CIhjLRACTER BU I LDING 

"Whereas, reposing special confidence in the devotion and efforts of a. 
groat number of patriotic' volunteer leaders of tho Boy Scout movement who. are 
duvoloping tho youth of the Philippines to become men of character trained for 
citizenship; • ' 



,/ . Maryland, 

i/a Letter to James Cardinal Gibbons of Baltimore/ February 27, 1913* In: The 

Blininn_Ppj2pJ.il,. v»1 . I, No. 7, March 1913, Rivera Collection, Vol.' I, 

PP. 132-133* 

ll Prom article, "A Reply to Cardinal Gibbons, "The Filipino ' People . t Vol . . I . No. 

7, March 1913. Ibid*., pp. 133-134. '■ . ■ 
i^Press statement on the Boy Scout movement, February 20, 1935. QP, HB#33, TNL. 



11-17 



• "Whereas, this groat movement, with its affiliated programs of cubbing, 

scouting, sea scouting, and roving, is being promoted effectively among thousands 
of .boys all over the Philippines for the purpose of developing Filipino patriot- 
ism and national unity in the citizens of the- future, and 

"W her eas, the Boy Scout movement has developed a ten-year program coordina- 
ting its aims and., objectives with those of the Commonwealth of the Philippines." 2 

As created in the attached bill, the Boy Scouts of the Philippines would 
bo an organisation .independent from, although maintaining a certain degree of 
relationship with, the Boy Scouts of America. At present, our Boy Scouts organi- 
sation is merely a subdivision of the Boy Scouts of America, and while we have- a 
Philippine Council, such Council is governed by, and is subservient to, the Boy- 
Scouts of America Headquarters in New York. 

I believe that the passage of this bill is urgent... 

The time is hero when as a nation we should begin assuming the responsibi- 
lities that are ours; and while we are grateful to America for the help extended 
ua, such as that offered by the Boy Scouts of America, it seems to me that this 
is a duty which is ours to perform and we should be willing to shoulder it for 
tho sake of our boys . ^ *■ 

■IgZOKLINKS BOY SCOUTS TRAINING WITH CHARACTER BUILDING 

Through its splendid accomplishments in character development and in pro- 
rating the moral and bodily welfare of Filipino" youth, the Boy Scout organization 

•has earned for itself a high place in the respect and esteem of our people. In 
recognition of its effective and disinterested services the National Assembly, on 
October 31, 1936, enacted a law creating a public corporation to be known as the 
Boy Scouts of the Philippines. The altruistic . purposes of the organization are 

.enumerated in section 3 of that Law, which reads as follows: 

The purpose of this corporation "shall be to promote, through organization * 
and cooperation with other agencies, the ability of boys to do things for them- . 
solves and others, to train them in scoutcraft, and to teach them patriotism, 
courage, self-reliance, and kindred virtues, using methods which are now in 
coiiiraon use by boy scouts . 

"To carry on this work effectively proper facilities for administration 
.ana control are essential. The central offices of the Boy Scouts arc temporarily 
out inadequately housed in the Rizal Memorial Stadium. A permanent and suitable 
noEio raust be provided. Since the formal inauguration of the Boy Scouts of the 
w-lippines , successors to the Philippine Branch of the Boy Scout3 of America, • 
to vJ ak ° place in January, 1938,. it is particularly desirable that its headquar- 
~IL— P° rmanerrfc ly located before that date. To provide funds for this purpose 

a Proclamation No. 39, "Setting Aside Saturday, February 22, as Boy Scouts Day" 
February H, 1936. Quezon Mes sages . Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFF , p. 502. 

2/ ^essage to the First National Assembly on the creation of a public corpora- 
tion, "Boy Scouts of the Philippines," October 27, 1936. Ibid. . pp.. 361-^62. 

t 



11-48 • 

- w - 

tiie Boy Scout executives have decided to appeal to the public, which is the direct 
ben eficiary of all their work. 

"Being convinced of the worthiness of the Boy Scouts organization, of the 
value of its efforts to Filipino welfare, and of the urgency of its needs for 
adequate facilities; 

"Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, hereby designate and set aside the 

Seriod from November 6 to '30, 1937, as a special one for the conduct of an .inten- 

^ 4 
fijve campaign to raise the necessary funds for this purpose." 

rags: DEM? 1 5 ADVICg ^^gO Y_^C TIggJ^J EQ^M^PlJgS ' ' ' 

You enjoy a priceless opportunity for valuable moral and physical improve- 
ment. I hope you will avail yourselves in full measure of that opportunity. Your .' 
lofty ideals are embodied in the Scout Oath and Law. I urge you to strengthen 
your faith in those ideals and to prepare yourselves as well as you can to take 
Dart in their accomplishment. The greatest need of our country today is a citizen-, 
ry composed of strong, clean, earnest and socially efficient men. You are being 
trained to be such men. You will be the men who will provide our country with the 

rind of leadership that it needs and without which it cannot endure. There should 

5 . • 

be more of you. 



MLQ LAUDS BOY SCOUTS FOR SERVICE TO H UMA NITY 



You have been taught almost from childhood one great principle of life, and 
that is, that life -is only worth living if we use it to render service. It is lova 
• of. humanity that must be installed in your hearts.. It is love .. ;.. :.i V 3. . 
not only of your countrymen but also of your fellowmen. That is the quality that 
must differentiate the. scout boys from those who are not scout boys. But the scout 
boys must serve humanity. When you see one who is in danger of losing his life, you 
go and give him your help without asking his name, without asking his nationality, 
and without looking at the color of his face. You see that .there is a human being"* 
who needs your help, you go and give yourself to help that, human being. That, to me, 
is what constitutes the essential quality of a good scout. 

jjOYJjCGUTS 1 IJjm; TO LIVE ANDjdELP_OThMS_ LIVlj 

In no organisation is it so important that every member be taught his duties, 
and how to comply with them, as in the boy scout organization. You are here to do 
something for somebody else. You are here to show that you are not living for your- 

&/• Proclamation' Ho. 294, "Designating the Period from November 6 to 30, 1957, as 
the period for the National Fund Campaign of the 3SP,' September 21, 19:57. ■ 
. Quezon Messag es, Vol. 3, Part II, JBVFF, pp. 1047-1048. 

5/ Speech on boy scout training over the radio at MalacaHan, October 31, 1936. 
Quezon Masse s . Vol. 4, Part I, JBVFF, p. 243. 

6/ Speech on the 3rd anniversary of the approval of the law creating the Boy Scout 
of the Philippines, October 31, 1939. OP, H&F&i ™" 



11-19 



.elves, that you are not satisfied noroly to live and let live, but that your ideal 
ia to live and help others live. So every boy scout must make it his duty not oniv 
to live up to the ideals of the institution but to see to it that every member 
of the institution does likewise. ' 

7. B.U S I N E 3 S 

GOYifflMBHT jrU G 0_iaT0 = BUSIrJ E S3 IF ... 

In the case where we have made a thorough study of -the possibility and pr,o- 

ticaMlity of establishing new industries here and no private capital is at hand to 
undertake the establishment of that industry, we will do it. 
jiglSHTjjffij D SELF- I NTE REST_BE3T BUSINESSMAN' S POLICY 

Enlightened self-interest is the best policy for businessmen, and- it will 
convince them of the wisdom of giving to labor the fairest treatment that they 
can give. 

While honest business must be encouraged and promoted, the public must be 
protected against those who are dominated by an inordinate desire, to make huge " ' 
profits. Wo man or group of men has any right to manipulate the prices of the ne- 
cessities of life. Profiteering must be stopped. 3 

8. CAPITAL 
^iffiIIl = IIII^II£2i^-I^y^^_CAPITAL 

The laws of these islands, and the people themselves, welcome capital which 
will find its place in the community where it chooses to operate and undertake its 
progress along with the Islands which require its assistance. 

* * * 

There is rational diversity of industry in the Philippines, which enjoys 
no booms and undergoes no crisis. Steady expansion is the investor's reliance. 1 (b) 
ILSSJlJATIOgA^ 

Did in V; ° Uld bS a national suicide to persecute capital. In our age, capital, 
fare of +1^° £unounts ' is necessary for the economic development and the social wel- 
_ == J^™ejDeople. °apital is entitled to a reasonable profit, and this reasonable 

2/ Speech on the essential qualities of Boy Scouts, on the third anniversary of 
rie approval of the law creating the Boy Scouts of the Philippines, Malacanan, 
October 31, 1939. Quezon Messages. Vol. 5, Part I, JBVPP, p. 203. 

V(a)lnterview with A. P. and U.P. Correspondents, September -20, 1935. QP, MR#38, TIIL. 

M Peech at the inauguration of the Philippine Chamber of Commerce building, 
nam la, July 29, 1938. OP, MR#40, TWL. 

ssage to the Second National Assembly, on the prevention of monopolization and 
injurious speculations affecting articles of prime necessity, September 16, 1039. 
mzon Messages, Vol. 5, Part I, JT3VFF, p. 350. 

• 1 b )Articl 0 , "Opportunities for Investment of Capital in the Philinnines ," 1Q?0, 



11-20 



- m - 



„ r ofit must not be denied it \tnder any pretext. So long as capital is mindful of 
the social purpose and duties of property, so long will our Government give it • 
: „; l0 ].ehearted support and protection, but not othervri.se. 2 

:..;ORE RjjJJAjjCE^^ FORE IGN CA PITAL 

The attraction of foreign capital has been one of my main concerns. However, 
foreign capital, at best, is an uncertain factor for the economy of any country to 
by built upon. The cornerstone, the sustaining walls, every part which gives firm- 
ness to our economic edifice, must be constructed mainly with the work and re--- 
sources of Filipinos. 

■JODLD iflJCOURAGE PRIVATE CAPITAL TO HELP PROMOTE NATIONAL ECONOMY 



Private business constitutes one of the pillars of the social structure. To 
a large degree, the people draw their sustenance from it and the government lives 
on it. No statesman can fail to recognize this fact. It is, therefore, to the inte- 
rest of the government and the people to help business, to nourish it in its growth 
and development, and to insure its continued existence. ^ 

9. CAPITAL P U N I S II M E N T 

iUiEON SAYS CAPITAL PUNISHMENT RELIC PROM SAVAGERY 



I don't believe in capital punishment because it is a relic of savagery. To 

kill a man solely because he nan committed a crime is barbaric and should not be 

1(a) 

uolerated by progressive governments. 

10. CENSUS 
W CENSUS TO TAKE STOCK OF NATION'S -HUMAN, MATERI AL RESOURCES 

The first years of our new- Government would be the most appropriate time to 
take a stock of the human and material resources of ::theocountry. A new census 
would give' an inventory of all these resources, upon the exact determination of 
which will depend the formulation of important national policies. It is essential 
fcnat we should have accurate, comprehensive and up-to-date data on commerce, agri- 
culture, industry and education, if we. are to find current solutions to the many 
complicated problems in these fields. U j) 

^LjVANCS OF CENSUS TO INTELLIG ENT PL ANNING 

Vie cannot intelligently make any plans here in the Philippines for complying 



ll Letter to Hon. Elpidio Quirino, Secretary of the Interior, on the dismissal 
of the chief of police of Janiuay, Iloilo, and of a secret service agent of 
the City of Iloilo, Februarv 14, 1930. q^z^njicasp.£es_ ± _ Vol. 4, Part I, 
JBVFF, p. 564. 

2/ Speech on government policies concerning business, Philippine Chamber of Com- 
merce building, -July 29, 1956. Ibid. , p. 122. , 

M p. 124. 

l/U) Press statement on capital punishment, 1937, n.d.m. QjP, MR#40, ML. 

Message to the First National Assembly on the talcing o/W Census in 1937, 
. September 29, 19.36. onrv/nn Messages. Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFF , p. 268. 



11-21- 



,/ith the provisions of the Constitution 

ril „ , , ^tution that we give facilities or opportunities 

to every child ox school ap-Q, or for- +v.« 

* „ ' r the Versification of our crops, or the es- 

tablishment of necessary industries until wo ".^«, 

wo " ava • a census of the Philippines, 
:r!ueh tells us our population, what vo conmn* ^ , 

wc consume, the articles that we produce, and 
;,hat industries we now have, tfe mh««+ n„ , , . ■ * 

_ , + , „ CGlln0i d ° ^thing that is intelligently planned . 

until we have tfu;en the census of the Islands. 

iSJSWM PROCL AIMS APRIL IS. 1938 AS caHffig mv 

r + . "Tr; -V" C6nSUS ° f ^ P ° PUlati0n *°* *• -cial and economic con- 
ation of the Philippines^ essential for proper study and planning for the fv- 
ture welfare of our people; and 

"k/hereas, ComMonwea 1 th Act ; T n nn „ v „ ., 

Ct "°* 170 Proscribes that the President of the 
Philippines shall by proclamation fix a <Uv i 

ix a day to be known as Census Day on which 
tho collection of such statistics shall be begun; 

"Sow, therefore, I, Ma-uel T, (),,«,„. , , , „ 

' ' 01 L ' s4Uczon ' d0 ^oby fix Saturday, April 16, 193.-;, 
» Census Day, on which the enumeration of population and the collection of dat, 
pertaining to agriculture shall begin throughout the Philippines and shall nroceod 

on consecutive days thereafter i n "h 7 -i . <-„,,■■ , , 

-eaitei, including ounaayo and holidays, until completed: 

•irovidod, that the talcing of census data on geography, lands, forestry, fisheries, 
■dnoe, manufactures, construction, commerce, transportation, communications, scrv ^ 
co, institutions, finance and government may be begun Wry 1, 1938: Provided," 
•■:urther, that in order to accomplish this census in an economical manner, the 
!° nBUB C0mm:iS8iOner iS horo * -thori^ed to utilize the services of teachers of th, 
T" ° f " dUCQti0n ° th0r offic -s and employees of the national, proving! 

city or municipal governments for the the work of enumeration and inquiry whenever ' 
practicable." J 

gj^g-go™ on muLj sui^wiis in mi cmsvs 



a 3 ricuU-ur P wM w?n 1 f 3 * 0 * 1 "^ in the taking of the census of population ,M 
^ virtue of " ° n Cmma ^ April 16th, 1930, I, Manuel L. Quezon, 

thj g p :l>; s rs s in no rf * d by Cormnonws aith Act *>• i7 °> d ° 

ded usin/S To™, grated in the Census of the Philippines, shall be recor- 
»>1 and If P f P r name by which thGy ' are known Really,- followed by their pete*- 
^ hou T^T Pr ° Vided ' that Pers ° ns Wh ° beai on ^ the Proper namf ' 

,0 be LlSe h4 + ° enujaer * ted u «ing such proper name followed by a surname 

■nd that 0° +L ,! 18 PerS ° n c&ncernod ' or in iiou thereof, the name of tho father 
lv. TheWflf+o, -^otner shall be used as paternal and maternal surnames, respective- 

-id pS ? SOn concerned na -y the adopted surnames for all publric 

,. j j.j.vaie purposes, 

^ Press coherence at Malacanan, July 10, 1?*6. QP, hRjfts, TJJL, 

oSoh a " a S 0n lAT0 * 216 ' " Fixin S ^urday, April 16, 1938, as Census Day," 
^ coDer d5, 1937. .ftueaon Me ssages . Vol. 3, Part II, JBVPF, pp. 1066-1067. 

Executive Order No. 128, "Use of Family Surnames in the Census of the 
auippines," November 16, 1937. Ibid . . p. 680. 



mat ~ 

•WOW 

11. CHARACTER ASSASSIHATIOH 
aMBTOg^DgCTBARBS. C HARACTER ASS ASSINATION PLOT 

There is here, a wicked plot to murder nc morally. The conspirators hold me 
up as a corrupt man and they do not stop at the means used. They confess they have 
no proof of my guilt but they require me to prove my innocence; and knowing before- 
hand that I can show it because they know I am innocent, they assort in advance 
that ay proofs are worthless. The plot is skillfully laid. The victim has no 
possible escape. He is deprived of all legitimate means of defense. 1 

<$mq$ cites jpizsi'amca aMrasar m oral, physical murder 

Those who have conceived this plot have not thought of the difference bet- 
voyn moral and Physical murder. Moral murder is more horrible than physical, bo- 
cause honor is more precious than life itself, and because while there is only one 
victim in the physical murder, and that is the person murdered, in the moral as- 
sassination the stigma is also stamped upon the uifo, the children, and perhaps 
upon the whole posterity of the person slandered. 

On the other hand, in the physical murder the man who falls under the 
assassin's knife has to die sooner or later, but in the moral assassination even 
tho best plot may fail, because truth always triumphs in the end, in spito of all 
wicked devices and slanders. 2 

SiSACTS SHARPLY TO AGULlAbDO CHARGES 

i/hen a man makes malicious .insinuations assailing the character of another 
in terms so plain that all but imbeciles or illiterates understand the moaning, and 
«:ien challenged to specify his charges avows that ho has none and can make none, 
out at the same time continues making similar insinuations, ho has gone so low 
•cfcat no one with any sense of decency would stoop to his level. ^ 

^OMJHjAYSJIEAlj OF^SAKDAL" ORGANIZATION 

The "Sakdal" is an association organised by a man without profession or 
aeruis of livelihood, vim at one time enjoyed government protection as a political 
appointee, but on account of improper conduct, when' he took a leading part in 
•aioiting public school students to strike in spite of regulations and superior 
order to the contrary, was dismissed from the service. 

In order that preventive measures may be adopted, it is recommended that 
tne National Assembly consider the advisability of enacting laws imposing heavier 
penalties against Communism and other subversive propaganda and for violations of 
the firearms law. 4 



,/ leader's 

II Press statememt on a veteran / charges, July 27, 1929. OP, tfR#3l, TNL. 
y Ibid. 

ll l 3 res3 statement commenting on the same .< charges, July 30, 1929. OP, MR#31» 
ML. 

if Pros3 statement on the peace and order situation, 1935, n.d.m. QP, MR#33, 
TNL. 



11-23 

- m 



To allow an offici.nl of thn ~, 

Uons, shocks my sense of f 2 p^ ^T '° ^ t0 ^ 

or insinuations of this sort will n \T ^ ^ that ^ further statements 

Ability therefore will be e . c " tod * "* f* ~ of reaper 

ex ^ ed by the government. 5 

. 12. CHARACTER B U I L D I G 

jjJ^j^j reOC LAIMB BO Y'S WEEK 

"Whereas, the proper formation of +i 

"Whereas, the Boys' Week JSxocutive GWn-i* + v, 

"v-unvo committee has nntUn^ r, _ 
evory important phase of/Soy's life; and outlined a program covering 

"Whereas, the period from the VH-h -vP v 

- - * .'^crrcr :;r: th : ~ *- — 

coo P e iation to the purpose of this week -th«+ ■! + ■ 
«able in the life of our boys ~nd of Sht P1> ° Ve ' 

co^nity." 1 7 " ° f PraCtlCal ^ t0 -If are of the 

IMPORTANCE OF GOOD tt'.ijwdq n-m.- m „ 

Good manners and right conduct are as essential to 

society as intellectual training. ^ U ~ * Civi " 

«*2 2 ^i-K Professor to believe 

-ad the young woman who have gone through Z ^ pupila ' The young man 

" 30t and «^gle with their peers ^ lvor 3ity should bo fully Propare d to 
one conducts himself like a savage! 2 " ° f Vory littl0 consequence If 

aro"not rSerri^ lli^?^™ 1 f™*«. - - ^notion of the echo**, 

oein * but — -o tf sr;^ c rj h : sr^: * udividual as a rati °* ai 

^^a^^C^Og aOQD l-L^S ^ RIGHT Cn^n* 

Jj==^!j! = ! treSS the need 0^ impressing upon the student body of the 
2 WT, n?J?r n 5py a ^g f a £ at UnfAlr i-inuatio„s against public servants, ' 

as°Bo^ la ^eek^'TTo 10 '^ " De ^ arin 6" the P ^iod from November 30 to December 6, 1936 
*/ hotter t ^ ^Sjl^es, Vol. 2, Part I, JBvJp, 'p. 594. 

winrtatem^ ofT^^'p 1 "; 814011 *: Universi ^ of Philippines, on the 
right ' conduct Jo^T ^ the ira P°rtanoe of good manners 

7J 3 Peech , t th fcfflU&JtaflSfift. Vol. 4, Part I, JBVEP, p. 5C3 . 

n ' d -ra. V, KR#4lf -rS? nary 3ession of a conference on character building, 1933, 



11-24 

~ Hfc- - 

diversity of the Philippines the importance of gentlemanly deportment as part of 
their university instruction. ■ ,, ; , cq; . ^ ^ .,, r;0ltj ,, bo , 

; u. iix nc .x, oi 13 - ; ..ci-;,y -.- j ufcc .'.let « J v. 

A young man who, in the classroom nnrt ,i„-^„ +^ 

oom and during the teaching hours and in the 

presence of his professors and comrades, raises m«i f™+- .1 

iciioOo ins loou and rests it on a chair, 

; , ;ivea evidence of the lack of every notion of courtesy. H 0 shows a great disres- 
pect not only for his prof essor and his associates but also for himself. He allow 
Ma low concept- of the task in which a student is engaged when in class, or his 
utter lack of a sense of responsibility. ^ 

Our people, I mean the average Filininns 4r> 4. , 

°° nil P lnos 1)1 tn e towns and villages, have beer 

courteous and hospitable all their lives, i/hy should- the boys and girls who attend 
schools, colleges, and universities be less mannered than their parents' and ancestors 
There seems.to be a growing idea among some of our youth that personal di*- • 
aity and individual self-reliance and independence are better shown by him who can 
bent exhibit rough manners. 

We must re-educate ourselves and drink from the fountain of true Filipino 
traits. Rot all that our forefathers did were wrong; in fact we can learn a lot 
iron them. 

rMI£ML^^l£ILg^^-Q^L-Q!Lg H ^ G^ OF CIT IZjSBRY 

isj^^tr^^ A nation is nothing more 

aaOe^haiLit^ tKe natiQn an df th ^^ 

&£fi*J£-Smtbe_B^^ weakD9BS is " it3 

m^^^.str^^^^^ « (Hereafter underscoring is supplied - ABS. ) 

Character is more important than training. I will not say it is more 
important than knowledge, because the word "knowledge" implies more than the pos- 
session of factual or technical information. Knowledge implies the absorption of 
"tat we learn by either reading books or hearing somebody. The application of what 
*o Have learned to the practical uses of life, the ability to assimilate what wo 
loarn, and the power to think truthfully - that is knowledge. 

The mere getting and piling up of information without assimilating them is 
^knowledge . But character is more importa nt than the acquisition of scientific 

V Letter to U..P. President Bocobo, loc. cit. Rivera Collection, Vol. IV, 
PP. 1823-1824. ~" 

5/ Ikt&t, p. 1824. 

y Mdross before the faculties and student bodies of public and private schools, 
colleges and universities, August 19, 1950. QP, MR#4l, TNL. 



11-26 



for your country. We are not bound to be heroes all the time; nor is there an ' 
opportunity to be heroes every day. Just do your duty .very day and you will be 
patriots. As a student your duty is to' study well and as a uan to be good. Your 
,., , ty i8 to work well until you become a good citizen. And don't give too much 
importance to clothing, good eating, and pleasure. _Eat . enough to keep you hea lthy. 
dL«i£J£^ and your nerve 

■". nnblg_.id. oa •- and pursue itl 

m_US WITHOUT GOOD CHARACTER. KNOWy B T« Di^jgOUS 



Knowledge Jsjforth jioJ_hlng_ unless, it_i__baged.on. charac ter. Knowled. 
iorg£_ttS5^ag#_^ is not possessed of a good'cha-, 

nct e r, for he___who has r eceived , mgnt^jraini^ut has not developed *h« mf Zi 
^^^Ll ] 3?.-g°^..^_ggl*y u so his lmo ^gd^ejgj^^i^gl low citizens. 12 
Ti;iACHBRS_SHGU LI) D.W ^L0P_G00D_C_;ARACTKR OF THEIR PUPILS 

The teachers should bear in Mind that their main duty is to build the cha- 
pter of their pupils. It is a mistake to think that you have done your day's work 
in school after you had given your lesson to the pupils. It is equally a mistake 
to think that your day's work is- over after you had asked a few questions. 

JZ££Ll2^^^9¥l'L^-^i^ugrdi Gn of his pupils. Tho teach er should Males 
. e 22rO!iPi!^^ _ good men than learned" Ie n~ ' 

-^J^^rse^^^ 

il^4JkJMs„.on_^i£„he. hins elf has ft gt l W character, 1 3 
^OLg^ggMlYI^gr ^UT RECOVER LOST V IRTUES OF uU R FOREBEARS 

We have vices, let us get away from then; wo have virtues, let us recover 
thor.i. And jgi__s^e__r_in mind tha t it is more important to be an honest and truth- 
Mj]aB.^'"l_to Jbo _a .learned but dishon est man. 14 

■MM SAYS CHARACTER MORE IMPORTANT TiiA;? BttAIKS 

^^S^arojagjE^ the most important i n a man.' Thev 

g^gteglpj^yg^rby. honesty, and lovaltv. If a mm hnn hjaina bu± lie ■»« ' ' . ' 

U/- Ib_Ld_, p. 170. 

W Speech on building the character of the children, at the Cagayan High School, 
^agayan, Oriental Misamis, August 27, 1938. .Ibid., pp. 185-186.- 

& MS*., p. 186. 
& p. 193. 



II - 27 



,h .honest ,Ji^wo^st.,th^aAi3hone S t mm wh" \ v nn hrninn. ^ 

^■■■•UffKiift BtTIIiDIi^ • Wh r iiCTTTiil DUHL-iG F(,RMATTV?: . • \ 

The moulding of character, the formation of ideals and ambitions, the 
building up of physical prowess - all these must take place during the years of • 
early youth. It is during- that stage when man is in a sort of plastic state, that 
liia- growth and development assume 'definite direction. ' Many of the 'decisive in- . 
luencos cannot be imparted either in the school or in the home. ' TJhoiosome con-- 
tact with nature, the freedom of. tho outdoors, grappling with practical obstacles '' 
and problems - these and these alone can. give a young man an opportunity to din- • 
cover his moral, mental, and physical resources, and thus comprehend the neces- 
sity .'of their development in order to meet these problems, better. 16 
TO BM.RlsiSPjii'C TBD, OF,; mm FPtdT ' RjjjSP>CT RIGBTS 0h> OTffiiRS 

A person who desires his rights to be respected has a cor- 
responding duty to recognize the rights of others.' One who would not recognize •' 
the rights of Ms followmen should not expect, others to respect his rights. 
Those persons who took the crop which did not belong to them actually trans- 
gressed the law, discredited our government, and looted the property of another.. 17 
EiDUSTRY AND P^SEVlsRMCE KEY TO KafflaUJ, SUC CESS 

No person can prosper materially through the help of others alone. One's ■ 
prosperity will come, first of all, from his own perseverance. He who refuses 
to be persevering, who does not want to work - in short, the lazy - shall never 
prosper in life, whatever help the government nay render him. All my plans to 
bring amelioration to the laborer - to increase his earnings and to help him 
acquire his own land - have no Value to a person who wastes his time fondling 
fighting cooks. 16 .. 

ITOVliRSITY ALS O KH3gS_M0 ULD CBI& LCmi Al-fl) LB U OF PISOPLE 

a university plays an important role in the progress of a nation. Not 
only does.it train men and women for the professions, but it also helps mould 
the character and life of the people through the influence that it exerts upon 
the ninds and conduct of their future loaders. 19 

15/ Speech, "Government Policy, Progress of Occidental Negros, and the Sugar 
; Industry," at the inauguration of - the City of Bacolod, Negros Occidental, 
October 19, 1933. Rivera Collection, Vol. IV, p. 1927. 

Speech on boy scout training, over the radio at Malacanan, October' 31, 1938. 
Saggo jLMessagos . Vol. 4, Part 1, JBVFF, pp. 241-242. . 

Ill Speech on respect for property rights and government plans for Buenavista. 

Estate, at Barrio Cruz na Daan, San Rafael, Bulacan, January 31, 1939. Ibid. . ; 
vol. - 5, Part I, " JBVFF, p.. 12. 

•W ibid., p. 13.. 

W Speech, "The Elimination of Partisanship in a. Democracy, " at the Far Eastern 
diversity, August 17, 1940. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, p. 2251. 



11-28 



iX '-.-i . 13. CHRISTIANITY 

jjjsim CjT JS_RE;.L JPI R IT _Og CHRISTIA NITY 

The real cause of the unrest all over the world is economic. 

Let him who is first he the last. This is the spirit of Christianity, and • 
this spirit should be the underlying principle of all our institutions. 

If we build the future upon this spirit, ours will be the chosen people, , 
and our country the paradise on earth. 1 

PRESIDENT TjSLLS_ggOggjgrpW;T U. OF FILIPI NOS ' CHRISTIAN K JHRITAGjj] 

By the grace of God, the Filipinos are followers and disciples of our Lord 
Josus Christ. Theirs is a Christian civilisation. Most of their scholars, for the 
last three hundred and fifty years, have drunk fro* the fountain of wisdom which 
finds its source from the summa theologica of St. Thomas Aquinas, as taught in 
q*r.\.„. Catholic university, the University of Sto. Tomas, in Manila, the oldest 
university under the American flag - my own alma mater. 2 

CHiHSTIAN FOU NDATION OF FILIPINO NATION BHPHASIZ ttD 

In the true Christian spirit, the Filipino people have laid down the foun- 
-ktion stone of their independent existence. Uhen they drafted the Constitution of 
tho Commonwealth, which is also the Constitution of the Philippine Republic, they 
sought first the guidance of Divine Providence and inserted in that fundamental law 
of the land a clause condemning war as an instrument of national policy and pledging 
our people never to resort to arms except in defense of our country. 5 

jjg™J^™MJO^jOgi^flt!! C at holicism from s pain 

It is true we revolted against Spain, but that fact does not mean a lack of 
present-day understanding of the advantages which came to us as a result of Spanish 
Ministration. Certainly we were given the rudiments of the Latin culture and 
received the blessing of tho Christian faith. Because wo are grateful to the United 
btatea for her numerous contributions to the material development of the Philip- 
pines, this does not signify any weakening of affection for Spain for what she -• 
did for our country. 4 

RjBffM JtD JUSTICE AL0 N*1 OFFMR SOLUTION TO WOULD HtipIFLTfypfi 

^ il ^ a Constitutional declaration - renunciation of war as an instrument of 

1/ Hadio message on his 54th birthday, August 19, 1952. iP, MR#32, TNL. 

'il Speech upon acceptance of Doctor of Laws, honoris causa, conferred by George- 
town University, Washington, D.C., April 17, 1937. Quez on Messages. Vol. 3, 
p art I, JBVFF, p. 95. 

2/ IbijU, P. 94. 

4/ Speech on Occupation Day radio program, August 15, 1938. OP, MR#41, TNL. 



11-29 ■ 



Clonal policy - implies that our people recognize that no nation' has the right 
to resort to war in order to carry out its national policies; that every state is 
member of the family of nations; that each nation has rights that must be res-, 
peoted by the others; that superiority of force is no .justification for adopting 
and carrying out a national policv that may be prejudicial to the liberties and 
interests of other peoples; and that right and .justice alone - never force - 
should determine and decide the conflicts that may arise between nations, in other 
, ords , it .means that we are willing to submit to arbitration or to an international 
court for adjudication of any and all controversies that may arise between the 
l-'hilippines and other countries. 

It is almost inconceivable that two thousand years after the birth of Christ 
who came to this world to teach the gospel of love among men, in countries that 
boast of being Christian, misery and want still exist in the midst of plentyl 6 
C LE-™--L— ^_g 2 LVE Jj£KLD_b_ILLS - QUZEQN 

If we behaved like a true Christian, practising Christianity in our dealings 
,ith our fellowmen, there would-be no wars, no economic depressions, no revolution,, 
no agrarian questions, no labor disputes. Instead, there would be peace and con- 
tentment, well-being and happiness everywhere. ^ 

- L i.? BARS PE SPOM^TION Of CHRISTIANITY IN PHILIPPICS 



No disaster could be greater in my country than the loss of the religion wh'ioh 
*a embrace. An obvious part of Japan's plans for the Philippines is the despoliation 
o.f Christianity, even though its present pretense is that it will permit religious 
freedom. 

14. CHURCH AND STATE 

The State has nothing to do with the Church, nor the Church with the State. 
1 aa a Catholic as everybody knows, I, who for the time being, am at the head of 
tins government. As an individual, I worship my God in accordance with my own reli- 
gious belief. But as the head of the State I can have no more to do with the Catho- 
de church than I can with a Protestant denomination, the Aglipayan, the Mohammedan, 
orjiny other religious organization or sect in the Philippines. 1 

V Speech on peace, social and economic security of nations, University of the 
Philippines, April 4, 1939. OP, MR#42, TNL. 

y Radio message on his 62nd birthday, August 19, 1940. Rivera Collection, 
v °l« V, p. 2263. 

qp, KR#44, TNL. 

8 Press statement on the interchange of diplomatic representatives between China 
and the Vatican, issued in Washington, D.C., October 28, 1942. QP, MR#45, TEL. 

Speech on the 25th anniversary of the consecration of Archbishop O'Doherty of 
'anila, September 4, 1935. OjP, MR#38, THL. 



11-30 



My friendship with Archbishop O'Dohertv w =n , , 

p u -uonertj really developed after he had 
become the archbishop ol Manila arid, I must add a 

. . „ + , n . Pl add ' a S°od many years prior to my 

rejoining the Catholic Church , the faith nf „,„ # j-u 

J of my lathers. I was Grand Master of the 

firand Lodge of the Philippine Islands and elected » J 

v xu , tioctod to the 33rd degree of the Scot- 

tish Rite fcasonry, the highest rank to which » 

. . ai 2 a mason can aspire, when our relations 

became very friendly. 

Under tlie present Constitution of tv,^ m ■ t 

citution of tho Philippine Commonwealth, just as 

«d« the Jonss Act, and in fast ever sinee the African flag was first hoisted 
over these islands, the separation of the Church and the State, and the freedom of 
.orehip are guaranteed. The State has nothing te do uith the Church, nor tho Church 
with the state... And no authoritv nf ™-, i t 

" y 0± an/ church h as any right to interfere with 
the afiairs of the government. ' 

I hope I am a good practical Catholic. As such, in my individual capacity, 
there is nothing that I shall not be glad to do to give added solemnity to the ' 

celebration of the Eucharistic Conrres- T ™ „i„„ 

^ ongrcss. i am also most anxious, as a private 

individual professing the Catholic faith, to render honors and- pay tribute to' His 
Mnance, the Papal Legate; but, as the President of the Philippines-, I am not 
in a position to do what your program calls for. 4 

With reference to the proposed program for my participation in the XXXIII 
international Eucharistic Congress which, at first glance, I thought referred to my 
personal participation therein and therefore expressed my approval thereof, I have 
noticed upon further consideration that what is intended in the program is that 
tne Papal Legate shall be officially welcomed by the President of the Philippines 
in behalf of the Government of tho Commonwealth, on the one hand, and as the head 
o± the Nation and in behalf thereof, on the other. 



* * * 



I am informed by competent authority that the Government of the Philippines 
war not render His Eminence, the Papal Logate, honors that might in any way be cons- 
true as a reconition of him as a representative of a foreign State; that the Papal 
=2^2^=--^_f!f ardGd aS an ecclesi astic of high rank without any official 
& Quezon Messages, Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFP, p. 127. 

* pp. 127-128. 

' h^t*T t ™^ Chbishop 0 ' D °kerty, January 9, 1937. Mezo n Messages. Vol. 3, 
l t "IBVIF, p. 274. 



,1-52 

- m - 

,. )re theory, and that as far as our people aro concerned, it is forever settled 

tia t this separation shall be maintained as one of the cardinal tenets of our 
Gpyernment. The ecclesiastical authorities should realise, therefore, that any 
attempt on their part to interfere with matters that are within the province of 
t i :0 Government will not be tolerated. If the said ecclesiastical authorities < * 
,'csire to have the Government respect their rights and afford them every kind of 
protection in the exercise of their religion, they must not only abide by the 
v-.,s and the lawful orders of the Government, but they must also/fmowledge and 
respect the principle of the separation of Church and State. 9 

rttBTST INITIATED CKURCII-STA'f-E SEPARATION, SAYS :.UiffiOH 

The doctrine of the separation of Church and State was not enunciated by a 
King or a President, or by a Pope, or a .Bishop but by our Lord Jesus Christ himself. - 

While our Lord was still in this world, there were those who wanted to show 
uim up as a false prophet, so they wont to Him and asked whether they should pay 
the taxes demanded by the Roman Government or not. Thereupon Jesus asked them to 
kind Him a coin; upon receiving it, He asked them whose face was it that appeared 
on the coin; and they answered it was Caesar's. Jesus then said: "Render unto 
Caesar what is Caesar's and unto God what is God's." ^° 

SIGHT Ag_CmZgj[J^INSUISj m FROM RIGHT AS CH URCH HEA D 

I shall not deny any bishop, priest, or minister of any church, of his 
right as a citizen to express his opinion on any public question; but I do empha- 
tically deny the right of the constituted authorities of any religious organization, 
Church or Faith, in their capacity as authorities of that religious organization, 

Church or Faith, to speak as such and to influence the Government or any of its 

11 

branches in the determination of its policies. 

15- CITIZENS CITIZENSHIP 
greSIDflWT F?'1PnASICTg_BnTY_OF EW1(.Y_CITIZRN_T0_V0TE 

It is the duty of every man and woman whom the law will grant the right to 
vote, to partake in this plebiscite and to express his or her views with the single 
end in view of serving the best interest of the nation. 

L et us say that all have/recreant but let us hope that all will also turn 
their faces in sorrow and in disgust, away from the path they have trodden and into 
the road that leads to enlightenment and mutual loye. We are all the sons and 
daughters of a most beautiful and generously endowed country. Let us seek 

2/ Press statement on the pastoral letter of the metropolitan archbishop and suf- 
fragan bishops of the ecclesiastical province of Cebu on religious instruction 
in the Philippines, June 24, 1938. Quezon Messages. Vol. 4, Part I, JBVPF , p. 666. 

12/ Speech explaining veto of the bill on religious instruction, July 17, 1938. 

Kivera c ollection, Vol, IV, p. 1809. 
ii/ £bid., p. 1808. 



11-32 

v;r e theory, and that as far as our people aro concerned, it is forever settlod 

tJa t this separation Khali bo maintained as one of the cardinal tenets of our 
Government. The ecclesiastical authorities should realize, therefore, that any 
attempt on their part to interfere with matters that are within the province of 
the Government will not be tolerated . If the said ecclesiastical authorities ■* ' * 
desire to have the Government respect their rights and afford them every kind of 
protection in the exercise of their religion, they must not only abide by the 
1--/S and the lawful orders of the Government, but they must alsc/inowledge and 
respect the principle of the separation of Church and State. 9 

CliR I ST^^NIT I ATlgP_CTIU^OK — ST ATE SEg/Jj^T^QN^^^A rgn gflM 

The doctrine of the separation of Church and State was not enunciated by a 
Ring or a President, or by a Pope, or a Bishop but by our Lord Jesus Christ himself. 

While our Lord was still in this world, there were those who wanted to show 
Him up as a false prophet, so they wont to Him and asked whether they should pay 
the taxes demanded by the Roman Government or not. Thereupon Jesus asked them to 
hand Him a coin; upon receiving it, He asked them whose face was it that appeared 
on. the coin; and they answered it was Caesar's. Jesus then said: "Render unto 
Caesar what is Caesar's and unto God what is God's." ^ 

SIGHT AS CITr£EN_DISTINGUISI.rED F ROM RIGHT A H CHU RCH H EAD 

I shall not deny any bishop, priest, or minister of any church, of his 
right as a citizen to express his opinion on any public question; but I do empha- 
tically deny the right of the constituted authorities of any religious organization, 
Church or Faith, in their capacity as authorities of that religious organization, 
Church or Faith, to speak as such and to influence the Government or any of its 
branches in the determination cf its policies. ^ 

15. CITIZENS CITIZENSHIP 

:TOSIDF,WT_FMlASICTg_DTTTY OF ^UY_CITIZEN_TO_VOTE 

It is the duty of every man and woman whom the law will grant the right to 
vote, to partake in this plebiscite and to express his or her views with the single 
end in view of serving the best interest of the nation. 

L et us say that all have/recreant but let us hope that all will also turn 
their faces in sorrow and in disgust, away from the path they have trodden and into • 
the road that leads to enlightenment and mutual love. We are all the sons and 
daughters of a most beautiful and generously endowed country. Let us seek 

2/ Press statement on the pastoral letter of the metropolitan archbishop and suf- 
fragan bishops of the ecclesiastical province of Cebu on religious instruction 
in the Philippines, June 24, 1933. Quezon Messages. Vol. 4, Part I, JBVFF, p. 666. 

10/ Speech explaining veto of the bill on religious instruction, July 17, 1938. 
Hivera Collection, Vol, IV, p. 1809. 

ii/ Ibid., p. 1808. 



11-34 

~ m - 

1 ,, I T()if'^S^ip_g^MIg^_OL'JjOI ^n_g g EVERY CITIZEN 

VJe must rely for the security of this new nation, not 30 much upon the might 
0 f brutal force, but upon the undivided loyalty of every citizen to the Government - 

loyalty founded upon individual consciousness that this Government is his, and 
tha t it exists only for his protection, for his liberty, and for his happiness. ° 

. So long as there are nations that believe in, and back their faith with, 
force, when their national interests, as conceived by them, are paramount to the 
interests of any other nation and even to the interest of mankind, our only re- 
course is to build up Our own force to defend ourselves against aggression. This 
is the reason why the Constitution asserts that the defense of the state is a 

prime duty of government, and that in the fulfillment of this duty all citizens 

7 

nay be required by law to render personal military or civil service. 
FEIST DUTY OF EV ERY CITIZEN: SUPPORT THE GOVERIMENT 



|rruc love of country must b e shown in de eds and not in words, and in time 
of oeace th e fi rst evidence of patriotism, of true lo ve of country, consists in tho 
triljLfrnfl negs to pay o ne's taxes. That is the f i rst d uty of a c i tizen. If he pay s 
,ds taxes willingl y and on time , any citizen can bo President o f the P hili ppin e o . ® 

DUTIES OP CITIZENSHIP VITAL TO GOVERMEHT SUCCESS 



lib man can make of this government a success if the Filipino people them- 

9 

selves do not realize the duties of citiKenship. •» 
T,!ERi3 IS NO LIBERTY WITHOUT SOCIAL RESTRAINT - QUEZON 



Organized society is predicated on the willingness of men to limit their • 
freedom of action in the interest of the well-being of the entire community in , 
which they live. There is no liberty without so cial restraint . It is on ly through 
neces sary restraints upon ..individual liberty an d the cu l tivation of self -r est raints 
to prevent abuse of that liberty that dj^9^tic_^ojrerj^e nts can offer peace 
and security _bo the people who l ive under them. ^ ^ 

16. CIVIL SERVICE 

ii^Ly^cnEUs^ 

I call the soecial attention (of the First National Assembly - ABS) to 



6/ Speech at the First National Assembly, October 18, 1937. MR#40, TNL. 

2/ Speech on peace, social and economic security of nations, University of the 

Philippines, April 4, 1939- QP> I®#42, TNL. 
§/ Speech at the public plaza of Tagbilaran, Bohol, July 1, 1939. ElSA* 

JO/ Speech on the essence of democracy, University of the Philippines, July 16, 
1940. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, p. 2233. 



11-34 

v.-.TTOH'S SEC UR ITY PREM ISED OK L OYALTY OP E VERY CITIZEN 

We must rely for the security of this new nation, not so much upon the might 
of brutal force, but upon the undivided loyalty of every citizen to the Government 
s. loyalty founded upon individual consciousness that this Government is his, and 
that it exists only for his protection, for his liberty, and for his happiness. ° 

3j?aHSE OF _S f JATE PRI 1S3 DUTY OF ALL FIL IPINOS 

. So long as there are nations that believe in, and back their faith with, 
force, when their national interests, as conceived by them, are paramount to the' 
interests of any other nation and even to the interest of mankind, our only re- 
course is to build up Our own force to defend ourselves against aggression. This 
is the reason why the Constitution asserts that the defense of the state is a 
prime duty of government, and that in the fulfillment of this duty all citizens 
uay be required by law to render personal military or civil service. ^ 

FIRST pUTY_0|^BVB]-lY_OITIZE]J: SUPPORT THE GOVERNMENT 

True love of c ountry mus t _b_e shown in de e ds and not in words, and in time 
of peace the fir st evidence of patriotis m, of true love of country, consists in the 
.. Xll^MOSS 3 - -tP- .Bay.. .one ' s taxes. That is the f irst duty of a citizen. If he pays 
:da taxes w illingly and on time , any citizen c an bo President of the P h ilippin es. 8 

JUTIBS OF CITIZENSHIP VITAL T0_ G0yERJ-fl iRI-!T SU CCES S 

No man can make of this government a success if the Filipino people thom- 

q 

selves do not realize the duties of citizenship. » 
™Q gJjLiiig I,ffl ' J l.H I ' JH0UT a0CIAL RESTRAIllT - QUEZON 

Organized society is predicated on the willingness of men to limit their ■ 
freedom of action in the interest of the well-being of the entire community in t 
which they live. There is no l i berty without so cial restraint. It is on ly through 
•Mc.e_sjarx. .re s t raint s ,up_qn jyidividwal liberty an d the cult ivation o f self-r estraints 

1°— Slgyen t a buse of that libert y that democr atic governments can offer peace 

~ 10 

and^sccur ity to t he peop le who l ive under them. 

16. CIVIL SERVICE 
SljjZO^EjiCHENS SELF-INTEREST, v/ANTS CIVI L SER VICEJj^ SJffHELD 

I call the special attention (of the First National Assembly - ABS) to 

6/ Speech at the First National Assembly, October 18, 1937. '-tf 5 * MR#40, TNL. 
1/ Speech on peace, social and economic security of nations, University of the 

Philippines, April 4, 1939- QP» MR#42, TNL. 
§/ Speech at the public plaza of Tagbilaran, Bohol, July 1, 1939. Ibid. 
2/ Ibid. 

10/ Speech on the essence of democracy, University of the Philippines, July 16, 
1940. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, p. 2233. 



11-35 

section 635 of the present Administrative Code permitting the Chief Executive, for 
the good of the civil service, and with the consent of the Philippine Senate, to 
n.-ucs appointments to positions in the classified civil service without regard to', 
•the examination requirements of the law. 1 am recommending the elimination of tlris 
legal provision in our C iv il Service Law, because I consider its existence a 
continuous threat to the inviolability of the Civil Service Rules. 1 

It is wholly impossible to devise any infallible system of evaluating cblli- 
that will permit higher authority to make distinctions on any such particularized 
basis. But the most serious objection to the selective method of promotion is that 
it frequently permits political or other extraneous influence to affect an of f i- ' 
car's advancement.. This is fatal to efficiency. Whenever an army organization 
becomes convinced that the promotion of an officer has resulted from favoritism or 
prejudice, irreparable harm is done to the morale of the whole corps, and the 
military is certain to be neglected in favor of political maneuvering. I am 
determined that nothing of this kind shall characterize the officer corps of the. - 
Philippine Army. 

mLgPI^_C^l T^_S¥Jjilj PaTAKES P LACED UND ER CIVIL 3MVICB RULES 

It appears that when the Office of the Sweepstakes was created under Act ' 
No. 4130, section 2. thereof provided in part that "tho board of trustees may make 
the appointments without taking into consideration the civil service law and rules. 
Under the exemption the appointments to the . sweepstakes office were made without 
regard to examination. requirements. 

With the inauguration of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the Consti- 
tution went into full force and effect and in order that there could be no possi- 
ble misinterpretation of its provision with special reference to appointments in 
the public service, I issued Executive Order No. 0, effective January 1, 1936. 

The Philippine Charity Sweepstakes was organized to provide funds for the 
care, in the main, of public wolf are activities of the government such as social 
work, hospitals, dispensaries, -public recreation, etc. 

The continuance of the exemption from civil service examination requirements 
m the appointments of employees of the sweepstakes office is, therefore, - repug- 
nant to the Constitution and to Executive Order No. 8. ? 

^ORESLDjjNT^LOSES COINCI DENCE I IT EI S APPOIN TEE 

When the Chief Executive has lost his confidence in the man he appointed, 
j-t makes no difference what the reason is because \the responsibility rests T/ith 



l/ Message to the First National Assembly, December 16, 1935. Quezon Messages . 
v °l. I, Sp. Rev. Ed., J.BVEP, p. 54. 

ll Press statement on the administration of the Philippine Army Officer Corps, 
January 11, 1936. Ibid. .- Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFF, p. 41. 

2/ Letter to the Secretary of Finance and chairman, board of trustees, Philippine 
Charity Sweepstakes, placing the office personnel of the PCS under Civil 
Service Rules, February 19, 1936. Ibid . , pp. 435-436. 



11-36 

- W - 

f-,3 -aan who makes the appointment. 

When a charge is presented against a public official, it is not necessary 

•i-'tat the evidence presented should be sufficient for conviction if the case .vis a 

4. • ' 

criminal case. 

i,LD Bi.jPLOY^ ^TOUL D^B^IT^P^ HOTIOjT/Ji EXAM S . 

I am constrained to disapprove this bill on the ground that its approval 
iould vitiate the principle on which the civil service is operated. Article II, 
section 1 , of the Constitution of the Philippines, provides that appointments in 
the civil service, except to positions which are policy-determining, , primarily 
confidential, or highly technical in nature, shall be made only according to merit 
and fitness, to be determined as far as practicable by competitive examination. • A 
cursory reading of this bill would show that it violates this provision of the 
Constitution of the Philippines. 

If it is desired by the authors of this bill to give special consideration 
to those employees who have rendered a long period of service, this objective can 
now be attained by the giving of promotional examination by the Bureau of Civil 

5 

Service in which the subject, "experience and training," is given great weight. 
'iPBZON AGAINST Sl-JEBPSTAKRS , LOTTERIES IN PRINCIPLE 



In principle, I am opposed to the holding of sweepstakes or lotteries and, 
as a matter of fact, I sent a message to the National Assembly on July 29 »" 1936, 
recommending the discontinuance of the holding of sweepstakes in the Philippines 
and the adoption of some other system with less objectionable features. As a 
result, the National Assembly approved at its regular session Bill 2251 allowing 
the holding of lotteries for charitable purposes. This bill was repassed during 
the last special session of the National Assembly in order to eliminate certain 
objectionable features of the same. 



* * * 



The primary purpose of the bill is to raise funds for charitable purposes. 
At present, we do not have sufficient charitable institutions to take care of the 
unfortunates who must have to depend on charity. 
RULES PlLgILLING_Og_POSjTIONS A ND PROMOTION S 

1 . Whenever a vacancy shall occur in any position mentioned in the General 
Appropriations Act or in any special act of the National Assembly, the appoint- 
ment to which nosition is not bv law vested in the President of the lhilinpines, 
the corresponding head of department is hereby authorised to fill it by original 
appointment from among the eligibles in ttte civil service or by regular promotion 

.4/ State^ritTpress conference, Kalacanan, July 24, 1936. QP* MHff38, TNL. 
5/' Message to the First National Assembly on vetoing Bill No. 128, "Authorizing 

Automatic Promotion of qualified Civil Service Employees," October 29, 1936. 

.Quezon Messages . Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFF, pp. 369-370. 
6/ Press statement on allowing Bill No. 2214 authorizing the ^fding of letter ±os 

for charitable purposes and gating a public corpora , ca ry^ -t^pur 

poses of the bill to become a law without tne rresiu^no o & r 

29, 1936. Ibid. , pp. 465-466. 



11-37 

- gag _ 

, :; a salary not to exceed three thousand pesos per annum, subject to the entrance 
salaries provided in civil service rules and reflations. Appointment to any 
BUC h position at a salary exceeding throe thousand pesos per annum shall be sub- 
mitted to the President of the Philippines for approval. ' 

2. No increase in salary shall be allowed except in case of promotion to 
a position of higher rank or to any position involving greater responsibilities or 
increase of activities, in which case promotion nay bo approved by the proper 
department head, subject* to the limitations provided in paragraph 0 ) hereof: 

.Provided, that promotions shall not be made at a rate greater than one civil 
service grade and after a period of one year from the date of the last promotion. 
Meritorious cases as nay be determined by the department head may be submitted to 
the Cabinet for approval as an exception to civil service rules. 

3. This Administrative Order shall take effect as of January 1, 1937. 7 
qjfflWGIV ftS GUI DELINE ON j^LIC^TIOK OF SENIORITY RULE 

It has been the consistent policy of this administration, and repeatedly 
announced, that the man in the service in lizie for promotion should be given a 
chance either to prove his worthiness or unworthincss by giving him,, in case of a 
vacancy, at least a temporary designation until the fact lias been established that 
the incumbent is not equal to the responsibility involved in his now assignment... 
L general criticism against our government in the past and which is still heard 
even under our administration is that relatives and friends, and also comorovincia- 
£OS> get preferential at t. ait ion in the choice of officials and employees in the 
government. This, in local parlance, is Called "regionalismo. " 

We must place ourselves above unjustifiable criticism, however cautious wo 
;aay be in our acts. I, therefore, feel- that you shall find a way whereby your ■ 
appointee (Captain Viii av i concio as Manila pilot - ABS) may resign so that the cum 
senior in point of service may take the appointment. If experience should prove, 
that he is not as competent as Captain Villavicencio, then it will be time to 
appoint the latter. 8 

pftlT SY STEM S TRiMrTHENiiil) WITH EXTENSION OP CIVIL SERVICE 



The classified service has been extended to all branches of the government, 
including the municipalities, and the scope and powers of the merit system have, 
boon increased to such an extent as to make of it as active and strong an agency 
of good administration as can be found anywhere. ° 

HlLSIDaKT WILL ACT IMTLAOIATELY ON ERRING OFFICIALS 



If I receive a complaint against an act committed by a chief of police or 



2/ Administrative Order No, 40, "Filling of Positions and Promotions in the Civil 
Service," August 24, 1937. Quezon Messages. Vol. 3, Part II, JBVFF, p. 1165. 

2/ Memorandum for the Secretary ( of Finance on the appointment of Capt. Villavi- 
cencio as Manila pilot, September 6, 1937. Ibid . , pp. 355-356. 

V Message to the First National Assembly, October 16, 1937. QP, MR#39, TNL. 



11-38 

-m - 

,, on by a policeman, I shall order an investigation. When I am satisfied that the' 
criMe committed warrant, drastic action, I shall not waste my time by going throug 
ttie red tape of sending the papers to the secretary of the interior or to the 
governor of the province. I am not a hypocrite. I will not wait for the recom- 
mendation of either the secretary of the interior or the provincial governor be- 
fore acting on it. 

m^C m^J^mJi^E ^^ll 'LL TAKE CA RE OF T HEM -_qUEZ0N 

You must recognize not only my authority but also the powers of the munici- 
pal authorities. Your municipal mayors are the heads of your towns; your governor 
* B the executive cf your province. It is necessary that you respect them. If thoy 
conuait any wrong, file charges against the erring officials, and I will take care 
of them. But as long as they hold their positions', it is necessary that you re- 
cognize their authority. 

17. C 0 A L I T I 0 N • 
COALITION C OVKaHKSHT IN iiiARLY YEA RS OF COM ONWBALTH- 

. A coalition government is incompatible with a partisan legislature. A 
coalition cannot be formed in the executive department unless there is also a 
coalition of parties in the legislative branch. Therefore, the popular verdict in 
favor of the candidates of the Coalition for the executive department is a. mandate 
• to every candidate to the National Assembly who supported them to put aside par- 
tisan politics in the National Assembly and organize it on a non-partisan basis. 

You will readily see how utterly incongruous would be the situation that 
;/ou wish to creato. I have been elected as a Coalition candidate. Hence, it is rjy 
duty as well as my privilege to call to my assistance the ablest men that I can 
Mnd from the ranks of either party and outside of them, so that the country may 
bo provided with the best, cleanest and most efficient government of which our 
people are capable. This is the prime purpose of the Coalition. 1 

"COUITIOtr' VOWS TO 1IAV3 OOTOJffeMBHT BAS13D Oil i-SgtlT. JUSTICE TO AL L 

We promised to give the country a government free from partisan influence 
"nd selfish motives; a government where merit is to be the primary consideration; a 
government where justice is to be administered to all alike - to the poor and to 
rich, to the powerful and to the humble - a government in fact, where the 

12/ Speech on government policies and relation between the national government 
and the provinces, February 14, 1938. Que zon Messages , Vol. 4, Part I, 

■raw, p . 7 . 

W Speech at San Fernando, Pampanga, February 14, 1939- I bid. . Vol. 5, Part I, 
JT3VFF, p. 23. 

l/ Reply to the Paredes letter of November 3, 1935 , explaining why President- 
elect '-juezon offered Majority Floor Leader Quintin Paredes the position of 
resident commissioner to Washington, which offer the latter had originally 
declined. Rivera Collection, Vol. Ill, pp. 1198-1208. 



11-59 

?ub lic weal is to be at all times the only objective and 'consideration. 

We have enacted into laws the most urgent measures promised in our plat™ / 
form and none of these laws have become a dead letter, for each and every one of 
ttan is a living and effective instrumentality for the promotion of the well- 
doing, cultural advancement, and the material progress of our people. 

Our firm resolve is to fulfill during the four remaining years of our term 
the pledges contained in the platform. 2 ^ a ) 

^^jm ] j^j^j t jm^ 2 _T^tjs^m to blow off 

It was a blessed day for the Philippines when, two years ago-, these two- 
contending parties ("Pros" and "Antia"), before the altar of the Fatherland, laid 
down their weapons and signed a truce that would permit both to join hands in the 
service of the people. . » 

But it was at best only a truce, for each party kept its own separate 
.organizations distinct and intact... I could frequently discern, with grave alarr, 
at times, that beneath the calm and smooth waters of the Coalition, there were 
surging in the depths undercurrents constantly threatening to rise to form moun- 
tainous waves that might rock and sink the ship of state. Jealousies, rivalries, 
suspicions, have never been entirely forgotten by all those who, at one time, were 
actually political enemies and who were still potentially so because their res-, 
poctive organizations were kept alive. ^ 

18. CODE OF ETHICS 

goQ gj^k^^ gigg MINING OF ETHICS ' • 

Ethics - ethics in the conduct of citizens; ethics in the conduct of pro- 
fessionals; ethics in the conduct of officials above all. The word ethics means 
everything. It means honesty in the man who is working. Ethics means justice in the 
nan who is paying the man who is working for him. Ethics means truthfulness in 
dealing with our fellowmen. Ethics means giving to everyone what is his due. Ethics 
means the fulfillment of our duties. 1 

I want to speak to you on the ethics of citizenship. It is there where we 
have to concentrate our utmost endeavor, '.ve should let our people realize that 
living is not worth a damn if it is a life without honor and without ethics, 

"*ich means the same. 2 ^ 

i'^IDiim^LAYb^ DOIffl 16 -P01NT CODE OF ETH ICS 

I do hereby require all schools to teach the following civic and ethical 

Address at the convention of Coalesced Parties, Rizal Memorial Stadium, 
September 20, 1937. Quezon Messages . Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, pp. 121-122. 

2/ Il2id., p. 123. 

U Speech before the Civil Liberties Union of the Philippines, 1938, n.d.m. 
, QP, MR#4i, TWL. 



11-40 

jrinciples, drafted by a group of eminent citizens: 

1 . Have faith in Divine Providence that guides the destinies of men and 

nations. 

2 . Love your country for it is the home of your people, the seat of 3'our 
affections, and the source of your happiness and well-being. Its defense is your 
primary duty. Be ready at all times to sacrifice and die for it if necessary. 

3 . Respect the Constitution which is the expression of your sovereign 
will. T h e government is your government. It has been established for your safety 
and welfare. Obey the laws and see that they are observed by all and that public 
officials comply with their duties. 

4 . Pay your taxes willingly and promptly, Citizenship implies not only 
rights but also obligations. 

5 . Safeguard the purity of suffrage and abide by the decisions of the 
uajority. 

6 . Love and respect your parents. It is your duty to serve them grateful- 
ly and well. , 

7 . Value your honor as you value your life. Poverty with honor is prefer-* 
able to wealth with dishonor. 

8 . Be truthful and be honest in thought and in action. Be just and 
■ charitable, courteous but dignified in your dealings with your fellowmen. 

9.., Lead a clean and frugal life. Do not indulge in frivolity or pretense. 
3e aimple in your dress and modest in your behavior. 

10. Live up to the noble traditions . of our people. Venerate the memory of 
our heroes. Their lives point the way to duty and honor. 

11. Be industrious. Be not afraid or ashamed to do manual labor. Produc- 
tivo toil is conducive to economic security and adds to the wealth of the nation. 

12. Rely on your own efforts for your progress and happiness. Be not easily 
discouraged. Persevere in the pursuit of your legitimate ambitions, 

13. Do your work cheerfully, thoroughly, and well. Work badly done is 
worse than work undone. Do not leave for tomorrow what you can do today. 

14. Contribute to the welfare of the community and promote social justice, 
iou do not live for yourselves and your families alone. You are a part of society 
to which you owe definite responsibilities. 

15. Cultivate the habit of using goods made in the Philippines. Patronize 
the products and trades of your countrymen. 

16. Use and develop our natural resources and conserve them for posterity. 

Riey are the inalienable heritage of our people. Do not traffic with your citizen- 

3 

SAip. J 

2/ Executive Order No. 217, "Prescribing Certain Civic and Ethical Principles 
to be Taught in all Schools in the Philippines," August 19, 1939. Quezon 
Messages,. Vol. 5, Part I, JBVFF, pp. 991-992. 



11-41 



19. COLECTI VIST A MAJORITY 
OIIiiiZON STANDS FIRMLY TOR COL LE CTIVE: T.w^r. !1?|?HTr 

I will always stand by my theorv n-f n«n Q „4.- ■, 

bneory ol collective leadership oven if I havo to 

leave the liacionalista Party. 

The time has come for the establishment in the- Islands of political parties 
lM ch should fight for principles, not necessarily for the control of the govern- 
ment. I do not care if those who are supporting the theory of collective leader- 
ship are never returned to power, but I am sure that if the question is put 
squarely to the people as an issue in the coning elections, the voters of the old 
generation and the young men of today will support them. 1 

aEJATiS E jgSjpEjjT _M^j^ _RbLB_OF COLECTIVISTA MAJORITY 

Since the votes in the Senate have placed us in the position of assuming 
Part of the responsibility of being in the majority, we shall assume it without 
hesitation. We .shall allow full and complete discussion of all matters brought . 
before the attention of this body. Me shall give those who do not commune with us 
in our ideas or do not agree with us in our proposals the opportunity to express 
tt*ir opinions before the people; but there should come a time in all classes when 
the will of the majority should assert itself, and be enforced, after having given 
the minority complete use of its rights to criticize. 2 

^IHiilL£L£ffiIL^Lll JlsracTED , says Quezon 

The liacionalista Colectivista party considers one of its most important 
duties to exert all its efforts to got all the power and all the responsibility for 
tho Filipino people that is permitted by the Jones Law, 

As a party wo do not have any special interest in assuming control of the 
.Government. But we are interested, and we are all ready to fight, that the part 
^iven by the Filipino people in the direction of their domestic affairs be assumed 
by some party that represents the country, .is are also interested that while some 
party or parties are at the helm of the government, another one should remain in 
the opposition. It is necessary to keep the integrity, honesty, and efficiency of 
the minority that is ever ready to check and curb the abuses that may be committed" 
ty those above. ^ 

^^nSONALIST^_FOR_P/JtTY, COLECTIVISTAS FO R PRINCIPLES 

The motto of the Unipersonalistas was: Sacrifice all principles, but save 
tno^party at u all costs. The motto of the Colectivistas is: Save the principles 

1/ Statement in the Manila Times, December 23, 1921. Rivera Collection, Vol IT, 
P. 575. "' 

?J Speech, "The Triumph of Collectivism," after the Colectivista-Unipersonalista 
split of 1922. In: Pedro do la Liana and Francisco B. Icasiano, i'uezon In 
ffiLS, Speeo.hp.q,. Manila: State Publishing Co., 1937, pp. 12-13. 

2/ Ikid^ Also in Rivera Collection, supra, p. 721. 



11-42 

- m - 

,nd sacrifice everything:, even the party itself I 4 

S&Jg. AWOCATiSS A GOVBRIfl^ T BY CCjflSEHSP S 

■^JLI 0 ^ 0 ^^-^--^-^ of democ racy, not only i n 

xora bj^ /j:]£o_i n _^^^ the e}q oression of the popu- 

lar wiJ-ljL.. 1 ^ a ^9IIBJ-}}l.Pj^?^2SJ^^.J^ms o f a voluntary expression of 
the ov^re^ of_the_ people. The Cpiectivists wan t a. government of opinio n, 
aot ^govgrmaent that solves vital ques tions without tho coun try 1 s kn owled ge or 
how or wh en the s election mis made. ^ 

ir^BRSQWJiis T?] ark aktiqpariahs, c ollectiyists nomam ~ mlq 

The Collectivists believe that union in a party does not mean union of nen. 
It means unity in principles professed and practised, tie believe that the organi- 
zation of a new party does not mean the bankruptcy of our national cause, because 
vo hold the Nacionalista Party is not the people. Even if there is a split, we 
shall work together for our complete political emancipation. We have f aith in our 
pe ople, blind, sublime fa ith in them and we know th at no Filipino will be recreant 
to the legacy beq ueat hed to him by his fo r efathers and th at all of us to a ma n 
vi ll stand in fav or of P hilippine independ ence, immediate, absolute and complete, 
lie know that the Filipino people, irrespective of party, creed or religion, will 
force the issue and compel all party men to work for the realisation of our 
sacred ideals. 

We are divided in ideas, but united in sentiment; united in love of coun- 
try, but divided in the procedure of serving her best. The Unipersonalists are 
antiquarians; the Collectivists are modern. Even if I wanted to remain in the 
party, I cannot very well do it. For it would be like mixing oil and water in a 
"lass. We shall need a new house now that we leave our old one. Wow we have two 
strong parties that we hope shall fight for ideals and ideals alone, eliminating 
personalities. ^ 

lMgiy?lggg||.. T 0 TAKE RISK TO DEFEND PRINCIPLES 

The politician who does not have any patriotic purpose in entering politics 
but his personal aggrandizement , who is only after his personal convenience and 
nothing else, is surely after a job, a position. Can I find a position in the 
iMlippine Government and in the gift of the Filipino people higher than that of 
iTosident of the Senate, the highest position to which a Filipino could be sent 
¥ his countrymen? If I wanted to perpetuate myself in power, is there anything 

&f Speech, "My Loyalty to My Party Ends...", February 10, 1922. In: De la Liana 
and Icasiano, ojd. cit . , p. 3, Also in Rivera Collection, Vol. II, p. 577. 

5/ Ibid,. 

§/ £bid_t. Rivera Collection, supra, pp. 580-581. 



11-43 

- m - 

cotter for me than to remain in the ifecionalista Tarty? 

But no! I prefer to take the risky side. I prefer to be in a new party that 

uust be organized, that will mean sacrifice, work, fight. And the same is true 

W ith those who are with me. There is nothing r;iore comfortable for them than to 

rcai&in in a powerful position. One should not belong to a party only to occupy a 

position. He should be a member of a party to defend the ideals of that party, 

and then occupy a position so that he may be able to better defend the ideals of 

7 

the party by means of his position. 

a mmm BY OPINION EXISTS IN PHILI PPICS, /.SSiiRTS qUi&ON 

One of the greatest arguments used against us by our American critics is 
that we do not have here a government of opinion. But is there a more conclusive 
proof of the fact that there is public opinion here than the present triumph of 
the collective principle of leadership? Is there one who doubts that this question 
has already been decided by the people? 

¥hen this question was discussed for the first time, almost all the papers, 
with very few exceptions, were in favor of the Unipersonal theory and against the 
Collective principle. What was the effect on the people? Nothing, absolutely 
nothing. The people decided for themselves. And this shows beyond the shadow of 
a doubt that here we have public opinion, courageous, independent, unbiased. Those 
who have followed this question with interest must have seen that the Filipino 
people is interested in matters that vitally affect its government , and that it 

Q 

in capable of forming its own opinion, without need of tutors or mentors. 
C OLLJilCTI VI STS ' WAR CRY : PEOPLE'S INTERESTS ABOV E PAR TY INTERESTS! 

The most propitious occasion has come when all political parties in the 
Philippines can show with deeds and not with words that there is something in 
which they can all be, and are in fact, united. That something is when it comes 
to fighting for our independence, and also when it is necessary to defend the 
integrity of the popular autonomy provided by the Jones Act. 

And to conclude, allow me to remind you on this occasion when we are met 
for the first time in a convention that when we entered the political arena, our 
war cry was: "Loyalty to party ends where it begins to be, in our belief, incom- 
patible with loyalty to the country," which means that the Collectivista Party 
places, and will always place, the interests of the people above the interests of 
the party. ^ 

COLLKCTIVISTAS COMMITTED TO DEKOCRATTC P RI NCIPLE S 

We should also reaffirm our adhesion and loyalty to the democratic 

2/ Uaiis. Rivera Collection, supra , p. 579. 
2/ ibid. 

2/ Speech, "People's Interests Above Party's Interests," October 8, 1922. 
Rivera Collection, Vol. II, p. 719. 



11-44 

principles that we proclaimed when we organized our party and with which we en- 
tered the political arena, tfe want to assure the people that our conduct in the 
government shall be inspired by those principles and that all our steps shall 
teud towards placing our republic, once our independence has been attained, on 
basis of sane and true democracy, which is what we understand by Collectivism 1< 

/;rm.MCTIVISTiS FOR IlTOl^l TOlSNCiil W ITHOUT ANY PRECONDITION 

Ue cannot admit that . as a condition precedent to the grant of . our indepen- 
dence there must be assurance that we shall be free from all foreign aggression, 
or that universal peace shall have been established, or that our electorate should 
be controlled by our youth educated in the public schools. 

* -x- * * •: 

Any one of those conditions means a step backward in the cause that we 
have been fighting for - our emancipation. The Jones Act established one condition 
only: the establishment of a stable government. And our people have amply ful- 
filled that condition. To agree to another now is to perpetuate the sovereignty 
of the United States in the Philippines, because with such a procedure, after 

the fulfillment of that condition, another one can be required of us and so on 
11 

indefinitely. 

qiIEaOg = DEFlNES = PR II^JlY D H ^X _Qg_^ c J"L T ^Ig^^_^I'gg T .I v ISTA PARTY 

The primary duty, the greatest and most sacred duty, of our party is to 
reaffirm our faith in the inalienable right of the Filipino people to bo indepen- 
dent and in its capacity to govern itself - that faith for which the most pre- 
cious lives of the land have been sacrificed. And in thus making this profession 
of faith, we should affirm our determination to continue to fight, each time with 

greater vigor, for the realization of the supreme aspiration of our party, the 

1 2 

restoration of theJPhilippine Republic. 

20. COLO K I A L K E N T A L I T Y 
HLQ HITS_ COLONI/J, iaTS VllO REFUSE TO ADMIT RiSALITY OF SHI^-gULg 

There are certain elements in the community who have always been not only 
•'against Philippine independence, but also against the grant of autonomous autho- 
rity to the people of these Islands. These elements, I regret to say, seem to 
refuse to abide by the sovereign will of the American people as expressed by 
Congress, and they refuse to admit in their mind that a change in government, 
not only in form but also in substance, has taken place in the Philippines. Those 
elements, despite the clear provisions of the Independence Act to the contrary, 



11-45 



still insist that the High Commissioner is in fact the Government of the Common- 
,-o.lth. They forget, or their reactionary mind cannot grasp the fact, that if 
.hat. they believe or want to believe, is true, the reflection would not be 
against the Filipino people, but rather against the American Government and the 
-erican people themselves, for the reason that if in truth the real Government 
of the Philippines was the High Commissioner, as obtains in other colonies else- 
uhero, America could not claim any credit for what she has done in the Philippines. 
On the contrary, her whole policy in the Islands would be 



sham. 



1 - one of hypocrisy and 



CIT 3Z0 N EXPLAINS COLONIAL BACKGROUND OF ACCRUED LEAVE 



I have the honor to recommend to you (gentlemen of the National Assembly 
- ABS) the immediate abolition of the accrued leave for officers and employees 
of the Philippine Government, including the additional leave for justices of 
the Supreme Court and the extended leave for judges of the Court of Appeals and 
Courts of First Instance and teachers. Such leave privileges only exist in co- 
lonial governments where they are adopted mainly for the benefit and convenience 
of officials and employees who came from the governing country. They were insti- 
tuted here at the time when the great majority of the positions in the Philippine 
Government were occupied by Americans and the belief was prevalent that white 
ram could not live in the tropics continuously for a long period of time without 
causing serious detriment to their health, thus necessitating their occasional 
visits to the United States or other temperate countries. With the establishment 
of the Commonwealth Government, the different positions of which are, with very 
rare exceptions, occupied by Filipino officers and employees, the reason for the 
continuance of the said leave privilege has disappeared. 



* * * * 



I recommend that the vacation leave of said officers and employees be in- 
creased to fifteen days yearly, and, in addition, a sick leave of not exceeding 
fifteen days per year be granted. B oth vacation and sick leave should be made cu- 
mulative while the officer or employee remains in the service, the maximum length 
of time to accumulate in favor of any officer or employee not to exceed five months. 

21 . COM H 0 N M A N 

C0MQNJjAN_ALONE = CAN SAVE WORLD FROM DISASTER, SAYS QUEZON 

tfe are living today amidst the storm and stress of one of the most tragic 
epochs of history. Acute unemployment and economic distress threaten the stability 
°f governments the world over. The very foundations of civilized society are 

l/ Press statement denying the report in the Man ila Daily Bulletin that the 
U.S. High Commissioner has turned down the proposal to float bonds in the 
Philippines for public works projects, August 3, 1936. Quezon Messages . 
Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFF, p. 446. 

ll Message to the First National Assembly, October 22, 1936. Ibid. , p. 345. 



11-46 



sHaken. Hie common man alone can save humanity from disaster. It is our duty to 
;!rove to him that under a republican system of government he can have every 
opportunity to attain his happiness and that of his family. Protection to labor, 
especially to working women and minors, just regulation of the relations between 
labor and capital in industry and agriculture, solicitous regard on the part of 
the government for the well-being of the masses are the means to bring about the 
aeeded economic and social equilibria between the component elements of society. 1 
KfflSIlMMr PLEDSlSS SOCIAL SEC URITY FPR COMMO N MAN 

We shall maintain a progressive system of compensation in case of accident 
and wo shall try to adopt a plan for the protection of the laborer against 
disease, unemployment and old age by means of social insurance. 2 

v^jns_cmmM^^j)Pimo^js^mi^ t helpful 



The Filipino common taols information may be limited, but his opinion is 
honest. After all, if we want to run this country intelligently, we must respect 
the opinion of our decent citizens. ^ 

9^M^^STIi^J^E^^^^9j^^. TALK > IGNORES RESOLUTIONS 



I would rather talk to them (the people) face to face than see them pass 
resolutions. I pay little attention to these resolutions; I do not believe in 
them , no matter how well-worded they may be. ^ 

PRESIDENT'S GOAL ; HIGH LIVIMGJT Atffi^D^JDgT ICE FOR COMMON HAN 

bur immediate task at hand is the raising of the standard of living of the 
common man and, above all, to secure justice for him - justice from the Executive, 
justice from the Legislature, justice from the Courts, justice from society, 
justice from his fellowmen. ^ 

^UEZO^ONJ^TO^IVE SOCIAL JUSTIC E TO COMMON "TAP" 

I come from the masses. My ancestors were of the poor class. I am not afraid 
nor ashamed to confess that my heart beats in unison with the hearts of the needy 
and for them. Justice shall be done to the poor and the humble in this country 
«o long as I am the President. I am determined to fight for the rights of every- 
one, rich and poor alike, but more particular Ly for those who are unable to pay 
handsomely for expensive lawyers. And let it be known that I shall use all the 
powers of my office to win this fight. 6 



1/ Inaugural address, November 15, 1955. QP, MRjr40, TNL * 

ll Speech on social justice, 1935, n.d.nu Ibid. 

V Statement at a press conference, August 27, 1937. Ibid, 

V Ibid. 

y Speech at the National Assembly, 1937. n.d.m. Ibid . 

k/ Speech on the principles of law and justice, at the University of Sto. Tomas, 
October 2, 1937. Q uezon Messages . Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, p. 152. • 



11-47 

- ** _ 

irrfDDIA TAX ABOLITION AN ACT OF JTCSTTnajPn nruy,,^^.. 

At your first regular session (referring to the First National Assembly - 
ABS), I did not think it wine to recommend the repeal of the cedula tax law for 
w were unprepared to cover the loss of revenue that the provinces and municipa- 
lities would have suffered thereby. Now, however, we can safely abolish the cedula 
tax, and do an act of justice to our laboring classes - thus closing also forever 
, chapter in the history of taxation in our country, that brought no honor to the 
government, and caused untold hardships to the majority of our people. 7 
WATIOHAL ASSE MBLY COMMENDED FOR C3DULA TAX ABOLITION 

I desire to congratulate you (the members of the National Assembly - ABS) 
on the enactment of this bill, which I an about to sign, abolishing the cedula tax. 
This is a tax which has been borne by our people for centuries. It has caused un- 
told hardships on those who earn hardly enough to make their living and it cons- 
tituted one of the serious grievances of our people against the Spanish govern- 
ment . 

gMM-^^AJQ^^^L^Mg-ilgJiAJOR AIMS OF REVOLUTION 



The younger generation who have been reared in an atmosphere of ease and . 
ooafort will not understand the real reason for the abolition of the cedula tax, 
but wo, who suffered during the Spanish regime and are still living, remember 
that our chief complaint arose from the payment of the cedula tax. One of the pro- 
mises of our leaders of the Revolution was to abolish the cedula should they win. 
We triumphed against the Spaniards, but the cedula was not abolished; it was only 
decreased slightly. It should have been abolished long ago, but the plan was not 
carried out for want of a remedial substitute. Now we know where to get that subs- 
titute, and what the people will get today is the relief they will get from the 
abolition of the cedula. 9 

m. PAYS TRI BUTE TO TILLE R OF SOIL IN FIRST RICE PLANTING DAY 

There is no nan in our country more honorable than the tiller of the soil. 
"0 country will be economically sound, and its inhabitants contented and happy, 
if the men do not love the soil and do not know how to till it. The stability of 
the nation is dependent upon the soil tillers, and the power of a country rost3 
upon the zeal of its citizens. Hence, we should celebrate Rice Planting Day, and 
core than this, we should learn the history and ponder upon the importance of 
P'Hay as well as the dignity of the man planting the rice. 10 

2/ Message to the First National Assembly on the abolition of the oedula tax, 
November 1, 1937. Ibid., p. 243. 

2/ Speech on the signing of the bill abolishing the cedula tax, November 15, 1937. 
iMd., p. 172. 

2/ ibid., p. 176. 

1.0/ Speech at the first Rico Planting- Day celebration, Buenavista Estate, San Ilde- 
fonso, Bulacan, July 9, 1939. qnszen Messages. Vol. 5, Part I, JBVFF, p. 142. 



11-43 

. f T?:T fflIT FA RMERS COUIJTRY WILL DIE OF KU HG- iffl - anBsng 

The farmer is the only one that gives us all our necessities in life. The 
,, onen t we are bereft of farm workers, then however large our domain, or rich we 
-.re or numerous our lawyers, presidents and doctors, we shall die of hunger; we 
;ja,.".ll not amount to anything. 

Evidently, the very source of our livelihood is the farmers and not merely 
Ivo- land which, if neglected by us, will not produce anything except thorny weoda 
■'„,: fl .t would hurt our foot. 1 

qoM_"TAO" Cl'iffS SOCIAL JUSTICE OHLY UHDBR COMflOHifF; A TMT 

¥e have been under the Amorican administration. I will not speak now of 
the Spanish regime because that already belongs to history. Uo have boon, I re- 
peat, under the Americans for 40 years. But when did the common tao receive the 
protection of the government if not only upon the establishment of the Coranon- 
ivealth? lou heard American governors-general charge the cacique of abusing his 
power, but they were merely denouncing the political bosses, not the economic 
bosses whom they never went after. 

Uhen did Juan de la C TU7l over have any chance at social justice if not 

only upon the establishment of the Commonwealth? Under the American rule, a law 

in this country authorized the imprisonment of the kasama who left his landlord 

while still pecuniarily obligated to the latter. But it was Manuel L. O.uezon, let 

1 2 

tie toll you, who did away with that law. 

'jJ^^J^XW^SOUm^ TO PROBLEMS OF C0?jM0H_HAN_ 

Wo can get nowhere if wo are incapable of understanding the problems of 
our day. The past can teach us very little in the discharge of the groat rosponsi- 
bilitios of the future, for the past is the history of the exploitation of man by 
the powerful or by the rich. 

And if we are going to be bound by the dogmas of the past as to what is duo 
the common man, we shall soon be bidding goodbye to the past. 

22. COMMONWE A L T Pi 

j» COMMOFffi ALT H GOVERNMENT BEFOU L! IliDEPEflDMCE 

A new government is about to be established, a government destined to 
constitute the last rung of the ladder to our final emancipation. ^ 



U7 Speech in Cabanatuan, JTuova Ecija, July 16, 1939. Ibid . . p. 152. 

Speech on civil liberties at the inter-university oratorical contest, held 
under the auspices of the Civil Liberties Union, Ateneo auditorium, December 
9, 1939. Ibid . . p. 223. 

W Speech at the open forum of the U.P. Alumni Association, August 7, 1940. 
Rivera Collection, Vol. V, p. 2240. 

IJ Opening address to the Senate, July 16, 1934. OP, MR#36, TNL. 



2 



. m 

;,i,J?II. T G OF RECTIFICAT ION OF COl4MOIM?J/J J m_ CGiTSTITU T ION 

The popular ratification of the Commonwealth Constitution is a distinct 
triumph of democracy and a recognition of our right to shape our own destinies. 

^-. .^iNEALTK IS MOST UNIQUE EXPERIMENT IN CIVILIZATION 

With the establishraent of the Commonwealth of the Philippines the great 

erican nation is about to bring to a close the most unique experiment in the 

■•n.-.uls of colonization, and the Filipino people are embarking on that great 

-dvonturo which they ardently hope will lead then to eventual nationhood. This 

3 

-u the moot vital episode in the political history of our country. 
pj^pJ_CjTj^hTJR^^SJ^^OI^T.fT S gTTL-IG UP_C OMOj^ ALTH_ 

!ie (Franlc Murphy) has brought to that exalted post proven ability, tact 
mid character. To him we owe nuch for the laying down of the constitutional 
foundations of the Commonwealth in an expeditious and orderly fashion. Without 
his wise counsel and continued support, our new government might not yet have 
txiun inaugurated, nor would such inauguration been held under so favorable aus- 
pices. We are indebted to him also for the high standards of efficiency and in- 
tegrity which he upheld in the government, for his interest in awakening the 
public conscience to the most elemental claims of social justice, and for the 
examples in simple living and public spiritcdness which he has given us since 
his assumption of the duties of Governor-General. ^ 

COMQWJEALTII HAS BEST DEMOCRATIC GOVERNMENT - MLQ_ 

We have the best government in the Philippines and, believe it or not, the 

best democratic government in the world. I have to say democratic because our 

5 

government is subject to constitutional limitations. 
COffiiOWEALTH GOVERNMENT IN A NUTSHELL 



The government wo have now in the Philippines has a constitution of its 
own, f rained and adopted by Filipinos, approved by the President of the United 
states, and then, in a plebiscite, approved by the entire electorate of the 
Philippines. 

VnYJfrllilH CAN BE NO CONFLICT BETWE EN QUEZON AND KCHUTT 

There can be no possible conflict between the High Commissioner and 

2/ Speech on the ratification of the Commonwealth Constitution, 1934, n.d.m. 
OP, MR#36, TNL. 

ll Press statement on the establishment of the Philippine Commonwealth, n.d.m. 
TP, MRjr-38, TNL. 

U Speech in honor of U.S. High Commissioner Frank Murphy, January 14, 1936. 

IbidUI ^;. t ;).-, 

5/ Press conference at Halacanan, Hay 8, 1936. '.. ••' ■• 

5/ Speech at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, Now York City, February 20, 1937. 
TP, MR//39, TNL. 



11-50 

- m - 

;y3G lf. The Independence Act defines the prerogatives and functions of one, and 
Uo powers and duties of the others. The High Commissioner is the representative 
iu the Philippines of the President of the United States, and the President of 
■the United States may delegate to him such powers as under the lav? ho (the Presi- 
dent) is authorized to delegate. As the representative of the President of the 
united States, the High Commissioner naturally takes precedence over the President 
of the Philippines, even though they are of equal rank. . 

On the ether hand, the powers and duties of the President of the Philippines 
,.ro clearly defined in the Independence Act and in the Constitution of the Common- 
..xalth, framed and adopted in pursuance of the authority conferred by the American. 
Congress upon the Filipino people, and that Constitution has been duly approved 
;.,v the President of the United States. The President of the Philippines is the 
head of State. He is the Chief Executive of the Government of the Commonwealth 
raid the executive powers are vested in him. The Government of the Commonwealth is 
not an independent government. Ji'very official of this Government, from the Presi- 
dent of the Commonwealth down to the last policeman and messenger, in fact every 
Filipino citizen, owes allegiance to the United States.,, 7 

^ONJPOIHTS OOTJJN Ti^ 

There is another vital reason why the date for the granting of independence 
should be advanced. The present political set-up is untenable in that while 
Anerica retains her sovereign authority over the Philippines, she, at the same 
tine, has placed in the hands of the Filipino people the responsibility for 
laying down the foundation and erecting the structure of the Philippine Republic. 
The continuance of her sovereignty over the Philippines imposes upon America 
obligations that she cannot shirk, and, correspondingly, it gives her rights 
that are incompatible with the free exercise of our judgment as to the best means 
that we smould adopt to prepare ourselves for an independent national existence... * 

POMlS_GRA | TaD TO COMMOrMHALT H GOVEiTH'iBNT LIMITED 

Upon the establishment of the Government of the Commonwealth, however, 
the situation has changed materially. By an act of Congress, we were given power 
to create our own government, controlled and managed by us, under a Constitution 
of our own making. It was the plain purpose of the Congressional enactment that 
the Filipino people, who were to become automatically independent in 1946, would, 
during the Commonwealth period, take such steps as in their opinion would best 
insure the stability and success of the Philippine Republic. let, the pot/era 

ll Speech on the purpose of his trip to the United States and relations with the 
High Commissioner, delivered at the popular banquet in his honor, Rizal 
Memorial Stadium, Aus-ust 20, 1937- foezon Messages, Vol. 3, Part I, J3VFF, • . 
p. 112. 

§/ Message on the improvement of Philippine conditions, Philippine Independence, 
and relations with the American High Commissioner, October 18, 1937. 
iMd-, p. 216. 



■:i -51 



-ruitad to the Govarnmont of the Coaaom/ealth in the most essential functions of 
.-.v/ernasnt, such as those affecting tariff, currency, finance, immigration, or 
rUosa ::hich in any way night involve thy international obligations of the United 
Jtatos, etc. were subject to the ultimate approval of, or revocation by, the 



9 

L-resident of the United btates. ' 



I/o serious-minded person will fail to see the grave problems confronting 
,,vr r,eo?lo in the task of preparing the country for an independent national 
, x : - tence . '^he uorld is in a state of turmoil; political and social conditions 
pre unsettled; governments are sunpicious of one another and a feeling of un- 
certainty for the future permeates the whole human race. ^ 

Je completed the organisation of the Commoriwealth Government as contempla - 

ted by the Constitution. The new government has functioned satisfactorily, and 

its varied activities have been extended in order better to serve the needs of 

11 

the poople and to promote their welfare . 

23. CO :\ C5M 0 5' DUTY 

vm To to iffH., Yj^jciP4^ 

Cur government cannot be successfully carried on unless you have prin- 
ciples and you apply then to everybody regardless of personal considerations. Such 
is hard... for sometimes by declaring these principles and enforcing them, I 
deprive even my friends of my help. It hurts me to do so; but those are the penal- 
ties of office, the penalties of duty, to do tilings that may hurt you. 

It will take generations before we can accustom our people to see that . 



5/ PP- 216-217. 

10/ Remarks on the appointment of i'rancis B.-.Sayre as new U. S. high Commissioner 

to the Philippines, July 27, 1939- ■ QF» K$>42, l r -!L. 
.1.1/ hessage to the Second National Assembly, January 51 , 1341 . WtfU, 



11-52 

- _ 

the government has nothing to do with relatives and friends. 1 

— — — -~° Y0UR DUTY AS FIL IPINO CITIZS NS 

In his ihtroductory remarks, the governor said that the people of Cebu are 
100 per cent pro-Quezon. Well, I want to tell you that there is only one way to 
show me that you are 100 por cent with me; not by shouting "Mabuhay si Quezon!" 
(Long live Quezon! ) ; not by applauding Quezon; not by giving Quezon a warm re- 
ception as you are giving him now; not oven voting for Quezon, but by performing 
faithfully your duties as Filipino citizens and by doing your obligations as 
officials of the province. (Applause.) You can show me that you, whose duty is 
to administer justice, are pro-Quezon by doing justice to everybody. 2 

I wish to make it plain that my administration will do all it can. to red- 
ress the grievances of the workers on the farm, but at the same time I will not 
tolerate any breach of.tho peace, especially on the part of subversive agitators 
who are misleading the ignorant. 

I also wish to remind the town mayors of Tarlac and Pampanga that it is 
their duty and responsibility not only to maintain peace and order at all costs, 
but also to carry out the policies of my administration. 

If I am not able to govern through elective mayors, I shall have to do so 
through appointive ones. The responsibility of governing is mine and no one else's 
ife have a Constitution that gives rae power to govern and I do not want anybody 
to misinterpret this. 

(Earlier, Quezon said: My first mission as the Chief Executive of this 
country is to maintain peace and order. And I will maintain peace and order if 
I have to order the killing of some people to do so.) 5 

El J2LgnLM^g = |2gJ2^ LE TT 15 rarca TAHT - QUEZON 

The hope or ambition to improve, or the hope to achieve improvement, is 
one of the most powerful human incentives which could make a man do his work well* 

Always try to be the best treasurer. Don't be satisfied with being rated 
as a second-class treasurer, regardless of the class or the category of the pro- 
vince where you are; be a first class treasurer for a first class treasurer can 
fit in, in any situation. 

Only a small man is preoccupied with the question of whether his job is 
big or small. It is not what you think about the importance of ybur job, but 

\J Speech before provincial treasurers, Malacanan, February 22, 1938. 
Rivera Collection, Vol. IV, pp. 1704-1705. 

£/ Speech at the inauguration of the provincial capitol of Cebu, Cebu City, 
June 14, 1938. . Ibid, ., p. 1802. 

2/ Speech before municipal mayors of Tarlac and' Pampanga in San Fernando, 
June 1,. 1938. Ibid. . p. 1758. 



11-55 



y0 ur manner of performing your duty that will impress the people. 4 

TJttttlfflP TO PRODUCE SOMM HIMB FOR TEEMSELViiiS iJlD COronnY 

We want to establish a secondary instruction that will be useful to the 
boy and girl who receives it . Our aim is to increase the people who make their ■ 
living by producing something that will enrich both themselves and their country. 

In Japan every nan and woman is taught some industry in the school. If a - • 
Japanese works in the farm, he makes good because he learns what he is doing. If 
a carpenter, the Japanese turns out to be an efficient one because he studies 
the technique in school. 

If we could teach the Filipinos how to fish we could make this country 
vary rich just from our fish resources. You find out how much a Japanese makes . ' 
uhon he goes out fishing, and you will discover to your amazement that ho makes 
noro money than a poor Filipino lawyer. 

This is the policy that we will adopt. We will teach our countrymen to be 
good fishermen, good carpenters, good farmers, and good producers, to enable 
thorn to make more money than the ordinary lawyer. ^ 

24. CONSTITUTIO N 

C0lSTITUTI ON^HAT_WILL_STAND_TBST OF TIME' 

The organization of the Constitutional Convention has been practically non- 
partisan mid its work done free from partisanship and with but ono end in view - 
to provide the Commonwealth and later the Philippine Republic with a Constitution 
that will stand the tost of time and will promote the progress and general wel- 
fare of our people and secure to them and their posterity the blessing3 of inde- 
pendence under a regime of justice, liberty and democracy. 1 

^^-IOI°IM!^^g^.:?03g^_^SHRI^D IN CONSTITUTION 

I look upon the Constitution of the Philippines a3 the expression of the 
sovereignty and of the aggregate will of the Filipino people. I shall abide by 
its provisions. I shall uphold the democratic principle underlying the institutions • 
c:iat it establishes. I am opposed to dictatorship. I maintain that no man who 
iwliovoB in a dictatorship can, with safety, be entrusted with the reins of 
usecutivo power under cur Constitution. Democracy can only_su.rvivo.,.if., _t^03 r e r r qt, . 
■riiliigjjL 0 ^ the go^vornnent_ believe in t he people's right_to rule and havo faith 
inj heir inhe rent capacity to d ecide rightly importan t public questions . 

Speech before provincial treasurers, Malacanan, February 22, 1930. Ibid ., p. 1704 

5/ Speech, "New Policy of Education, Public Works, and Clean and Honest Govern- 
ment, " in Tacloban, Leyte, June 10, 1938. Ibid., p. 1777. 

V Speech before Constitutional Convention, 1934, n.d.m. OP, M#36, TNL. 

* Speech accepting his nomination as President of the Philippines, July 20, 1935. 
Quezon Messages, Vol.- 1, Sp. Rev, 13d. , JBVFF, p. 235. 



11-54 



1 9? 1-l q ^ — ----- -^ RI!vT& SPECTACLE 

It was the nost inspiring spectacle to see men fron every nook and corner 
of the Philippines noting so unitedly and in such a harnonious and friendly 
,t),osphero. It Has evident that every nan in the Constitutional Convention was 
only inspired by the loftiest ideals and noblest purposes. 5 

Knowledge of the fundamental law of the land is vitally important in the 
life of an individual. Only through a thorough understanding of its provisions 
can a citizen live to the fullest degree of freedom. It is necessary that the 
pooplo at all times should be behind their Constitution both in its letter and 
spirit and bo over vigilant so that no human conspiracy may defeat, its aim or 
dodge its purpose. 

This is the appropriate time to familiarize our people wi*\ho Constitution 
which, if properly used, will ensure and safeguard their freedom, happiness and 
prosperity. h ■ 

P.^SID2M_ MST__EIgORCE CONSTITUTION TO FU LLEST EXTENT 

Upon the President of the Philippines is placed the sole responsibility of 
determining how long should compliance with the letter and spirit of the basic pro- 
visions of the Constitution be suspended. As soon as the President shall havo 
found that such application shall not result to the detriment of the public in- 
terest, it becomes his plain duty to enforce the Constitution to tho fullest extent. 

IiSI^-^^^™I2LL^^g2§I^Q^X_ oii ' PEOPLE'S .RIGHTS 

Tho Constitution of a nation is the depository of the rights of tho pooplo. 
It is the foundation of all constitutional forms of government. So long as tho 
letter of the Constitution is strictly adhered to, so long also may the people 
root assured that their constitutional rights are properly protected. A deviation 
fron the letter and spirit of the Constitution is a violation of tho faith of the 
people reposed in their constitutional representatives. 6 

jE^L2g^_^XgCUTI^_uroKR CONSTITUTION EXPLAINED r 

Ths Constitution of the Philippines is an improvement upon the Constitution 
ofJ-liB United States, but in its essential characteristic is patterned after that 

)J Press statement on the completion of the work of the Constitutional Convention, 
February, n.d., 1935. qp, MR#3S, TNL. 

y Message for the Sons and Daughters of the National Civic League, October 23, 
1935. Ibid. 

V Letter to Hon. Pedro Magsalin, chairman, Judiciary Committee, National Assem- 
bly, December 18, 1935, Quezon Messages . Vol. I, Sp. Rev. Ed., JBVFF, p. 44. 



11-55 



Constitution. The governmental powers are vested in three coordinate and indepen- 
dent branches of the govornnent: the executive, the legislative and the judiciary. 
A H the executive powers are vested in the Chief Executive; the legislative po- 
Kors, in the National Assembly; and the judicial powers, in the Judiciary. The 
executive power is one and indivisible and resides in the person elected by the 
people to be at the nead of the nation. He and he alone is responsible for the 
,v,j.thful execution of the laws and for the administration of the affairs of the 
-overnnent . 

;o'r!IL'uU^^ H^^ C^IME^S_^I LIFPI^ CC HST ITIJTIONDAY 

"Whereas, this Constitution embodies the ideals of liberty and democracy 
of the Filipino people; expresses their love of peace and order, education, and 
progress; establishes the necessary safeguards for individual rights; insures 
the fornation of a citizenry conscious of its solemn responsibilities to the 
State; secures the conservation of the patrimony of the nation; provides for the 
defense of the national territory, and guarantees a regime of equality and justice 
under a government republican in form and in fact; and 

"Whereas, it is necessary to inculcate in the ninds of the citizens of the 
Philippines - especially upon the youth - the great principles and sound procept3 
proclaimed and ordained in the Constitution, to the end that the sense of dignity 
and national consciousness may ever be alive in their hearts, and that they may 
bo accustomed to the rules and practices of democracy and to respect institutions, 
for upon the fulfillment of these purposes depend the maintenance of national 
sovereignty and the success of constitutional government established in this 
country for the progress and well-being of its inhabitants." 8 

quIiSON VOVIS TO UPHOLD LETTER AND SPIRIT OP CONSTITUTION 



I deem it the duty of the Chief Executive, and in fact of every one of the 
throe branches of this government, as well as of every official thereof, to carry 
out and execute faithfully not only the letter but also the spirit of the Cons- 
titution, and whenever there is a slightest doubt as to the scope of any of its 
provisions, to resolve that in favor of the plain intent, or the known intent, of 
the nakers of the Constitution... I am positive that the Constitutional Assembly 
wtuitod 'to reserve to the State the ownership of all mines of every kind in tho 
Philippines and that they would have given retroactive effect to that provision, 
evon in the case of nines which have been patented, had they been sure that 
this could be. done without violating well-known and accepted prir iplos and rules 
regarding property and vested rights in a society, generally known as capitalistic. 

1/ Report on the Constitution of the Philippines, 1935, n.d.m. qP, I€l#38, TNL. 

2/ Proclamation Ho. 36 declaring February 8th of each year as Constitution Day, 
February 7, 1936. Quezon Messages. V ol. 2, Part I, JBVFF, p. 498. 

5/ Letter to Judge Clyde -A. DeWitt on the disposition of certain mining clains, 
September 26, 1936. Ibidj.* p. 448A. 



11-56 



It is because ovory member of the Constitutional Assembly believed in 
-.roperty rights as one of the basic foundations of organized society and en- 
lightened government, that ovary section in the Constitution which deals with 

•-.-operty, whether belonging to the State or to an individual, contains a 

1 10 
wving clause that vested rights be respected. 

fOHKEKPS UN RIGHTS SJANTKD_O R_ NOT BT^CO ifSTITUTIO N 

Neither tho Executive nor the Legislative department of this government 

desires to deprive anybody of rights granted hini by the Constitution. But neither 

tho Executive nor the Legislative department of this government, I hold, ought 

1 1 

to recognize or grant rights which tho Constitution did not intend to grant. 
ASPECT VESTED RIGHTS AS LONG AS CHARTER SAYS, SO 

I want the Supreme Court to have an opportunity to determine who have 
acquired vested rights under tho Constitution ■• -H;_. . •. .. /, : o 

and unless the Supreme Curt has determined that, I want tho government expe- 
ditiously to carry out the purpose of the Constitution and to grant rights which 

12 

hr.vs been recognized in the Constitution as vested rights. 
3JM)S TO USE 0\U I CONSCIENCE IH I INTERPRET ING COUSTITUTION 



As the Chief Executive of this nation, the man who by virtue of his oath 
is duty bound to execute tho Constitution, I use my own mind and my knowledge 
of the law, in a case where I form uy own opinion as to what tho Constitution is. 
I an going to comply with the Constitution in accordance with my opinion. I am 
tho supreme arbiter of my conscience and, therefore, I am not going to accept 
the opinion of my legal advisor. ^ 

193^PHILIPPIi||^g 

The Constitution is the fundamental law of tho land and it must have a 
greater degree of stability than an ordinary law. But a constitution is not a 
sacred document that may not bo amended. No constitution has boon dictated by 
an Almighty God. Every constitution is the work of men and all constitution/ moro 
or losa have some defects. The Constitution of the Philippines is one of the 

/S 1 4 

beat constitution/ written in modern times. 

ColTO UTIQH RE NOUNCES WAR A 3 INSTiltJMEHT OF N ATIONAL POLICY 

Our Constitution is inspired by a spirit- of sound nationalism, and we 

10/ Ibid., p. 448B. 

tiJ Ibid. 

12/ Speech at a conference with the Solicitor General and other public prosecu- 

. tors, September 10, 1937. MR#40, TBL. 

W. iMd. 

W Untitled speech, 1938, n.d.m. QJP, MH#41, TML. 



11-57 



would endeavor properly to comprehend this spirit and to adhere to it in the ' 

formulation of our national policies. 

It is significant that at the beginning our Constitution declares that 
the Philippines renounces war as an instrument of national policy, and adopts 
tto generally accepted principles of international law as a part of the law of 
our nation. 

aw DEiUTAB LH, CONSTITUTION MUST CHANGE WITH THE TIMES 

The Constitution is the highest expression of tho people's will. It is the 
uoroise law of tho land and the organic law of the state. It lays down the frame- 
work of the whole government. Unlike ordinary legislation, it nust be considered 
as of n permanent character and should not be subjected to whimsical changes of 
tho public mind. 

But while the Constitution should not be amended unless. there are strong 
reasons demanding such action, it would be the height of unwisdom to attach to 
that instrument the character of immutability which is generally attributed to 
tho laws of the Hedes and the Persians. 

Social find political conditions are dynamic and a constitution, like a 
living organism, must be adapted to the changing social and political order. Tho 
essence of constitutional government in a democracy is not that the Constitution 
ronains the same for all time, but that all constitutional changes should be 
affected only in the manner proscribed by the Constitution itself. 

25. D E H 0 C 2 A C T 

JTOIT OF DEMOCRACY, YES - W AMERICANS vULL PRACTICE IT! 

There is only one thing we have in common with the United States and its 
psoplo - tho conception of democracy. Both peoples love freedom and liberty. Our 
children studying in tho public schools arc imbibing the American sentiment of 
democracy, liberty and freedom. They are learning the very sentiments the Ameri- 
cans have inherited from their forefathers, the men who shod their blood on the 
battlefield for those principles. These we have in common with the citizens of 
that great Republic, but this union is a union of spirit and will never be 
realized if these principles are not put into practice by those from whom we 
•mvo learned them. 1 



15/ Speech on peace, social and economic security of nations, University of 
the Philippines, April 4, 1939. OP, MR#42, TNL. 

Ikl Speech at the special session of the National Assembly, August 13, 1939. 
Ibid. 

U Speech, "Conception of Democracy," in the Senate, January 18, 1921* 
Rivera Collection, Vol. II, p. 549. 



11-57 



would endeavor properly to comprehend this spirit and to adhere to it in the 
formulation of our national policies. 

It is significant that at the beginning our Constitution declares that 
tho Philippines renounces war as an instrument of national policy, and adopts 

the generally accepted principles of international law as a part of the law of 
15 

our nation. 

^JgiS l-g^A— — 12 ^ggST^CHA^j^wiTK TI PS TIME S 

The Constitution is the highest expression of tho people's will. It is the 
t .u?roiaa law of tho land and the organic law of the state. It lays down the fraae- 
TO rk of the whole government. Unlike ordinary legislation, it oust be considered 
as of n permanent character and should not bo subjected to whimsical changes of 
tho public mind. 

But while the Constitution should not be amended unless. there are strong 
reasons demanding such action, it would bo the height of unwisdom to attach to 
that instrument the character of immutability which is generally attributed to 
tho laws of the Medes and the Persians. 

Social and political conditions are dynamic and a constitution, like a 
living organism, must bo adapted to the changing social and political order. Tho 
osaonco of constitutional government in a democracy is not that the Constitution 
remains the same for all time, but that all constitutional changes should be 
affected only in the manner proscribed by the Constitution itself. 16 

25. d e h o c :;t A C I 
jpiaiT of djkmo cracy, ras - w MdmcLzs will practice iti 



There is only one thing we have in common with tho United States and its 
people - the conception of democracy. Both peoples love freedom and liberty. Our 
children studying in tho public schools arc imbibing the American sentiment of 
democracy, liberty and freedom. They are learning the very sentiments the Ameri- 
cans have inherited from their forefathers, the men who shed their blood on the 
battlefield for those principles. These we have in common with the citizens of 
tiiat great Republic, but this union is a union of spirit and will never be 
realized if these principles --.re not put into practice by those from whom we 
•i;ve learned them. 1 

15/ Speech on peace, social and economic security of nations, University of 
the Philippines, April 4, 1939. OP, MR#42, TNL. 

W Speech at the special session of the National Assembly, August 13, 1939. 

U Speech, "Conception of Democracy," in the Senate, January 18, 1921. 
aivora Collection, Vol. II, p. 549. 



11-58 



^.jflON^ITEg r rvfO_INT RRESTING F0^1S_Og_GOyBR>iI.ffllCT 

Laws do not make a government democratic or autocratic... We have England 

fur example; while there is a king and it is a monarchy, yet the workings of 

its government are democratic. And we have, on the other hand, some Latin 

American countries where their government can be summarized in three points: 

l) The government resides in the people; 2) the people delegate their power to 

\ 2 
a President; and 3) the President does what ho pleases. 

j.IAJORI TY ANSWERA BLE T0_THEIR CONSCIENCE ALOHE 

The choice of its leaders is purely a matter of confidence and trust on 

the part of the majority in the leader that it chooses; therefore, said majority 

is not answerable to anybody for Ohoosieg thislcr ihatomanu,,. *Me w: th:j.i .•■v-.r. 

r.s its leader , except to its own conscience. Is one's own conscience insufficient 

restraint in the exercise of one's powers? What better judge can a man have but 

his own conscience? Have things come to such a pass that now we even berate the 

3 

value of conscience? 

VTi'AL ROLE OF PRESS IN VIABLE DEMOCRACIES 



In democracies the press constitutes a vital factor for the dissemination 

of news and discussion of public questions. Whether a newspaper or a weekly 

supports or attacks an administration, provided it tries to be fair, it always 

4 

renders a good service to the community. 
mm PUBLIC OPINION SAPliOUARD OP DEMOCRACY 



I believe in the cultivation of sound public opinion and I am convinced 

that nothing can substitute this opinion as a factor for good government and as 

5 

safeguard for democracy. 
R^PECT_F0R_LAN 3Tm , INS^0IMT_ CTJjM 0CRACY ; , .■; r 

Reverence for law as the expression of the popular will is the starting 
point in a democracy. The maintenance of peace and public order is the joint 
obligation of the government and the citizen. I have an abiding faith in the 
Sood sense of the people and in their respect for law and the constituted authority. 
1HS0N I S DETERMINED TO ESTAB L ISH VIABLE D EMOCRACY IH PHILIPPINES 

Our purpose is clear. We want to establish in the Philippines a government 
in accordance with the Independence Law, and in accordance with/mandates of our 

2/ Loyalty to Party speech. De la Liana and Icasiano, on. c_itj_, p. 9 
2/ Speech at the Senate, august 1, 1933. «iP» HR#34, TNL. 
V Message for Talutan t magazine, August 7, 1935. QP> Mfr?38, TNL . 
5/ Message in /ffif lippin o Herald Commonwealth Inauguration Supplement, November 
7, 1935. Ibid. 

y Inaugural address, November 15, 1935, Q"^on Messages.. Vol. I, Sp. Rev. Ed., 
•roVPP, p . 13. 



11-59 



own Constitution. And I want to add this: It is my ambition to see that a deuo- ' 

ora0 y such as is contemplated in our Constitution and in the Act of Congress 
can be made just as efficient as any autocracy or dictatorship; and that a 
democracy can run a government like a business concern. 7 

In our day and generation democracy, as an effective system of government, 
is being challenged. Let this new democracy of ours show to the world that de- 
mocracy can be as efficient as a dictatorship, without trespassing upon indivi- 
dual liberty and the sacred rights of the people. 8 

DEMOCRACY IS DOOMED WEBB PEOPLE LOSE FA ITH IN PfflngJ^IGIilf _ 

Democracy is doomed to failure whenever people feel no respect for their 
own representatives in the government. And it should be remembered that it is 
lass a reflection upon the officials themselves as it is upon the electorate, 
if the character of said representatives is not what it should be, for it is 
the electorate that choose them. Public officials deserve more respect and 
deference from the people in a democracy than in any other form of government, 
for the authority of these officials emanates from the people themselves. 9 

I see with misgivings indications that we arc beginning, to follow the 
.iractico in other countries of speaking disparagingly of the nombors of the 
legislative branch of the government. It does not bid fair of the future of 
democracy in the Philippines if we were to adopt this practice (of assemblymen 
receiving the allowance for their clerics - ABS'] , .and it is time that we should 
call a halt thereto, if it is our conviction that democracy is the best form of 
government so far devised by human ingenuity, and it it, our desire to perpetuate 
it in our country. Let the people be jealous and vigilant of the conduct of their " 
public servants. Lot them bring to the bar of justice or of public opinion every 
official or employee who falls short of the requirements of his position. But 
so long as these officials and employees are qqual to their trust, they deservo 
every consideration from the public. 10 

•jgPg_ PEMOCHA CY lttfl TS ON ENhlOIfTEMJd) CITISJirtRY 

True democracy must find assurance of stability in an enlightened citizen- 
ry. . . 'Jo have cone to realize only too well that a nation ecnccivod* in hate and 
torn by internecine dissensions and civjj strife accorapalishes nothing but its own 
degradation and ultimate destruction. 



2/ Speech before the Manila Rotary Club, June 4, 1936. Quezo n Mes sages. Vol. 2, 

Part I,-, .n-JVE'F, p. 104. 

W Message to the National Assembly.. Ibid. . p. 181. 

2/ Letter to Speaker Gil Montilla of the First National Assembly, July 28, 1936. 

.Ibid., pn. 213-214. 
iS/Ibid., p. 214. 

W Speech on the first anniversary of the Comnonwealth, November 15, 193°. >)P,Mil;-36, r 



II 



60 



OliTY OF MAJORITY = T0 J^ = OPj|0|ITIGN = GRO^ 

It is the duty of the majority to pave the way for this new opposition and 

loce i n its hands the instruments by which it can foster its growth through 
to PJ-'- ° 12 • 

lawful procedures. 

it , ILl pp IN jS MUST_glg A BgHDCillCY A3 P3R CONaTITUTlUlO., MANDATE 

Xle (?re engagud in the building of a new nation. Vfe have created a now go- 
yrittiont which under the Act af the U.S. Congress that gave us the authority thoro- 

v,, a -t-n be democratic and the Constitution we have framed for this new govern- 
^ont conforms to this constitutional injunction. 

We must always have in laind that we are building the Filipino nation and 
are establishing Philippine democracy. 

VTiBLiii DEMOCRACY fcdiiDS SBaaCH, CLiUJi ttL iCTICKS 

In a democracy the important thing is the free expression of the will of the 
ooople, and we should see to it that our elections are clean. . . But the form of 
democracy is not so important. What is important is that form of democracy fcest 
adapted to the idiosyncracies and the needs of the people; that form of democracy 
that has been tested fron time innamorial and found successful. 

POSSIBLE TO jIAVli_MIR , _^Ei9.i'^H'£_~~~ill~=II=4==£~E~E2 

I want to prove to the world that in a democracy it is possible to have a 
fair and just government without any consideration of politics. And let every of- 
ficial of the government beware of his conduct, for he who does not cooperate with 
ne in my desire to show that democracy can be efficient and fair will suffer for it. ' 

.a; yiLiPii;os bullae in mshucracy - qpaaoH 

We in the Philippines believe in democracy. V/e say that the human mind has . 
not been able to conceive a better form of government than the government of the 
people, by the people and for the people; and so we are determined that as long as 
we are permitted t! have the government Jhat we want to have, we are going to have 
denocratic institutions in our country. 
KHT FRBK MSN IN A DiW0C3*ACY AR5 ONCONVICTKD CRIMINALS 

l^^TZ* nay bo convicted for ^^^SSSiS'i- 
;\nd yet not necessarily be a criminal. •••• - - ••• ' , 17 
the street without having entered the jail and yet be a real criminal. 

_^=™====== roal^scnd Parties, Sept. 19, 1937. m : 39, 

12/ Speech at the convention of tne ooai-scoa j. 

12/ Speech on Philippine democracy, October 27, 1937- UM* 

lOtf Untitled speech, 1938, n.d.m. MR-/'41, TNL. 

1$Z Speech in Catbalogan, Samar, June 10, 1938. »J«. *>1. 4 ' Part l ' 

JBVF?, p. 82. 
16/ Untitled speech, 1933, n.d.m. QP, MRsftl, TNL. 

.12/ Speech before the U.P. Alumni Association and the U.P. student body, 19,0. n.d.m 
Ibid. 



11-61 



I'ULlTO^ y^S^ Ml!iRjii _ffJ!;;.jitJjsflCJ!! OF n DEMO CRACY - CjUaZUN : 

It is a mistake to believe that the existence of political parties in a 
democracy is necessary. It is a mistake to assume that political parties are 
isaential to a democracy. . . I do not know of any democracy where ther/are no 
political parties, but political parties are only the sequence of democracy. 
... Democracy is nothing more than the rule of the people. That is all there is 
in a democracy and political parties arc not essential for the rule of the 
people. They are a mere mechanism. ' 

ODB ZOK INSISTS DEMOCRAC Y CM EXIST WITH OUT POL ITICAL PARTI j3S 

A democracy can exist without political parties. Perhaps as democracy 

grows in territorial population, the existence of political parties becomes a 

Mcossary means whereby the collective will of the people may be expressed. 

19 

(frat is all that is needed. 

UITLSSS DEMOCRACY SEPARATES GOV'T FROM P OLITICS , FASCISM WILL TRIUMPH 



One of the greatest handicaps with which democratic government/nave been • 
.uardened in the past is politics in government. Political parties are indispen- 
sable to the democratic system; and political parties, to accomplish one of 
taeir purposes, which is to elect candidates to office, have had to craate par- 
ty organizations. These party organisations have invariably attempted, and in 
i«.any cases hcve succeeded, in interfering with purely governmental functions. . . 
Whonover governments have been run by party organisations, the interest of the • 
party has been placed above the public interest. 

In such cases the result has been governmental inefficiency, dishonesty, 
injustice, and all sort3 of abuses. When these evils have reached, as in certain 
countries they did reach, a point where they became intolerable, the democratic 
system itself has been discredited in the eyes of the people, who came to be- 
lieve that said evils were essentially and inevitably a vice inherent in the 
system. Hence the people finally substituted autocracy for democracy. 

It is my sincere opinion that in the fight now raging between fascism and 
democracy, unless democracy finds a way of separating government from politics 

and nakes it its business to give the people an efficient, effective, and jvtst 

?0 

government, fascism will be successful. 
M0JR ACY_IS_ ON_TRIAL EViiiRTOHE RE - qUEZ0N_ 

I desire to call your attention to the fact that democracy is on trial, 

10/ ibid. 

12/ Ibid. 

20/ Press statement on the reorganization of the provincial and municipal forces 
August 3, 1938. Quezon Messages. Vol. 4, Part I, JBVFF, pp. 685-686. 



11-62 

- HI - 

t j 13 t while years during the last decades preceding the World War democracy was 

caking gains even in the moat autocratic countries in Europe, and in fact in 

,..sia, democracy is no longer accepted universally as the right and natural 

21 

,-,-ovsrnment of man. This is a fact. 

.-^■F-RESTIiaaT IN USE 0? POTO, NOT C ONSTITUTION. CATT SAVE SBIIOCTACY 

^^^SfPl^SL^LJS^JZ^Z AS. Jl°L.jhe__qoa3_titution nor the written laws. 

Bafoguard of ..democracy is self-restraint in the exercise of political power, 



r.irt that restrai nt come3 o nl y after using_ that p_o wer_ for a long time. 
FI LIPINOS ST ILL RUN SHORT IN APPLICATION O Jb' DEttOCRATIC PRACTICES 

I am not simply a progressive, I an a revolutionary. I believe in politi- 
cal reforms and changes in our social institutions. A revolution, as always, 
brings more evil than good; so, despite my revolutionary ideas, both in politics 
and in social life, I prefer to go about as I am. Democracy is an experiment only, 
■fe have been experimenting with democracy here for the last forty years and while 
we all know so much about democracy - and I have no doubt that some of us could 
talk of democracy better than any constitutional lawyer in the United States 
could -yet when it comes to the actual practice of democracy, we have to admit 
that we are still helpless about it. J 

MIOC RACY CAN BE MAD E AS EFF ICIENT A 3 ANY OTHE R FO RM OF GO V'T 

Mankind is now divided into two great camps - those who believe in democracy 
and those who feel contempt for it as a completely discredited system of govern- 
ment. -By our political education, by our convictions and by our inclinations, 
i/e are a democracy. We have established a democratic system of government and 
the perpetuation of thin system will depend upon our ability to convince the people 
that democracy can bo freed from those vices which have destroyed it in some 
countries, and that it can bo made a:, efficient as any other system of government . 
known to man. It behooves us, therefore, to prove that through a wise use of 
democratic processes, the welfare and safety of the people can be promoted, 

24 

thus contributing our share to the preservation of democracy in the world. 

21/ Message to the National Assembly on the Buckner Case, January 6, 1939. 
QP, MR#42, TNL. 

Ill Speech on cooperation between the c hicf Executive and the National Assembly, 
at the farewell banquet in honor of Hon. Quint in Paredes, majority floor 
leader, Second National Assembly,' at Malacanan Park, May 22, 1939. 
Quezon Messages T Vol. 5, Part I, JBVFF, p. 134. 

22/ Ibid. 

iV Message to the Second National Assembly on' the state of the nation .and 
important economic problems, January 24, 1939. Ibid. . p. 260. 



11-63 

- m - 

iMiocRATic. _^0OTgLjgaim^ jproduces gH^E 0N ^- TT ' T fl[Ll ■ ■ -v ; 

You have been taught to believe that a majority party and a party of the 
opposition are essential to the growth of sound democracy. You seem to have ac» . 
coptod that theory as gospel truth. And so the young man in this institution of 
learning, who should learn to have faith in their government , are made to feel 
that only in the opposition can we find men of independent character, men who 
love liberty, men who are interested in the well-being of the people. That ex- 
plains why the majority of our youth look upon the government with suspicion, if 
not with ill-will. 

I^'0^^I2Et^^^gg£9OggL^gi!I^_T0. DEMOCRACY 

. jQaiJ^jasSSaiii^ p arties, but informatio n 

j^J&03iSS&&Lj£^ in a spirit of coope- 

until Poop ljL^rn_J;^^o J e_rate rather than 

:f:k&tJ2n?_anj^ 
■■■■o vernaent. 

BJ3ST FORM OF DEMOCRACY SERVES PEOPLE'S NEEDS 



The historical origin and development of political parties in the Philip- . 
pines should deserve more study from our political scientists than the origin 
and development of the political organizations in other countries, or the an- 
cient theories of government. It is only through such study that thoy can really, 
understand and explain the political institutions and government of their own 
country, and give competent advice in the tremendous task we have at hand of 
devising our own democratic institutions and government, capable of coping with 
the multiple problems of the day. The ,_essenc_e of democracy is government of th e 
people,, by the people and for th e people. B u t t he forms of democ racy are infin ite , 
iQSgndin£j^on__th^ genius of the particul ar p eople who adopt it. And the best f orm 
^L-dgm,Qcracv. let it be remembe red always, is that which can b est, promote and in- 
^jgQ-t.hc_liberty, we ll-beinp; and h appiness of a ll the people. 

HZON AIMS TO HAVE DEMOCRATIC GOVERIffiEHT WITHOUT FRAUDS 



But I want the Filipinos to have the glory of being the only people upen 
the face of the earth who have a democratic government and commit no frauds. That 
would bo a magnificent record of which all of us would be proud. That would be 
the heat assurance that democracy in the Philippines will never perish. Those are 
no times for party strife. Those are black days, humanity has never been confronted 



2y Speech before the U.P. student Council, July 16, 1940. CjP, MR#44, Tift. 
2a/ IjDid. 

12J Spoech before the faculty and student body of the Far Eastern University, 

August 17, 1940. Ibid. 



11-64 

,.ith such a danger as it is threatened now. Outside of God himself nobody knows 

.,l,,:ther the end of civilization is coining very soon. Ren everywhere would consi- 
der this tragedy and ponder seriously over the situation. At no time in the his- 
tory of the Philippines has it been so necessary as it is today for every Filipi- 
no to feel that he is the brother of every .Filipino and for all of you to realise 
Vat we have but one country and only one. Wo have been very fortunate that so f. m 
■jo have been free from this war, but nobody knows how long we are going to be fro.', 

■i&UC&LCY OELY GOVBRMjBM' FOR SiiiLF-RESPE C'lIUG PEOPLE 

I believe in democracy, nomocracy is the only government for self --respecting 
■•on and women. Democracy is the government of the people, by the people and for the 
people. That means that those who are to occupy public offices must be chosen by 
the people themselves. If we want to perpetuate democracy in the Philippines, 
every man and woman should stand to protect and defend the right of suffrage. 2 ^ 

CLg AN ELECT IONS ^^^I^AL_TO_RjjAL_DJMOCj^A^Y_ 

People may differ as to what are the essential elements of democracy, but 
all those who believe in democracy at all must be in agreement that what is prima- 
rily the cifferenco between a democratic government and any other form of govern- 
ment is that in a democratic government the people elect their officials. There- 
fore, for the maintenance of a real democratic government it is essential that 

'50 

the elections should be clean, 

26. DIG T A T 0 R S II I P 
ADVOCACY OF DICTATORSHIP IS INSULT TO FILIPINOS 

He [General Emilio Aguinaldo] not only makes ' insinuations against • 

uo which he, can never prove but he indicts the whole Filipino people by assorting 
that only through the imposition of a dictatorship may we hope to have a govern- 
ment wherein honesty and justice will prevail. 

Not that the indictment which he draws up •- that we have a corrupt govern- 
ment, public servants who profit by their offices, fraudulent elections, injustices, 
"aid combinations - constitutes in itself any conclusive proof of our incapacity 
for self-government. It is because of the groundless charge that tho Filipino 
people do not have the intelligence and tho civic courage to correct these abu- 
ses, if any; and that they are powerless and incapa le of working out their own 
salvation and, therefore, need a dictator forced upon them by the sovereign power. 

?§/ Speech delivered in Bacolod, Negro o Occidental, October 2, 1940. QP, MR#44, 
TNL. 

23/ Ibid . 

10/ Ibid. 

U Article answering Aguinaldo* s charges, June 22, 1929. QP» MR#31, TNL. 



11-65 



ACCUSED CQ]fflgM^I)_TJ_AgVAKC3_ UNDER DIC TATORSHIP ' 

It in only under a tyrannical government, under a dictatorship, under a 
mim whose ruler is everything and the people are nothing, where the accused io 
ftt: judged guilty in advance, and is either tortured in order that he may confess 
guilt, or he is obliged to -prove his innocence. This is an inquisitorial 
•id which is now condemned everywhere . ^ 



jthOC 



■^ONJjgRKS^^ IN CON-CON SPEECH 



There is, however, one great danger in having a strong executive depart- 
ment, and that is the danger of dictatorship. And hero again this Convention has 
shown its vision and wisdom when it provided that there shall be no re-election 
■j'or the position of the Chief Executive. 

This clause in the Constitution guarantees for the Filipino people the 
impossibility or at least the improbability of ever having here a Chief Executive 
that will try to perpetuate himself in power. We are all familiar with the his- 
tory of some Central and South American republics. We know that to a large extent 
the revolutions that have continually rocked such republics have been due to the 

fact that their Chief Executives were permitted to present themselves as candi- 

3 

dates for re-election. 

1935 CONSTITUTION DIDN'T LAST "FOR ALL TIME" AS MLQ PREDICTED 



The plebiscite scheduled for May 14 U935) is not merely being held for 
tiw purpose of accepting the Constitution; it is, in a large sense, a tost of our 
vwoplo's civic consciousness and responsibility, and a solemn and historic 
roo.scsrtion of their reviving sovereignty. 4 

-x- * * 

livery vote cast will be a vote on our Constitution, a document which, upon 

its final acceptance, will be the source and inspiration of all political power 

■Mid authority in our land for all time. Thus a vote cast on Hay 14 will be a vote 

4 

on -cne very destiny of the Philippines and the Filipino people. 
PfflON SAYS KB CAN'T B E DICTATOR UNDER 1935 CONSTITUTION 

The Chief Executive is given great( power under the 1935 Constitution - ABS.) 
i-orhaps it is due to this fact that some of the jolly writers of this country 
h.":ve been inclined to call mo a legalized dictator, forgetting, evidently, 
tfiat those are contradictory terms. A man cannot be a dictator under the Cons- 
titution if he oxecises powers that are given him by the Constitution. 

2/ Press statement on Aguinaldo's charges, July 27, 1929. Ibid . 

"if Speech before the Constitutional Convention, February 5, 1935. Rivera ■ 
Collection, Vol. Ill, p. 1132. 

i- Quezon message from Washington, D.C., April 19, 1935. Ibid. . p. 1153. 

5/ Speech, "Status of the Commonwealth and National Defense," at the Waldorf- 
Astoria Hotel, New York City, February 20, 1937. Ibid ., p. 1464* 



11-66 

- m - 

DI CTATORg^|OLI|H PARTIES, M/j mWT^PITBLIC OPIIflQN 

In tho old clays, dictators relied only on physical power. In our day and 
•aeration, dictators realise how precarious their situation is when they have 
r.ofchine to support thorn except physical power. They realize that they need the 
„upport of public opinion. Hence, they have their political organizations be- 
hind them and they allow no other party to exist. That is one of the essential 
x'oatures of dictatorship in our day - that they depend upon public opinion, 
-.id they create public opinion to suit themselves, so they allow no one to 
-vpross opinions contrary to the policies of the government nor do they allow 
r.nrties to be organized in opposition to the government. ^ 

yJB ZOK AGAINS T EVERY FORM 01'' DICT ATORSHIP 

Today democracy is being challenged in all quarters. It is presented as a 
failure not only by those who have no faith in the common man, and who believe 
that the masses are destined to be ruled from above, but also by those who ad- 
vocate the rule of the proletariat and aim at a classless society. I stand before 

-on as the opponent of dictatorship in whatever form it is presented, including 

7 

tho dictatorship of tho proletariat. 
■•■UJigQN AFFIRMS B ELI EF IN DEMOCRACY 

I fi rmly believe in demo c racy , in the soundness of its principles, and in 
i t s capa city t o ultimately sa ve humanity from misery and want, and as th e only 
rjystcm of government capable of doin g .justice to ev er y man f woman, and child. . . 
Whe n prop e rly conduc tod, it i s_^^jiatur^__and only system of government that 
' ''' lo u jji k° acceptable among civi lized men. 

27. ECO IT 0 H I C N A T I 0 H A L I S M 
gC0NCTjICJjATIOIIM,ISM DESIGNED FOR SISLF-PROTlgCTIOH_ 

Economic nationalism is practised in every country as a means of conser- 
ving capital at home, at the same time exporting products for the payment of 
foreign goods, thus encouraging the production locally of such articles that 

Make up the common necessities of life. This is not, strictly speaking, an 

1 

advocacy of self-sufficiency. It is simply a policy of self -protection. 

§J Speech at the open forum of the U.P. Alumni Association, Villamor Hall, 
August 7, 1940/ QP, MR#44, TEL. 

1/ Ibid. 

8/ Speech on the essence of democracy at the University of the Philippines, 
July 16, 1940. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, p. 2229. 

1/ Campaign speech, 1935, n.d.m. QP, MR#38, TNL. 



11-67 

- m - 

^J.,IFI|0S_SH0ULD TAKE OVER ^IL^IHESS FROiyjJMS 

It is now high time that sari-sari stores were placed in the hands of 
Filipinos. 

No people would consent to having their daily i ife ' s necessities remain 
the hands of foreigners. 

I am determined to remedy, by proper and legal procedure, such a flaw in 
, ur economic situation. I will exert my best efforts to put the country's retail 
V; sines s in Pilipin/hands . 

28. ECO N OHIO PLANNING 

Our present and future economic safety depends upon the diversification of 
our agricultural products and industries. 1 

BC OWOMIC PLA NNING AS OUR PAltAK OUNT NATIONAL P OLICY 

There is a very noticeable and commendable attempt to appraise all known 
economic factors to the and of harnessing them into this new economic system. 

The happy transition of the Philippines from the ravages of the present 
worldwide depression can be ascribed to two main causes, namely, the resiliency 
of our people to adjust to changing conditions, and the artificiality of our 
national economy nursed and encouraged by the rich, almost illimitable, American 
"iarl;ot arid patronage. 

It is in preparation for that dark outlook that I urge our new government 
to adopt economic planning as the paramount national policy. v ' 

iSCONOMIC PLANNING TO SAKGUARJJ PUBLIC '^LiLFARB 



The creation of this National Economic Council answers an urgent national 
need and formally commits this government to a definite economic policy. '. r 0 don't 
believe in the economic philosophy of laissoz fairo. I favor government leader- 
ship in production activities. I believe in planning the national economy. The 
world has learned at a cost of untold economic waste and human suffering, after 
submitting to a Very severe test that very foundations of the social order our 
civilization has created and erected, that governments cannot allow unlimited 
free rein to private enterprise without jeopardizing the public welfare in the 
interest of human greed. 

Under our platform we are committed to the proposition of placing the cost o:< 
public utilities of prime necessity, such as electric service, within easy reach of 

ilai/ Speech on the fourth anniversary, of the Commonwealth, November 15, 1939. Ama- 
zon Messages. Vol. 5, Pert 1, JBVP5 1 , pp. 214-215. 

1/ Press statement, May 10, 1929. %\ Mil^l, TNL. 

2Lb]/ Campaign speech, 1935, n.d.m. Cff s MRf/38, TNL. 

V Speech at the first meeting of the N^ional Economic Council, March 30, 1936. 
Ibid. 



II - 68 



- flU- 



i- 3 public. The administration has further undertaken to carry out the policy of 
planned economy in production. . . The exploitation and husbanding of the water 
power resources of the country is an essential factor to all productive enterprises 
.r,-xd the National ijiconor.de Council has rightly recommended its study and execution 
even ahead of the establishment of other industries. ^ 

i^sM? appoints members of national Bcqa oHic couhcil 

Pursuant to the provisions of Con \onwealth Act No. 2, and by virtue of the 
oowers conferred upon me by Art. VII, Sec. 11, paragraph (4), of the Constitution, 
the National Economic Council is hereby constituted and established with the fol- 
lowing membership: 

., « 

The Secretary of i'inance, chairman; the Secretary of Agriculture and Com- 

aerce; the chairman, PNB board of directors; the president, NDCj the president, 
im; Mr. Joaquin M. Elizalde, Hon. Francisco Varona, Hon. Ration J. Fernandez, Ilr. 
V/enceslao Trinidad, Mr. Vicente Madrigal, Vud Mr. Ram-n Soriano, members. 

The NEC shall forthwith organize and adopt the necessary rules and rogulatla 
for its proper functioning. In the study and consideration of all matters coming bo- 
fore it, the Council shall have authority to obtain any information and expert opi- 
nion from all available sources, and for this purpose may appoint and constitute 
such committees as it may deem necessary and appoint thereto those persons who, in 
its opinion, may be specifically qualified . . . Until otherwise provided, the mem- 
bers of the NEC shall hold office until December 31, 1937. 5 

"jimm bmpkasizes ifciED for actROijokical survey of country 

In order to effect an orderly and scientific development of our agriculture 
..ad to permit thv. intelligent planning of agricultural production, it is essential 
that as ao'.'Xi as possible we undertake an agronomical survey of the Philippines. 

•agpflOMIC Dfi VaiAjpMSTJT SHOULD .nfSTTftjji Ivi-iLFARE OF v/O RKIiSG MRU 

Uhile it cann >t be rightly said that the poverty of the masses in the Philip- 
pines is due to tiie concentration of wealth in the hands of a privileged class - 
for there arc really no groat fortunes hero, and such poverty as exists is due main- 
ly to the fact that the resources of the country are as yet not properly developed - 
it should be our concern to prevent an economic development that will mean fabulous 

riches for a select few and poverty and misery for the bulk of our population. More- 
over, the injustices and abuses wh,.ch are now committed against the workingman must 
iit once bo remedied by insuring to him fair treatment , proper living and working co 
clitions, and a just compensation for his labor. 

St/ Message to the First National Assembly on the creation of the National^ Power Cor 
poration, Octuocr 2, 1936. jjuezon hossa^s, Vol. 2, Part 1, JBVFP, p. 307. 

5/ Executive Order No. 17, "Constituting the National Economic Council," February 1 
1936. Ibid., p. 625. 

6/ Message to the Second National Assembly, January 24, 1939- '-JP, MR#42, THL. 

2/ Speech at the commencement exercises of the University of the Philippines, April 
4, 1939. Quezon Messages, Vol. 5, Part 1, J3VFF , p. 66. 



11-69 ^ 

29. ECONOMIC READJUSTMENT 

When free trade opened the door of the great American market to our product 
our agriculture grew as it were, like a mushroom. 

It is now a classic in Philippine economics to refer to the free trade 
between the United States and the Philippines as having been imposed upon us 
over our strong but futile protest. Its establishment, no doubt, was^f/pired by 
the desire to implant in our country an economic system which would enhance its 
material economy. 

Our economic security, therefore, demands a drastic rearrangement of all 
economic factors.' 

^^OQglg-^-.g^g^-Ig-^Q-glggllgg-g^yi^Qg TRADE CONFERENCE 

The purpose of ny trip to the United States is to have preliminary conver- 
sations with the President of the United States and with the state and war depart- 
ments (concerning) the calling of the trade conference between representatives of 

2 

■|;*io United States and the Philippines. 

' ffliSSOff WIRE ON EARLL3R IITOlliPENDEITCE , ECO NOMIC RE iiDJUSTMEHT 
(Complete wire): 

For Secretary Jorge B. Vargas, Manila. 

(l) Following for Vice President Osmena: (quote) 

At a conference held between the Interdepartmental Committee on Philippine 

jiff airs presided over by Dr. Francis B. Sayre, the Committee acting on behalf of 

President Roosevelt, at the preliminary discussion, and I, with the attendanco of 

Speaker Gil Hontilla, Secretary Yulo, Resident Commissioner Paredes, Assemblyman 

Buencamino, Joaquin H. Elizalde of the National Economic Council and Benito R&Kon, 

technical adviser, it was agroo/lhat a joint preparatory committee of American and 

i'ilipino exports be appointed immediately to study trade relations between the 

United States and the Philippines and to make recommendations thereon. : '. . ■ 

In view of the fact that I have recommended that the period for granting 
complete independence be shortened to 1938 or 1939 it was also agreed that this 
joint committee of experts will be expected in making their recommendations to 
consider the bearing which this advancement in the date of independence would 
have on facilitating or retarding the execution of a program of economic adjust- 
ment in the Philippines. ; ' 

It was further agreed that preferential trade relations between the United 
States and the Philippines are to be terminated at the earliest practicable date 
consistent with affording the Philippines reasonable opportunity to adjust their 
national economy. Thereafter it is contemplated that trade relations between the 
two countries will be regulated in accordance with a reciprocal agreement on a 

l/ Campaign speech, 1935, n.d.m. OP, MR-;?38, TNL. 

2/ Press statement on the purpose of his trip to the United States, January 7, 
1937. Quezon Messages. V ol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, p, 311. 



11-70 



..^..preferential basis, (stop) 

The holding cf the conference provided in the Tydings-McDuff ie Act will be 

3 

,, oS tponed until the Joint Preparatory Bcnunittee shall have presented its report. 

QUEZON. 

I hope that both Americans and Filipinos on this Committee (Joint Prepara- 

:-orv Committee on .Philippine Affairs) are going to consider the problems before 

-; ; uji.i from the same point of view on the assumption, which has been a fact in the 

cist, that what is good for the Philippines is also good for the United States and 

vice versa, There must be no attempt to put through any proposal that may be be- 

4 

.isficial to one people but detrimental to the other. 
QUEZON STRIPS TO U.S. CRITICIZED BUT H IGH LY PROD UCTIVE 

My trips abroad arc criticized, but others also have being going abroad 
.-'.lwost as often and yet they are not criticized. The purposes of my trips are for 
the good of the country. In the first trip, I brought back the Jones Law; in the 
socond, the Tydinga-McDuff ie Act; and now I bring money to the people. On the 
other hand, what did the others bring back? Words and nothing else but words. 

aiii'TATE C HIEF EXPLAI NS SIGNIFICANCE OF U .S . TRIP 

I made that trip at the invitation of President Franklin D. Roosevelt for 
the purpose of laying the ground work for the better definition of the relations 
between the United States and the Commonwealth during the transition period and 
in order to remedy certain objectionable features pertaining to the same in the 
Tydlngs-McDuf f ie Law . 

.-. * * * 

The trip enabled me, while I was abroad, to observe the functions of various 
governments and the economic and social conditions in the most progressive count- 
ries; and, in addition, to accomplish various things that have redounded to the 

benefit of the Commonwealth. 

r i UaZ 0M COMMEN DS JO INT pOMKTEB J^M TT^^^^^I^^^II 

I am informed that the American members of the Joint Preparatory Committee 
on Philippine Affairs are sailing today on the President Coolidge. . . I have re- 
frained from having intervention of any sort in the work of the Committee , and I 
an not even informed of what it has done, but from reports that have come to me, 

^Presrstatlment'on the Joint Preparatory Committee on Philippine Affairs, 

March 22, 1937. Ibid. . pp. 321-322. 
.4/ Speech at the first meeting of the Joint .Preparatory Committee on Philippine 

Affairs, Washington, D. C, April 19, 1937. Ibid., p. 90. 
5/ Speech on the results of his trip to the United States, August 16, 1937. 

Ibid. , p. 100. 

6/ Message to the First National Assembly, October 16, 1937. OP, MR#39, ML. 



11-71 



l am under the depression that it has done what has been humanly possible for it 
to do to get at the facts upon which its recommendations may be based. 

I wish to express ay appreciation of the work done by the Committee and to 
convey my thanks to Ambassador Mac'Murray and every one of the members of the 
Committee both American and Filipino. ^ 

30. ECONOMIC SELF-SUFFICIENCY 
UIBN COMR OL_INCOjgA TIBL E_¥ITH | MAXIMUM PHILIPPINE PROGRESS 

0. - You do not believe in alien control, however benevolent? 

A. - No. Alien control and nat ion/progress to the maximum of native capa- 
city are incompatible. For material and for moral reasons I am pleading for in- 
dependence of my country. It is arguable, and I consider it true, that mutual 
benefit may accrue for a time to a dominating country and the country dominated. 
There has been this time of mutual benefit as between America u and the Philippines 
But, in such a conjuncture, a stage is certain to be reached at which the domina- 
ting country begins to stand in the way of the interests, material and moral, of 
the country dominated. 

MLQ CONFIDENT PHILIPPINES_C AN_ PRODUCE INDUSTRI AL, ECONO MIC LEADERS 

It is not true that once foreign capital engaged in business in the Islands 
these businesses will never pass into Filipino hands. If we are a strong people 
this c&pital will seTve only as a temporary instrument to start their businesses 
that we may later acquire, and I have faith in the virility of our people to 
acquire them. 

I cannot accept the disheartening stury that a people that has produced 
Hisal, Bonifacio, del Pilar, Ilabini, Burgos, Zamora, the Lunas and other men il- 
lustrious in politics and in the arts and sciences, is not capable of producing 
genuine and great leaders in industry, commerce, and agriculture. I believe, on 
the contrary, that we shall know how to utilize the -technique of modern business 
and that we shall survive in the struggle for existence which is more than ever 
relentless. 

I thus face the future with confidence. The years have not made me pessi- 
mistic. On the contrary, in my dreams I see our people completely independent 
and fighting triumphantly for the conquest of human progress. 

QUEZON SEEKS SELF-SUFFICIENCY IN RICE AND CORN 



One of the most serious and immediate problems which confront our new 
government is that which concerns the supply and price of rice and corn, the two 

ll Press statement on the work of the Joint Preparatory Committe on Philippine 
Affairs, November 12, 1937. que son Mess ages. Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, p. 344. 

1/ Exclusive interview with Edward Price Bell for the Chicago Daily News, 1925. 

In: The Philippine Republic , published monthly in Washington, D.C., and edits 

by Clyde H. Tavenner. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, p. 768. 
2/ Address, "question of the Hour," before the Philippine Agricultural Congress, 

Manila, September 21, 1928. Ibid. . pp. 826-829. 



11-72 



999 - 



main staple food.- of our people. It is essential that we devise ways and means 
whereby we may insure at all times an ample supply of these commodities at roaacr- 
able prices to the consumer while at the same time enabling the producer to re- 
ceive an adequate return for his investment and efforts so as to encourage him 
to continue producing locally these products thereby making our country self- 
sufficient in this respect. ^ 

RICE C0ffiIS5I0N_CREATED__T0 = S0LV E RICE PRO BLEM_ 

"Whereas, during the last special session of the National Assembly, the 
President in a special message. proposed ... the enactment of legislation looking 
to the solution of the problems affecting the rice industry, with particular, re- 
ference to the impending rice shortage for the current year; ... the Secretary of 
Agriculture and Commerce has certified that the rice shortage this year is such 
that immediate action is necessary; . . . the production and proper distribution of 
rice is one of the moat important problems of this government; ... it is necessary 
to provide adequate means for the steady and sufficient supply of this comaodijy 
at priced reasonable to consumer, producer, and trader and thereby afford relief 
to hard-pressed small farmers and kasamas . and the large body of consumers... 

"Now, therefore, I, Manual L. Quezon., hereby constitute and create a Rico 
••'vamission to consist of the following: 

Honorable Manuel Roxas, member, National Assembly, chairman; Hon. Felipe 
Buoncaniino , member, National Assembly; the Director of Commerce; Hon. Vicente 
Singson Encarnacion, and Dr. Nicanor Jacinto, members... whose duty shall be to 
:.iake a careful investigation and study of the rice problem and recommend measures 
for immediate relief, including the proper distribution of rice throughout the 
Philippines at reasonable prices. The Commission shall study further ways and 
norms to insure at all times a steady and sufficient supply of this commodity so 
as to prevent the recurrence of a rice shortage, and shall make a report of its 
findings and recommendations to the President of the Philippines at the earliest 
practicable date. 

"The Commission is hereby authorized to requisition the services of emplo- 
yees of any department, bureau or office of the Governmen| which it may consider 
necessary to accomplish the requirements of this Order." 

QUEZON ADMINISTRATION WARNS RICE PROFITEERS 



I want to servo notice on everybody that my administration is not going to 
allow anybody to prey upon the needy. The Constitution and the existing laws 
give the President ample powers to protect the public, in cases of emergency, 
^uch as is confronting the country now because of the shortage of rice, especially 
':ho masses, who cannot possibly pay very high price for the rice they need. 

3/ Message to the First National Assembly, December 19, 1935. Quezon Messages, 
Vol. I, Sp. Rev. Ed., JBVPF, p. 97. 

V Executive Order No. 18, "Creating a Rice Commission for the Purpose of 

Studying and Making Recommendations on Ways and Means to Solve the Present 
Rico Crises and to Insure a Permanent Supply of Rice at Reasonable Prices, 1 
February 17, 1936. Ibid. . Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFF, pp. 626-627. 



ii m 



* * * 



The Rice and Corn Corporation hqq k-.^^ • , ^ 

x *aT-on nas been created for the double purpose of 

■;ratocting the public from undue rise of twice when +w» < a * , . 

- iU wiien tnere is more demand than 

frno-lV) and to protect the rice cro*rer«* fw» i~„. , 

" fero-rors irom losses when there is more smnly than 

.5 
demand . 

Te have enormous resources in land and raw materials that we nay require.' 
All that is necessary is for our people to have the will to work and to take ad- 
vantage of the opportunities afforded them. It is in apiculture, in commerce 
and in industry, in the arts and sciences, that our salvation lies. If. have nothim 

•a TV 

to fear except our own lac!: of foresight or unwillingness to engage in productive 
toil. :h must mobilise our people and our resources for this task, talcing advantage 
of our present difficulties to induce greater production and bring about a national 
economy best suited to our social life. . 6 

31 . KJDUC AT I 0 If 
fl ^E^C U^^ jfflPCATIOK 

The State is in duty bound to maintain a complete and adequate system of 

t 

public education, providing at least free public primary instruction and citizen- 
ship training to adult citizens. 

I am for greater emphasis on vocational and agricultural training in the 
intermediate and high schools, but the instruction should always be in keeping with 
tha economic conditions of each region and of the country as a whole. 1 
j^£L^^§-g^" UT - ! Yg_^^ _C^ATiaG KuUCATI'. J Cc-UftCIL 

"whereas, the Constitution of the Philippines prescribes certain definite'""' 
siucational objectives to be accomplished through the medium of the schools; 

"Whereas, the present system of public instruction was devised under a 
political status and social conditions different from those which now exist or 
W'Uch if in arise in the near future as a result of political and economic changes; 

W Speech on the establishment of the National Rice and Corn Corporation, 
H& y 26, 1936.. <jp, KR. : ;:36, T:iL. 

6/ v 4 

-7 A-sssage to the Second National Assembly on emergency powers and revision of the 
educational system, July 15, 1940. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, p. 2223. 

■u "?a<3cn on accepting his nomination as President of the Philippines, July 20, 
-935. aaeg^sJ^sagefij, Vol. 1, 8 P . Rev. -iid., JBWff, p. 238. 



••Whereas, with the settlement of the question of Philippine independence, . 
, ae political future of the Philippines has been determined, making possible a 
; , re definite orientation of educational aims; 

•'Whereas, an educational system can only render permanent social benefits 
,. tn it is in keeping with the economic conditions and opportunities obtaining 
each epoch, and 

•'Whereas, for a proper recasting of our educational system it is necessary 

• , make available to the Government the wisdom and experience of men who have 
: ; en engaged in the study of education in its varied aspects and .have the ability 

: envision the qualities in character, learning and vocational aptitudes which 
.ihould be possessed by Filipino citizens in order that they may bo roared in 
>,;.vic efficiency and trained to serve the nation. 

"How, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by vir- 
tue of the powers in me vested by law, and upon the recommendation of the Secretary 
•■i I'ublic Instruction, hereby constitute and create a National Council of Educa- 
tion to consist such members as may be appointed by the President of the Philip- 
lines, from time to time, whose duties shall be to study and make recommendations 

,-acerning reforms in the present system of public and private education in the 
.hilippines, to advise the Government on basic educational policies, and to report 

n such other matters related to education as may from time to time be submitted 

■;<; its consideration by the Secretary of Public Instruction, For administrative 

•urposes this Council shall be under the Department of Public Instruction and 

;:uall have authority, with the approval of the corresponding Head of Department, 

■;o obtain the assistance of officers and employees of any department, bureau, or 

offices of the Government which may be considered necessary for the proper per- 

2 

-.romance of its duties," 

ILLITERACY PRESEN TS R EAL MENACE TO NATION'S STABILITY 



We believe that illiteracy is a real menace to the stability of the nation. 

But notwithstanding the seriousness of this problem, the Government cannot and 

should not, on account of its limited resources, assume exclusive responsibility 

for giving adult teaching to all. This movement should be undertaken jointly by 
tho government and by the public through civic organizations and groups of persons 
'io are willing to devote part of their time to the education of the adults. 

|MjrX^_|£UCATl0N FOR bELF -RESPECT juuj £d^'.':-C" ICN 

I am preparing these (Filipino) youth/^o fight for their country so that 
tho education and training that we give them will be an education which they nay 

2/ Executive Order No. 19, "Creating a National Council of Education and to 
Advise the Government on Educational Policies and Necessary Reforms in the 
listing System of Education," February 19, 1936. Quezon Messages. Vol. 2, 
Part 1, JT3VFF, pp. 628-629. 

ll Letter of Rafael Palma, chairman, National Council of Education to the Secretary 
of Public Instruction, reporting on educational measures that should require 
legislation, Manila, August 24, 1936. Ibid. . p. 293. 



11-75 

use for their self -respect and protection. ^ 

If the Philippines is going to be enslaved, it is better for the Filipinos 

not to be educated, for a nan who is not educated can stand that bettor than a 

5 

Man who has got education. 

46 HIILlEP IHg DBLm i ^_TO ^^H JJCRLD ^^DUCATIG?xVJ J MEET 

Among the 46 educators authorized by Malacanan to attend the Seventh 
,/orld Conference of the World Federation of Education Associations to be held in 
Tokyo, Japan, August 2 to 7, 1937 are the following: 

Dean Francisco Benitez, Dr. Isidoro Panlasigua, Dr. Herminio Velarde, Dr. 
Kenesio B. Kendiola, Prof - Gabriel A. Bernardo, Mr. Solomon V. Arnaldo, Dr. Gil- 
bert Perez, Hr. Serafin Aquino, Dr. Enrique Sobrepena, Dr. Hauro Baradi, Mrs. 
•iiguela Jhocson, Hr. &, Mrs. Faustinc Bugante, Hr. Eduardo Quintero, Mr. Prudencic 
Langcauon, Dr. Mariano C. Icasiano, Mrs. A. del Carraen, Mr. Mariano V. de los 
Santos, Hiss Concepcion Aguila, Miss Minerva Guysayko, and Mr. Gregorio F. Zaida. 

EDUCATION DOBS HOT AK ggS II EAH TnSDCK - 

Education or instruction does not always moan wisdom; and a person who is 

just half-baked in his instruction is more dangerous than a man who has no ins- 

7 

truction at all and who accepts his ordinary reaction as a guide. 
STUDE NTS S H OULD STUD Y T O BE ABLE TO FORM OWN VIEWS 

I believe the time of the people who are in the University should be 
devoted to study. That is their job there: to study, to prepare themselves pro- 
perly, so that when the time comes for them to exercise the duties of citizenship 
they will have sufficient preparation to study every question calmly, not from 
what they heard Ouezon or Aguinaldo or anybody else say, but from what they them- 
selves have formed. ^ 

PkIMARY EDUCATION FIRST, IMMEDIATE duty of_state_ 

The first arid immediate duty of the State is to provide universal primary 
instruction to giris and boys of school age, and that until such duty shall have 
been performed fully, the government subjects itself to the criticism of affordin 
opportunities for higher instruction to peoplo who can afford to pay for their 
own education while denying primary instruction to hundreds of thousands of the 

it/ Speech before the Foreign Policy Association, Astor Hotel, Hew York City, 
April 3, 1937. Quezon Messages. Vol. 3, Part 1 , JBVFF, p. 80. 

5/ Ibid. 

6/ Press statement on the Seventh World Educational Conference in Tokyo, 

July 30, 1937. Ibid., p. 323. 
2/ Speech at a press conference, October 27, 1937. <fl?t HB&Of ™" 
£/ Ibid. 



-,76 



,ns and daughters of the poor. ^ 

, ^Y wac^mmj^jm ^ for citiztottp ™, T , TTTr 

If primary education is as important- ^ a i ■, , 

xaporuant as we acknowledge it to be, it seems 

,,,-ise to continue with the present systen whereby responsibility for the main- 
nance and extension of primary instruction is divided between the national and 

municipal governments... It is therpfn^ j . , 

is ™ereiore proposed to have the national govern 

• .at assume full responsibility for thp ainT, n ^ . 

a-luj j. or tne support of primary instruction. 

It should be admitted, however +V10+ 

u, nowever, that four years of primary education cannr- - ; 

,., P are the individual for more than the most common and ordinary routine activi- 
:i0C ° f MS GVeryday life - ?or this reason it would be wise to encourage the at- 
-ndance of children in the intermediate grades in order to obtain a complete 

.icmentary education. And with this end in vim it i j • ^ 

ena in vie * ^ is planned to have all existing 

intermediate schools supported by the municipal governments. 10 
rOCmOHALAMD II'roUoTRIAL_BDUCATION .IN_SECOjTOAHY SCHOOLS 

I have given the question of secondary education a great deal of thought, 
m-1 I am convinced that as a matter of policy we should, at this stage of our 
V/elopment, give greater emphasis to vocational and industrial education. 

Besides giving every child a primary and if possible a complete elementary 
-ducation to train him on how to discharge his duties intelligently and to make 
proper use of his rights as a citizen, the government should help the student ac- 
quire a secondary education which should round out his training for citizenship 
"■Hi give him proficiency in a vocation which would enable him to support himself 
••nd to contribute to the development of his country. Much. as we would like to have 
iho government extend all possible aid to the schools, at least for the present 
oocondary education will have to be supported by those who desire this kind of 
education. 11 

i^lLIg-gO. MAKE EVERYEODY LITERATE TO KNOW HIS RIGHTS, DUTIES 

The policy of the national government now is to open primary schools in all 
places so that every child of school age, particularly the sons of the poor who 
live in the farthest, barrios, can acquire a primary education. Wo don't want to 
— prive the child of the poor people at least of the knowledge necessary to en- 
£Jle him to read and understand his rights and duties. 

'^Ii£^^_S££^LY_BIjj^ICIAL USE OF AC ADEMIC EDUCA TION 

An academic education is not, in itself, of value to anyone who receives it, 

3./ Message to the First National Assembly, November 17, 1937. Quezon Message s. 
Vol. 3, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 248. 

JC/ Message to the First National Assembly, March 25, 1938. Ibid. . Vol. 4, 
p art 1, JBVFF, pp. 314-315. 

-U/ Ibid., p. 315, 

■%J Speech at Tacloban, Leyto, Juno 10, 1938. ( Ibid . . p. 77. 



11-77 

unless ho is capable of making practical and socially beneficial use of it* Those. 
v ,ho must depend upon their toil for livelihood will be less exposed to becoming 
parasites and a charge on the contiunity, if they pursue such courses of study 
as will most likely insure to them a steady work and gainful occupation. 15 

gfflffi OF_W^^ _V OCA TIONAL_gFFICIENCY URGED BY HLQ 

We nust increase the wealth of the nation by multiplying its production. 
Lad to accomplish this, we must revise our system of education and emphasize the 
training of our youth for vocational efficiency as enjoined by the Constitution. 1 

JOIN T EDUCiJ riOI^L_ SWV .EY_GOHHITTEE C REA TED 

I do hereby create a committee, known as the Joint Educational Survey 
Committee, which shall make a thorough survey of existing educational methods, 
curricula, and facilities, to formulate plans and measures to enable the govern- 
ment to maintain a public school system in accordance with the mandate of the 
Constitution, and to recommend s\ich changes and modifications in the present ways 
;-'f financing public education as the economic resources of the country may justify 

32, E L E C T I 0 H 3 

"gaDflRALISTA S" ROUTED IN PHILIPPIC ASSEH3LY' ELECTIONS 

The last election in the Philippines, which took placo on June 4, 1912, 
again shows conclusively that the people of the Philippines are unanimous in their 
desire to attain independence. 

There are in the Philippines two political parties - the "Nationalist" and 
the "Progresist" . The Nationalist Party has always contended for the right of the 
Filipinos to be independent from all foreign domination and has maintained their 
actual ability to manage their own affairs... The Progresist is the successor of 
another party called "Federal." This Federal Party believed in the annexation of 
the Philippines to the United States... Out of 81 members of the Philippine . 
Assembly only five are Progresist and these were elected by a bare majority. 

If there be a man who now dares assert that there is a single Filipino 
opposed to Philippine independence cither now or at an early date, he must be 
either reckless of the truth or wholly ignorant of insular political conditions. ^ 

13/ Speech on national policies, nationalism, and economic security, at the 

commencement exercises of the University of the Philippines, April 4, 1939. 
Quezon Messages T Vol. 5, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 67. 

A£/ Mm P. 66. 

15/ Administrative Order No. 109, "Creating a Joint Educational Survey Commit- 
tee," November 3, 1939. Ibid., pp. 1331-1332. 

U Article, "The Last Election in .the Philippines," In: The Filipino People ,, 
Vol. 1, No. 1, September 1912. Rivera Collection, Vol. 1, p. 99. 



11-78 

Political parties are a real necessitv ■< 
they are guilty of a crime if in „ * ' deaocratic Sovornnent; but 

the P-lic, they conduct their 1 ^ f ^ ^ ^ *" *° ° 
the country. P ^ " * nanMr to — deep disaention in 

The right of criticisa is one of the „pf B , , 
,hen this right is made use of to denou ^ ^ owov 

tainin. to the " _ ° - »* everythi, 



taining to the adversary, char^n-, hi -, , n ' ^ ever ^ in S P G ^" 

*ith, whether with or Ilthout 1 ^ ^ * « ~ 

destructive of the o«onW are" " " *° *** »° 8 * 

- country demands J £ p^J^ ^ ^ ~ 
High above all party, high above all selfish interests rise the sacred ' 
rx,hts and liberties of the people who have sent us here to the end tb I 
defend those rights and liberties. 3 ^ ™ 

We want to nick the hp<?+ r ,er 
t - cal „ ftriQ . , + . b8St U6n ' in ny °P lnion > the job without any poli- 

tical considerations whatsoever. 

I have found that some of the evils that confront the head of the govern- 
ment is the fact that if he can see, reelection he has to play politics. * 

, " \ s r y enouiih to uree that * Mt aS ide w he n 

-tereata of the pGO pl e are at stake, and to proclaim "country above party". But 

Z . a ° ra0nt C ° neS f ° r theSG ^otic pronouncements to be translated 

: o a ct only aM . public . gpirited _ can overcome 

^ Prejudices of human nature. 5 

S^^lONTOjTAGgmiro COST OF TO O MANY POLLS 

'•-o already ttkef pS- 'n"^ ^.f 1934t ° date ( ° Ct ° ber 2 ' 19 ^' four -1-otica 
f « the Constitutional / ' y, + ? 0 f^" 1 elections of W34, the elections 

•^Ith elections all J ^ P 1 ?*" 0 " 8 ° n the C ™ s titution, and the Comon- 
==== == =_-^ wnich have cost the inaular and local governments the 

%J I " — = 

Cru^unon tl^ 0 ^T et held in rj ' uezon ' s h ™°*> H etel de France, Sta. 
BiaL P 425! trilUaphal r ° turn frra the **** States, September 28, 1 9 16. 

3/ Speech on the floor of the Senate, November 2, 1916. Ibid,, p. 437. 

'^VlffllS W TNL. A * P * U * ? * Respondents, September 20, 1935. 

5/ Co 

«esSeq la J°P f pe ? ch ' Legislative building, December 21, 1935. Quezon 
— aageaj. Vol. 1, Sp. Rev. Ed., JBVFF, p. 111. 



11-79 



tot-1 amount of P 2,226,690.07. Next April there will be a plebiscite for woman 

suffrage in accordance with Commonwealth Act N 0 . 34, Under the present 'Election 

t„ w the general elections for local officials will also take place next June, 

-i id in 195^ there will again be an election for members of the National Assembly. . 

-f the 1937 elections for local officials are not postponed, there will be another.- 

,,.^1 election for them in June 1940; and in 1941 the presidential elections wi?.. . 
" cr -" x .the 

t-i-e place. VJi thin/ next four years, therefore, there will be five successive 
elections which will mean to the national and local treasurie/an expenditure of 
^proximately f-3, 693,459.60. Adding this amount to the amount of f*2, 226, 690. 07 
•lready spent since 1934, we will have spent up to an including the presidential 
elections of 1941 a total outlay of £5, 920, 149.67 for elections only within a 
period of seven years. 

As a measure of immediate economy, it would be more convenient tp postpone 
the general elections of 1937 to coincide with any other subsequent election, say. 
v/ith the next elections for members of the National Assembly, and thereby elimi- 
nate the two general elections of 1937 and 1940 as separate elections for local 
officials. This will not only mean a substantial saving in the local funds of 
over a million pesos which we urgently need for general development work, but 
i.'ill also avoid much of the political and even social agitation incidental to 
oach election. This will also insure, I ho-oe, not only a more stable state of 

pence in the country, but also peace of mind among our citizens in this period of 
J 6 
intense preparations and execution of a great part of our national program. 

LIMIT IN ELE CTION LAW D jmgC ^^A&jJTO J^^S^J^J^^^?, 

Responsibility and power are vested in the National Assembly as a body, and. 
therefore, one man alone cannot destroy the whole work of the Assembly. In the case 
of a governorship, the responsibility is individual, and the National Assembly 
urguod that if the members of the National Assembly must be 30 years of age at 
least, then a governor should also be of that age... 

I was informed that the provision was inserted (in the Election Law) in 
order to prevent (l/enccslao) Vinzons from being a candidate. However, I want hin 
to be a candidate, because if he is defeated, the defeat would show that the 
province is not with him. If he wins, I would have the opportunity to see if he 
can make a good governor, and we will give him a chance ^but if he turns out to 
bs a bad governor, I will go after him and suspend him. 

7J^QW_tfAOTH fiT.TCATT FJ.^TTONS^HAT 'JILL INSPIRE ITJBLIC_CQM^NCT 

The coming general elections being the first to be held under the Common- 
wealth government, "i am particularly desirous of talcing every precaution that will 

F^tt^rfin^tary of the Interior Elpidio Quirino on post ponemoat of o 
election* of provincial governors, October 2, 1936. Quezoi i . Messages , Vol. 2, 
I J art 1, JBVFF, pp.- 309-310. 

1/ Conference with a delegation of Young Philippines, September 29, 1937. 
Ibid. f Vol. 3, i'art 1, JBVEB', pp. 131-132. 



11-80 



- it? _ 



prevent, as much as human ingenuitv win BGmit + , n . . 

„ wj-xx permit, the commission of any act in vio- 
lation of the Election Law, with a vipw +r, • •' 

' -view to inspiring confidence among the people 

in the high purposes of the national fovernr.ion+- 

««..x governraent, ana avoiding suspicion that it 

is permitting, directly or indirectly, anv ■ 

^i-xy, ^ny undue influence to be exerted in the 

elections of a particular candidate, esDecinllv t, +1 . 

8 , especially to the position of provincial 

governor. 

C^!j ^^LBC T^H S_BA SIS_^ Ri-iA L, ENDUR ING DiiMOCR&CY 

It is my desire and plain purpose to have these coming elections - the 
first general elections under the Commonwealth - conducted in full compliance with 

existing laws. It is of general know! on +v,r,4- a~ 4.1 „„ 

L ' i-nowicd tj e that m the past, officials and employees 

of the government who are subiect to piirii a Q ™.-;„ n • , 

uojec-c to civil service rules and regulations have been 

taking part in the elections, directly or indirectly, in violation of such rules and 
regulations... All officials and employees of the government should know that teas- 

tic action will be taken against then for i.-r-n „4^i • • 

_ xiut uneu 1 or participating m electoral campaigns in 

violation of civil service rules and rpuli+in^" tv^ +• u 

1U regulations. Ihe time has come for a due and 

full enforcement of the Civil service Law. 

These early years of the Commonwealth government constitute the proper tire 
for laying the foundation of a real and lasting democracy in the Philippines and 1 
hoarding all practices tending to frustrate the will of the people in the choice 
of their public servants. Particularly the justices of tho peace, the police, and 
tho school teachers must be impressed with the necessity not only of not talcing any 
p:.rt in the elections other than to exercise their right to vote, but also of not 
.-riving any ground for suspicion that they have partisan leanings. 9 

■I desire to reiterate that I shall take no part nor interest in the elections 
of any candidate for any provincial, city or municipal office and that the Nacio- 
aalista Party cannot have an official candidate unless one is so selected by 
agreement between the -Anti" and "Pro" factions who have joined the new Jfccionalista 
P".rty as agreed upon at the recent convention. 10 

^BiSgJjjjLYjron^RICT BUT ALSO FOR POOR 

It is outrageous to compel a man to spend his own money for election, for 
*wt eliminates the poor. who have no money. 11 
£gDBMIAL OFFICE NOT INTER VENING- IN LOCAL ELEC TIONS 

is a E y ery time 1 ^ approached on purely (local) political matters a disfavor 
^jumejbo me personally, if not to my administration. The duties of my office are 

§/ Letter to Secretary of the Interior Elpidio Quirino, September 30, 1937. 

■isiis.* p. 293. 

2/ latter to the Secretary of the Interior, October 7, 1937. Ibid. . pp. 296-297, 

10/ Jitter on non-participation in the local elections in Iloilo, October 8, 1937. 
S24l» P. 299. 

-U/ Speech at a press conference, October 20, 1937. Wt MH#40, THL. 



11-81 



vui exacting, and I need all the. tiae I can dispose of for 'ray own relaxation, and 
;i:; t share it with party affairs, which, at least, as far as provincial and tiuni- 

elections are concerned, can have no possible effect on national policies. " 

The important thing in a democracy is the frequent renovation of public 
oiTicials, so that the people nay pass judgment upon then or their work. From this 
:-,int of view, four years is much more democratic than six years. 1 ^ 

C LSAIJ HOMIilST ELBCTIONS_A_C ^IT_AND JOY_ TO_ODR COUNTRY - qUBZON 

One of the things a candidate to an elective position craves to see, is to 
find out whether he can endear himself to his country or not. Nothing can bring 
iiore joy to one's heart than to find that he stands high in the esteem of his 
countrymen as proved by the election returns. That is why I an hoping for a clean 
and hones/election - one that will be a credit and a joy to our country. ^ 

HONjSSTJjlgCTION GIVES OFFICIALS' GREATE ST SATISFACTION 

It is the greatest ambition of my administration that the elections, while 
I am the President of the Philippines, be carried in perfect order and that in the 
electoral campaign the rights of everybody be protected. The greatest satisfaction 
of a man who seeks an elective public office is to see that the' people are for him. 
But he can only get that if the people actually vote for him in accordance with 
their wishes. What satisfaction can there be if a man is elected and he, in his own 
conscience, knows that he has been elected only through fraud or through violence 
or through the use of illicit means. I dent want that to happen. I am attempting 
to give the people of the Philippines a good, honest and fair government. I want 
to give our people here a government of which not only the officials of the govern- 
ment but the people themselves may be proud of. And this can only be accomplished 

if everybody from the nan in the highest position to the man in the lowest position 

1 5 

should abide by the laws. 

CI^N_gLECTIOIIS W ILL SAFEGUARD DEMOCRilCY_M D_LIBERTY 

As long as elections are hold at reasonable intervals and the people are 

permitted freely to elect the man whom they desire to entrust with the highest 

office of the land, self-government will remain unimpaired and democracy and 

1 6 

liberty preserved in this country. 

J 2/ Letter to Vice-President Sergio Osmena, October 23, 1937. Quezon Mossaffes, 
Vol. 3, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 304. 

.12/ Untitled speech, 1938, n.d.rn. OP, MR#41, TNL. 

Ji/ Speech at the inauguration of the municipal building of Candelaria, Tayabas, 
October 29, 1938. Q uezon Message s, Vol. 4, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 239. 

15/ Speech at a conference with the provincial and municipal officials of Negros 
Oriental, November 3, 1938. OP, MR#41 , TNL. 

Ji/ Message to the Second National Assembly, August 16, 1939. Quezon Messages , 
Vol. 5, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 340. 



TT~32 

- i* - 

•JZmjLIXS OLHaij_TO_^TJlIDJ£j,^^^ni^ PRESIDED? 

Under the Constitution the President can only be removed from office throu,/! 
nj^achment proceedings, which presupposes anlfeasancs in office. So that under th- 
Constitution onco the President is elected for a torn of years, no natter how poor 
he is as President, so long as ho does. not corariit malfeasance in office he remains 
in his job until the end of his tern even if ha were to bocone the most unpopular 
•resident that was ever elected. There is no way of removing hiu. If we establish:'' 
the precedent of shortening the tern of office of the President through an amend- 
ment to the Constitution, a perfectly good President who has become obnoxious to 

the legislature may be rid off by amending the Constitution and shortening his 
17 

tern of office. 

liSStf^ BAD OFFICIALS 

The Filipino people cannot hope to maintain their democratic form of govern- 
ment unless we begin to respect the laws and particularly the election law. One of'' 
the worst crimes that a citisen can commit is the commission of elec^' 
frauds. The basis of a democratic government is the government of the people, 
through their elected representatives and it is the duty of every citizen to res- 
pect the free expression of the will of the people in the choice of their officii-"" 
It makes no difference whether they elect good or bad officials. • , •• : • ... 

• 3ut the right of self-government includes the right of 
self -misgovernment . If the people make a mistake and elect a bun official, that 
is their fault, flobody has the right to cheat them. They will only learn to elec J ; 
.\;ood officials when they are allowed to make mistakes in electing bad officials 
because they realize that they themselves are the main sufferers of their mistakes. 
I don't know when our people are going to take seriously this duty of making the 
election • an orderly and honest one. But I do know that unless we comply with 
our duty in this respect, the government of the Philippines is doomed to failure. ' 

33. E M P L 0 Y M E II T 
Uiviiil-u-LOrilE HT PROBLEM BBOOMIHG MORE SERIOUS 

The problem of unemployment in the Philippines is becoming more serious 
•jvory day. But unemployment can only be solved by providing opportunities for gain- 
ful work. There is very little more the government can do directly along this line, 
la fact we might find ourselves compelled to reduce positions in the public ser- 
vice in order to effect economies. It is in the field of private enterprise, through 
the expansion of some of our industries and the creation of new ones, that 



12/ Remarks at a press conference, August 5, 1940. V, HH&M-3, THL. 

!§/ Speech in Cagayan, Misanis Oriental, September 4, 1940. '-'JP, MR#44, TMj. 



11-83 

- m - 

;0 rtunity lies to provide work to those who are unemployed. 1 

Unfortunately the -government does not have the means to give employment to 
-11 those who would like to work and can find no work, much less to give food to 
those that are in want. It is also to be deplored that our laws are not sufficien"' 
effective to protect the poor from the abuses of greed. 2 

NATIONAL UNEMPLOYMENT BOARD CREATED BY QUEZON 



"In order to coordinate all government and private efforts to reduce unem- 
ployment and to aid those who are in distress on account cf unavoidable unemploy- 
ment, I, Manuel L. Quezon. , , do hereby create a national Unemployment Board, com- 
posed of the Comuission/Sf Health and Welfare as chairman, and the Undersecretary 
of Public Works .and Communications, the Undersecretary of Agriculture and Commerce- 
the Undersecretary of Labor, and Executive Secretary of the Associated Charities 
cf Hani la, and two other persons who shall be appointed by the President, as members 

"It shall be the duty of this Board to take a census of all unemployed per- 
sons in the Philippines, to ascertain their needs, to determine upon ways and means 
of relieving or ameliorating their conditions, and to advice the government autho- 
rities concerned as to the expenditure of the funds now appropriated or which 

3 

ray hereafter be appropriated." 

ECONOMIC SECURITY THROUGH TOTAL EMPLOYMENT 



Many important details will have to be attended to and a careful investiga- 
tion will have to be made of local conditions if we must have a social security 
act which will be fair and will not overtax the resources of both the private 
industries and the government, that may be called upon to share a substantial part 
of the burden which the passage of such a measure will entail, and at the same 
tine adequately accomplish its end. 

Economic security for all is the only sure cure for such an ill, and this 
can bo attained only by giving employment to all able-bodied members of the commu- 
nity and providing for a "system of social insurance towards which the^individual 
as well as tho industries and the state should bo made to contribute. 

L ; aSS UBEHPLOYHEMT IP RICH WILL ffigHD THEIR HONEY HERE 

I believe that if our rich people will spend their money here, we shall 
have less unemployment in the Philippines. 



\J Massage to tho First National Assembly on the creation of the National Eco- 
nomic Council, December Li), 1935. Quezon messages. Vol. 1, Sp. Rev. Ed., 
JBVFF, p. 84. 

?/ Address at the opening of the National Assembly, June 16, 1936. MR#38, TJ.JL 
3/ Executive Order No. 122, "Creating a National Unemployment Board," 

Octobers, 1937. Quezon Messages.. Vol. 3, Part II, JBVFF, pp. 670-671. 
4/ Message to the First National Assembly, October 16, 1937. W, KH#59, TNL, 
5/ Speech at a press conference, October 27, 1937.. Q?» ^0, TNL. 



11*04 

- flft- 

34. SilCO M I U M 
r^aiWOLUTIONIOTJjUgZOiT HAS GO OD WORD FOR AGUIIIALDO 

I wish to say a few words in behalf of Gon. : Aguinaldo. I was at one tine an 
officer in the Philippine amy, having left college in response to the call of ny ■ 
coiuvbry to fight under her flag. For several months I was on the staff of Gen. 
A/juinaldo, then President of the Philippine Republic and commanding general of 
its army. I had occasion, therefore, to know Gen. Aguinaldo woll and intimately, 
and from personal observation I can assert without fear of successful contradic- 
tion that lie is a man of high character and patriotism. 

Aguinaldo at one time wielded great power in the Philippines. During the 
revolution he was the supreme military chief, with powers of a dictator, just as 
the President of the United States would be here in case of war. He had the power 
to do with the treasury of the then independent Philippine government as ho pleased 
Vihen he was captured by Gen. Funston, after having exercised this undisputed 
authority for more than two years, Aguinaldo was a/poor as he was when the war 
started. [Applause on the Democratic side.] 

Mr. Chairman, 1 do not wish to make invidious comparisons, but I want to 
risk you how many revolutionary chiefs in other parts of the world who have been 
in the position of Gen. Aguinaldo have done what Aguinaldo did? How many have been 
uilling to go back to their homes as poor as ever after having had in their pos- 
session so much money that they could have appropriated without question? Agui- 
aaldo is not a rich man today. He is a modest farmer. He has not accepted any 
position from the American government, although it is authoritatively stated that 
he was offered a good one. He is not even in politics now. 

Why? He wanted to show the world that he fought for his country, not because 
of any desire for personal i^rofit or power, but out of patriotism, and that when 
ho could not fight any longer he could go back to his home and lead a peaceful and 
nodest life, the life of a good citizen, working on his farm, as he is doing now. 
Thus Aguinaldo demonstrated that the Filipinos who had known how to fight know 
likewise how to work/if $M8e. I need say no more. [Applause on the Democratic 
side.] 1 

qUigON PAYS TRIBUTE TO A UTHOR OFJmSSj^ 

Though aged and almost an invalid, I have seen him (William Atkinson Jones) 
work without repose in order that the Filipino people might obtain these new con- 
cossions (contained in the Jones Act - ABS). Without any hope of recompense except 
the satisfaction of duty well done, he has jeopardized his life, neglecting his 
broken health, in order that the American people might do us justice. Praise to 
Sr. Jones! 



i/ Speech in the U.S. House of Representatives, October 2, 1914. 
Rivera Collection, Vol. 1 , pp. 257-258. 



11-85 

- 8& - 

2 

Vtever we have done and may do for him will be but a scant reward. 

p^ilNSE HSIiP OF HARRISON TO PHILIPPINE IHDISPBiaaNCE CAUSE 

There is another person who has perhaps not been given all the credit due 
for the aid which he has given to those who labored in Washington to {jet U3 
cur new Organic Law (the Jones Act). That person is the Governor-General (Francis 
Burton Harrison - ABS). Permit me, Mr. Governor, to tell you. in the presence of 
this distinguished gathering that I believe that without you we would not have had 
a Jonas Act. The confidence which, since the first day of your arrival on these 
shores, you have reposed in the intelligence and patriotism of the Filipino peopl">- 
the Lianner in which you have administered the affairs of this country, the recom- 
mendations w hich you have made to the President (of the U.S.) and to our friends 
vi Congress, have contributed more than anything to bring about that situation 
whereby the Filipino people are now in the enjoyment of the ample rights granted 
by the Jones Act. In the name of the people and on my own behalf, I thank you 
lost warmly. Your memory will be forever inscribed, not only in the annals of my 
country, but also in the hearts of every Filipino citizen. 

IiLQ FORESEES ROXAS 1 BRILLIi^IT_PUB LIC^C A| EgR 

I have foreseen and foretold that he (Speaker Manuel Roxas) would reach the 
heights of glory by dint of his personal merits. So it is with a great satisfac- 
tion that I see him now endeared in the hearts of our people and receiving their 

4 

nonage of love and admiration. 

ffiiZUN ACKNOWLEDGED lSm^^MJ^J£j_^^^SSam_ 

The Red Cross in the I-hilippino Islands is an organization that our people 
h,:vo cone to know and respect through the direct beneficial services it has 
rendered them. 

The Red Cross has never failed to respond promptly and efficiently. Although 
not a government institution and operating without any direct funds from the govern- 
ment, the Red Cross has cooperated with the government in public health, social 
cM other ways. To carry out the work i^is doing the Red Cross depends entirely 
upon the generous spirit of our people. 
r^SIDEIIT COMMENDS 3IILIMAN . U^ _0H 34TH AD VERSARY 

Thirty four years dedicated to training the youth intellectually and moral- 
ly, constitute a valuable gervice to the nation and a record of which any insti- 
tution can well be proud. 

irSesnrr^blic banquet in Quezon's honor held at the Hoto 1 Je Frwwo , 

Sta. Cruz, upon his triumphal return from the United States, September 2,,, 1916. 
Rivera Collection, Vol. 1 , p. 427. 

V ibid., pp. 427-428. 

V Press statement, 1929, n.d.m. Qi\ KR#31, ■ TEL.- 

5/ Message for the Red Cross in the Philippines, July 3, 1935. ^ MR#33, TNL. 
6/ Message on the 34th anniversary of the Silliman University, 1935. n.d.m. Ibid^ 



11-86 

- m - 

Thoy (Calvo and Arnaiz) have won for themselves groat credits as men of 
courage and ability, have rendered to aviation in the Philippines a signal service 
by giving it new impetus and encouragement, and have made the world aware of our 
participation in the conquest of the air. It is then natural that the whole coun- 
try should ho fired with enthusiasm for thei/succcssful flight. 

It is my belief that, while those two aviators have indeed won honor .and 
•dory for their people, thoy have not performed a task primarily devoted to pub- 
lic service within the purview of the Constitution in order to justify the expen- 
diture of public funds for their just emolument. ^ 

FMHMOI^Zgfla^^Jg^CIS^mTpH HARRISOI_T_ 

Former Governor-General Francis Burton Harrison has expressed to me his de- 
sire to become a Filipino citizen. It appears, however, that under the present Na- 
turalization Law he lacks the required residence to acquire Filipino citizenship. 

It is not necessary for me to state that no American has contributed more 
to the cause of Philippine self-government and independence than the Honorable 
Francis Burton Harrison and that he deserves the eternal gratitude of our people. 
I feel it would be a very gracious act on the part of the national Assembly if it 
should confer Filipino citizenship upon former Governor-General Harrison by a spe- 
cial act, and I hereby beg to recommend that you present this matter to the Assembly. 

^^§Qj^ = |L|ggii£i^l^^ = ^0^ = S|LB^gID PUBL IC SE RVICE 

As I examine your record of service I find that your first appointment as a 
,-aere clerk in the Cebu Customs Service dates as of April 4, 1899, a very long time 
ago; that you have steadily risen through the various intervening- grades in the 
customs service until, early in 1918, you were promoted to the very difficult and 
important post of Insular Collector of Customs, the trying duties of which you have 
loyally, efficiently, and graciously discharged to the benefit of the public. 

I am to give public recognition to your splendid performance, and I am sorry, 
indeed, that in fairness to you I feel I must not keep you any longer in the service. 

jlfjZO^PAYS TRIBUTE TO SERGIO OSHBHA 

It is not talent alone that can make man superior to their fellowmen, it 
is wisdom. 

There was none in that distinguished body (Philippine Assembly) of the best 

l/ Message to the First National Assembly on vetoing Bill So. 492, "Extending 
Financial Aid to Arnaiz and Calvo, Manila-Madrid Fliers," July 21, 1936. 
Ssmon. Messages, Vol. 2, Part 1, JBVFF, pp. 566-367. 

2/ Letter to Speaker Gil Montilla of the National Assembly, re "Conferring of 
Filipino Citizenship Upon Ex-Governor-General Francis Burton Harrison," 
October 6, 1936. Ibid., p. 372. 

9/ Letter to Vicente Aldanese on his resignation as Insular Collector of Customs, 
January 29, 1937. Quezon Messages. Vol. 3, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 276. 



11-87 

-m - 

Bl0 n that the country had at the time who could approach him (Sergio OsmeSa) as far 
as wisdom and vision was concerned. ^° 

; ,IGH TRIBUTE_TO_AU_^aRICAN_FRIEN I) - GEiJ. HAR 30RD 

In my eyes, he stood as a living example of honesty, integrity, a public 
fficial who exhibited exceptional love of duty. 

When we look around and point out to the men who, in behalf of America, ha- 
mmered that service to the Filipino people, gentlemen, we cannot overlook the 
fact that one of those men is General James Ilarbord of the Philippine Constabulary 
Ho may not realize, like the good soldier that lie is, how much he has done for the 
Filipinos... He does his duty without any ulterior motives, without evaluating vha- 
he is doing, but merely doing what a soldier should do as his duty. 11 

gg0ggYg^-g-gg g§g-2g -^I^ggj,_HQ^OR IS COMBINED 

The Filipino people have never had a better and truer friend than President 

S'ranklin D. Roosevelt. Every act taken by him, having to do with the relations 

between his country and my country, has been actuated by a desire to deal fairly 

1 ? 

-ad honorably with us in the Philippines. 

jLlg2L§Mg-Mgg ICA ^ = ^^"TBAC£gRS_ II? PRINCIPLES OF LIBERTY' 1 

You (referring to the first American public school teachers in the Philip- 
pines - ABS) belong to history as furnishing one of the greatest examples of suc- 
cessful and disinterested, patriotism. You belong to posterity as the instructors 
of future generations of 'Filipinos in the principles of liberty and right. You be- 
long to the present, to us, by your virtues and by your achievements. I think it 
is safe to assert on your behalf that you feel amply repaid for all that you suf- 
fered and for all that you did. 13 

Sergio Osmefla will go down in history as one of the greatest Filipinos, 
o had the ability to interpret to the American people the ideals and sentiments 
ol the Filipino people, and to the Filipino people the purposes and objectives of 
tlio United States in the Philippines. 14 

^ZQN_COpA^ JIIHS ELF_WITK SERGIO OSMEKa 

He ( Sergio Osmena) is by nature an evolutionist, and I have been all my life 

.10/ Speech extolling Vice-President Osmena, October 29, 1957. OP, MH#39, THL. 
11/ Speech on Quezon's friendship with General James Harbord, May 22, 1933. 

^SS3IL19SSRBSSjl V °l« 4, Part 1, JIJVFF, p. 61. 
1?/ Speech at the Occupation Day radio program, August 12, 1938. QP, MR#41, TI?L. 

12/ Speech on Filipino gratitude to the United States, at the Luneta on Occupation 
D ay, August 13, 1930. Quezon Messages. Vol. 4, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 127. 

14/ Speech on the 60th birthday of Vice-President Osmena, September 8, 1938. 
£bid., pp. 204-205. 



jj-88 

evolutionist. He always built upon the past, while I always wanted to jump. That 
•id that alone was the caxise of our misunderstandings. 

Inspired by a rebellious spirit, I always moved in a hurry, never satisfied; 
• always wanted to go on without looking back; while he, ever measuring the dis- 
tance, always looked ahead but without forgetting what was behind. ^ 

p'JiMA ONE OF NOBLEST CHARACTERS THAT EVER LIVED - QUEZON 

With the death of Rafael Palma, the Philippines has lost a patriot, a scho- 
lar and one of the noblest characters that ever lived. He has joined the immor- 
tals, leaving us the example of a life devoted to the service of his country .and 

fellowmon. Hay he rest in peace. 16 
TJSSON KONORSjnSSmOWER ¥ITH_DKTJNGUISHED_3ERV ICS STAR 

For services of extraordinary value to the Commonwealth of the Philippines m 
a position of major responsibility, the Distinguished Service Star of the Philippines 
is hereby awarded to Lieutenant-Colonel Dwight D. Eisenhower, United States Army. 

35. E N G L I S H LANGUAGE 

Tj-jSLISfl LANGUAGE AND PRES ERVATI ON OF JMffCRACY 

The English language is the best means of preserving democratic institution? 

in the Philippine Islands. So if you want to have a clear notion and conception of 

• 1 

liberty and freedom you have to got it through English literature. 
ffiET.TSff PnnVTfflilS GOOD MEANS FOR INSURING INDEPENDENCE 

It would appeal to the American nation to know that even after their flag 
has/pulled down,American institutions and ideals have become the heritage of the 
i'ilipino people. They will be assured of this when they know that the English 
language has been adopted by the people of the Philippine Islands as their 
official language. 

This is so important that when I was a Resident Commissioner in the United 
States I met people who discussed Philippine independence with me and generally 
at the end of the discussion they would ask, What would be your language? What 
would be taught in vour schools when we leave you? 

They, of course, know that English is now being taught in the schools. I 
invariably answered that it would be the English language. So I say the adoption 

IS/ Ibid. , PP. 207-208 

Ji/ Press statement on the death of Dr. Rafael PaLma, Hay 25, 1939. Rivera 

Collection, Vol. IV, p. 2077. 
U/ General Order No. 10, December 12, 1939. p^oj^sages, Vol. 5, Part 1, 

JBVFF, p. 1354. 

U Speech before the Inter-Alumni Union, Normal School auditorium, March 12, 1921. 
Rivera Collection, Vol. II, P« 550. 



II- 89 

- m - 

•f English as the official language of the Philippine Islands is a good means of 
securing Philippine independence! (Applause 

01Tp.i^^S = |MOgOUg_gg^RIggCB REGARDING ENGL ISH LANGUAGE 

I remember when I first left the Philippine Islands on my trip to Russia - 
tha t was in 1909, and at that time I could only speak the Spanish language, Prom 
the time I landed in Hongkong until I met the first Filipino in Paris, I could not ■ 
understand anybody whom I met. And that trip made me learn English. 

-* * * 

On one occasion I sat at a table and intended to order some eggs. I picked 
up the menu which was in English, and pointed at something in it. I thought it 
teas eggs, but they served me fish. (Laughter and applause.) So I was right there 
and then convinced that if I wanted to eat eggs and not fish I had to learn Eng- 
lish. And when I came home I set myself to learning this language. ^ 

36. FIL-AMERICAN RELATIONS 

^JGij ^c omjm E sm^ BQm^c^^M! and progressive 

At the present time the Filipinos, without distinction of creed or class, 
are doubtless ready to acknowledge that the work of America, notwithstanding 

1 

errors and mistakes, has heen on the whole an educational and progressive one. 
iHEBE_IS NO DIFFERENCE BETOEEN_SPMm_AND_AMERICAN RULE 

The great masses in the Philippines see very little difference between the 

rule of Spain and that of the United States; they say that both are foreign go.. . 

ments and as such equally undesirable. The sooner the Filipinos are allowed to 

form a government of their own, a government which can be called bone of their 

bone and flesh of their flesh in which they can take * ■grs.at -j. pride, the greater 

2(b) 

and faster will be their program in building a more perfect nationality. v ' 
QUEZON RESIG NS FROM PHILI PPINE SOCIETY IN NEW YORK 

I am satisfied beynnd any question that the Philippine Society has been or- 
ganized to gather the scattered forces that are now at work to preserve the pre- 
sent regime in the Philippine Islands and systematize and concentrate their eff"f+ 

Such being the case, my membership in your association is not .only useless 
h 'it harmful. It is harmful because it places me, and through me my people, whose 
ideas I am supposed to represent in my actions and words concerning their rela- 
tionship with the United States, in a false position. If, under the circumstances 

?Xa)7 IbidT 

X_7 Ibid., pp. 550-552. 

X — / Article, "The Critical Moment," El Ideal i^ feiUa, April 8, 1912. 
QP, MR#22, TNL. 

£lb)/ Ibid. 



T>90 



rationed, I should continue my association with the Society, its members might 
, led to believe that it is possible "to create a sympathc'::.o interest betweor. 
•;h'j American and the Filipino people" under a policy of colonialism. The sooner 
cur position on the subject is frankly and unmistakably announced the better. Phi 
".-.nthropic, religious or commercial aid will not reconcile the Filipinos to the 
•wlioy of colonialism, which the Society is undoubtedly advocating in a more or 
-as disguished, but none the less definite and energetic form. ' 



dife;wsjlaiuu:so^^ 



Because he is imbued with the spirit of free Americanism, he (Governor-Grf- 
uoral Francis Burton Ha:.-, is on - ABS) has the love of the Filipino people. If you 
-.«•; seeking to lead that people along the path of prosperity, progress and indi- 
vidual freedom to the goal of national liberty, you have entrusted that noble en- 
terprise to the right man. If it be your wish to subjugate the Filipinos, to e^:- 
them, and to give their resources into the hands of a few concerns, you havo 

r.Laced the governorship in the hands of the wrong man, and Mr. Harrison should bo 

4 

voc. ailed without delay. 

."■1WTCANS LITTLE AND ILL-INFORMED ABOUT PHILIPPINE C0I1DITI0NS 

- - ' '. ~ — ' — ' ' ~ : 

I have travelled to every part of the United States and I have been sadden'.* 
to learn how many misapprehensions exist here as to the real conditions in the 
"-.lippine Islands due, probably as much as anything else, to the exhibition of 
the native Igorot village at the St. Louis Exposition ten years ago. It is actual* ■ 
ly believed by me : iy, if not most, Americans that the Islands were inhabited only 
by naked satoages before the United States took possession. 

Great things have been done by the United States in the Philippine Islands, 
but no government could have converted a savage, naked people in ten years, into^ 
such citizens as you see represented here in the person, say, of the Philippine 
Resident Commissioner. 

F ILIPINOS _ MUS T ALWAYS MAINTAIN GOODWILL O F U.S. 

Nothing would more certainly result in the complete failure of our labors 
-~. pi offensive attitude on our part towards other peoples. We must endeavor 
specially to gain more and more the goodwill of the American people. This is r 
p-.ople that have given us repeated proofs that it is cordially interested in our 
•' •■-•'> , and it is simple justice that we should give it proofs of our gratitude, 
assure you that after a sojourn of seven years in the United States, I am firmly 

?! Letter to Richard E. Forrest, secretary, Philippine Society, 30 Church St., 
Mew York City, June 13, 1913. In: l^sJLlVipino People.. Vol. 1, No. 10, 
June 1913. Rivera Collection, Vol. 1, pp. 163-164. 

V Speech in the U.S. House of Representatives, June 29, 1914. Rivera Collection. 
Vol. I, p< 190. 

V Remarks at the Panama Exposition (date inadvertently omitted). In: TfegJ^i- 
B&WLEaSEla* Vol. HI, Ho. 8, December 1915. Rivera Collection, Vol. 1, p. >.o 



- IflfS - 



„ onV inced that we could not find a better friend than the American people. On ever." 
uastion concerning the Philippines that has conie up in Congress, the represents • 
, : :. ve s and senators, those who voted in accordance with our opinion as well as thou.-. 
, l;0 voted the other way, have voted in the belief that they were acting in our 
y.st interest. 

:.?■)_ onazoN COMMITS P.I. ON AMERICA'S sips IN torld vjar t 

If we believe that America is enslaving us, if we believe that America is 
M t sincere, if we believe that America has not fulfilled its pledges to +he 
. ilipino people, let us take advantage of this opportunity in which she is engaged 
in a war and declare war against herself. If we do not do this, we are cowards, -. 
for a coward is the man who speaks much of liberty but does not know how to die 
for it. 0 n the other hand, if we think that America is sincere, if . we think that 
v:e have been fairly treated by her, let us show her our gratitude by siding with 
her and upholding the cause that, she is upholding. 

Let us throw a retrospective glance over the past. This liberty, this prog- 
ress we are now enjoying, we owe to the American nation. From the remotest corner 
of the Islands come messages of peace and progress. America is entitled to our 
gratitude. And the time has come for us to show that we are grateful. ^ 

'■tuEZOfl ACKNOWLEDGES U.S. COOTRIBUTION TO P.I. DEVELOPMENT 

Q. What is your estimate of America's contribution to Philippine development 
A. It has been a great contribution. America has been remarkable not only 
for what she had done but also for what she has not done affecting Filipino deve- 
lopment . She had it in her power to practice in these Islands the creed of miln*+° T "* 
despot, but she did not do so. She cooperated with us in our efforts to make the 
Philippines a prosperous country. She promoted education, liberal and political. Sh". 
fostered applied science. Economic and financial aid accompanied the Americans into 
the Philippines. All America did and all we did, as we consistently have been led 
to suppose, were predicated upon the theory that one day the Philippines would bo 
free. We believe the day when they ought to be free has arrived. 
B ASIS OF FILIPINO COO PERATION WITH AMERICAN ENVOYS 

The people of the Philippine Islands are ready to cooperate with the r~pre~ 
ssntatives of the United States in this country aad with the policies of the Ameri- 
can government so long as those policies are in line with the promises made solemu- • 
to us and if those representatives are in earnest trying to carry out those 

it Address at a public banquet in Quezon's honor held at the Hotel de France, Sta. 
Cruz, upon his triumphal return from the United States, September 28, 1916. 
Rivera Collection, Vol. 1, p. 426. 

II Speech in the Senate, November 6, 1917. Ibid . . p. 443. Quoted in Isabelo P. 
Caballero and M. de Gracia Concepcion, Quezon: The St ory of a Nation and Its 
foremost §Lfcatg^man._ W"" 1 " 1 "' The International Publishers, 1935, pp. 179-180. 

■?/ Exclusive interview with Edward Price Boll for the Qhic££P_$a±]j. News, 1925, 
In: Ihe Philippine Republic, published monthly in- Washington, D.C., and 
edited by Clyde H. Tavenner. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, p. 768. 



- m - 



promises. wo will be ready to do anything and everything on our part to cooperate 
^th America on the basis that America is here, first, to see that a nation is 
,. |0rn m the East with its own government and flag, a government based upon the vor; 
foundation that the American government has been founded, namely, that all men £>.:: • 
;q ual, that they are endowed by the Creator with inalienable rights, and that the 
f re -ntitled to have such government as in their opinion shall best serve their w. 
interests. 

p::T^PFlMEg_W IbL_IIELP, BUT NO EX PLOITATION P LEASE 

We, the Filipino people, have the kind /^fee ling for President CoOlidge 
;iad the people of the United States. That wo are loyal and friendly is demonstra- 
ted by the manner in which our people have welcomed and received the Presidents ' 
representative , Col . Thompson. 

• We are just as anxious as the President himself to further the economic de- 
velopment of the Islands and to have a better administration of affairs. 

The Filipino people are willing to give the American people rubber and 
other commodities they need but it must be done without exploiting our people, 
ind within the limitations prescribed by the land laws of the Islands. ^° 

U.S. MUST HONOR LEADERS' PRONOUNCEMENTS 



Ever since the United States has taken possession of the Philippine archi- 
pelago the invariabl/pronouncements of those who could constitutionally speak for 
the people of the United States, their presidents and their Congress, have been in 
effect, that the United States did not come to own our country but in the capacity 
of a trustee to administer its affairs in the interest of the Filipino people vn- 
til such time as, through their practical training in the art and science of self- 
government, they may be able to administer their own affairs without outside inter 

.a 

ference and control as/free and independent people. These pronouncements we firmly 
believe made on behalf of a great nation jealous of its fair name cannot be with- 
drawn without disgracing the name of that nation. ^ * 

AMERICA'S RESPONSIBILITY IN PHILIPPINES IS CITED 

You have a very serious responsibility in the Philippines. Upon your own 
volition you have gone there, and being the power to decide what you would do with 
the Filipinos, you deliberately told them that you were in the Philippines not to 
remain .'forever, nor to exploit the riches of the country, nor to annex territory, 
but for the purpose of helping the people of the Philippines to learn the art^of 
self-government. And, when they had learnt that, to grant them independence. 

V Speech in the Senate, 1926, n.d.m. QP, MR#29» TNL. 

10/ Press statement, 1926, n.d.m. Ibid... 

11/ Speech in the Senate, 1926, n.d.m. Ibid . 

•12/ Speech requested by a prominent American, Mr. Brown, 1927, n.d.m. Ibid. 



11-93 



- m ~ 



; ;--QgaTAIiraY = p rj;JU)S PHI LIPPINE DEVEL0PMEI-1T - Q JJEZON 

Whatever you are going to do with the Philippines, you had better do it. 
for development in the Philippine Islands is retarded because of uncertainty. 
..jcsican doctrines of government, American practice in good living, will remain 
: : n the Philippine Islands forever. And, if we are able in the Philippines to 
-dopt your system of child welfare, you will have left something there that will 
— sain a monument to your nation. ^ 

.'"Ti-AMBR ICAN RELATIONS MUST BE_BASED ON G O ODWILL 

The relations between the United States and the Philippine Islands., what- 
ever they may be now or in the future, if in any shape or manner they may ever be 
profitable to both countries, they must be based upon goodwill*, and I am sorry to 
say that as long as the relations between the United States and the Philippine 
Islands are premised upon the assumption that the Philippine people cannot govern 
themselves, this will not evoke a sympathetic response on the part of our people. 1 

U NJUST IFIED INTERFERENCE IN PHILIPP INE AFFAIRS 

If you want to make a success of your administration of the Philippine Is- 
lands, then there must be cooperation between your representative in the Philip- 
pines and the Filipino people; and when we are willing to do what you ask us to 
do, you should let us do it. To proceed otherwise and have Congress act, when vre 

have the power to act and are willing to act, is an unnecessary and unjustified 

15 

interference in our affairs which cannot possibly be helpful to anybody. 
^iJ ii;ZOH_CON JUR ES P ICTURE OF AMERICA AS MOTHER OF DAUGHTER REPUBLIC • 

Just picture to yourself, if you will, a Philippines raising her head as 
mistress of her own destinies in the midst of the West Pacific, holding the torch 
of democracy and freedom and pointing the way to the teeming millions of Africa 
and Asia now suffering under alien rule; a Philippines, heir in the Orient to the 
teachings of Christianity, a fair daughter republic of the greatest Republic (U.S.) 
upon which the sun has ever shone, and tell me whether such a picture doe3 not 
«iake you thrill with the pride of motherhood! 16 
™j!lLP F PHILIPPINE I NVOL VEIIENT IN WAR AS U.S. COLONY 

As long as the' Philippine Islands are a colony of one of the probable con- 
tenders we cannot escape the disastrous results of this oncoming conflict. Pru- 
dence, therefore, counsels us that we should have a separate international 

12/ Ibid" 

14/ Speech at/Hippodrome Theatre, Baltimore, USA, December 4, 1927. JMd. 

15/ Speech before the U.S. Senate Committee on Territories and Insular Possessions, 
December 16, 1927 . Ibid . 

IS/ Address before the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Phila- 
delphia, November 25, 1927. In: The Philippine Repu blic Vol. V, No. 2, 
March 15, 1928. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, p. 804. 



11-94 



narsonality. This will undoubtedly have its own responsibilities arid risks, but 
a state of freedom is the lesser evil. W e shall be leas exposed to become involved 
in such a conflict as an independent nation, than as a colony of the United States. 

3CIID OF FIL-yJ^ERIC^f FRIiSHDSKIP HOltill aiflTOII<G 

While seeking to erect our own government, we hope that when the present 

■oolitioal bond between the United States and the Philippines shall have been 

severed, another more lasting, nore enduring, will replace it, the only bond that 

oan really bind together two different peoples permanently - the bond of mutual 

1 8 

interest, equality of rights, and friendship. 
HOOSEVEL T C0NSID ERING_tf0R'THY_30LUTI0U TO P.I. PROBLEM 

President Franklin D. Roosevelt has given and was giving very careful con- 
sideration to every aspect of the Philippine question, with the purpose of giving 
it a solution that will be creditable to the United States and in the interest of 
both people. 

I arii hopeful, therefore, that during his administration the question of 
Philippine independence will be settled definitely and in a manner satisfactory 

•i 

to both the people of the United States and the people of the Philippine Islands. 
gll^HgRICAN BONDS OF FRIENDSH IP A HD GOODWI LL 

I am sure that my people' are more than ever grateful to America, and as the 

political ties binding the two countries are cut, the bonds of everlasting friend- 

20 

ship and goodwill will bind the two peoples together for all the years to come. 
^RICANS_CAU_ACqyiR CH/JITER 

There in no question in my mind as to the equal rights that Americans and 

Filipinos have as to mines. If the Filipinos can acquire, Americans will have the 

same rights, because under the Constitution, American citizens for the next ten 
years 21 
/'..'ill have the same rights as the Filipino citizens. 

'n S_Og_FRI ||DSHIl' > GRATITUDE MORE LASTING 

The political tie which binds the. Philippine Islands to the United States 
in being substituted by a tie stronger and more permanent - the tie of friendship 
and everlasting gratitude. 22 



.12/ Memorial to the U.S. President, December 1933. QP» MR#34, TNL. 

Speech before the joint session of the Territorial Legislature of Hawaii, 

November 22, 1933. Ibid. 
12/ Press statement, February 16, 1934. QPr HB#36, TNL. 
22/ Press statement, March 22, 1934. Ibid. 

- 2 i/ Press eonforence at Malacanan, January 24, 1936. Q?t MH#38, TITL. 
%J Press statement, April 21, 1934. OP, HH#36, TNL. 



11-95 

.t wam flLARIFIBS PQVfiSRS OF U.S. PBli SID IJjg^HIGH OOKHISJiaiaR 

Lot it be clearly understood that no American official? from the President c 
United States down to the High Commissioner, has any authority, powers, prero- 
gatives or privileges in the government of the Commonwealth except those granted 
■ n the independence law, commonly known as the Tydings-McDuf f io Act. The President 
V.a no power under the said independence act, . much less the High Commissioner, 
■•: 0 veto any law passed by the National Assembly. The President lias the authority 
•jo suspend the talcing effect of or the operation of any law, contract or executive 
order of the government of the Commonwealth to fulfill its contracts, or to meet 
its bonded indebtedness and interest thereon or to provide for its sinking funds, 
cr which seems likely to impair the reserves for the protection of the currency 
cf the Philippines, or which in his judgment will violate the international ob- 
ligation of the United States. In the case of bond issues, the independence act 
provides that the public debt of the Philippines and its subordinate branches 
shall not exceed limits now or hereafter fixed by the Congress of the United 
States, and no loans shall be contracted in foreign countries without the appro- 
val of the President of the United States. " > 

Tj^PATSRNALISM INIMICAL TO OUR NATIONAL IffBJIiiSST^ 

When we accepted the independence plan prescribed in the Tydings-McDuff ie 

Law, we also accepted exclusive responsibility for all obligations revolving 

upon an independent nation. 

We felt that a continuation of paternalism, no matter how well intentioned, 

24 

would tend to weaken our national character. 

qoaZON ifltPHASIZES glL-AlhSRICAH TDiS OF FKIEH PSIIIP , GRATITUDE? 

The day when the American flag goes down to give place to the Filipino 
flag, American history in the Philippines will not have been terminated; it will 
only be the beginning of a history more Bublirae; it will be the beginning of a 
relationship between America and the Philippines strengthened by a tie more 
lasting than that which is merely political - the tie of friendship and gratitude. 

aQjlXPRBSSES FILIPINOS' GRATI TUDE T^AljjjRICA_ 

The establishment of an independent Philippine government insofar as the 
Filipinos ' desires, wishes and hopes go, means only our separation from America 

22/ Press~statement on the powers of the U.S. President, High Commissioner 

under Tydings-McDuff ie Law, August 3, 1936. CJP, MR#38, TEL. 
21/ Speech before the graduating class, Reserve Officers Service School, 

September 18, 1936. Ibid. 
25/ Speech, "Spanish-American War and National Defense," before the Mm*"* 

Order of the Carabao-, Williard Hotel, Washington, D.C., February 27, 1937. 

Rivera Collection, Vol. Ill, pp. 1470-1476. 



11-96 



in the field of politics. 

Gratitude is the memory of the heart. 2 ^ 

VJith all due respect to you (Americans), let me tell you, I am afraid that 
y0 ur conception of liberty is not altogether right. A proper conception of liber- 
ty is the performance of duty to a nation. It is because you are giving too much 
importance to the freedom of the individual to do as he pleases, as against the 
interest of the State, that you are suffering from the evils that you are suffer- 
ing today in this country. 



J3S 

%BZQ H EXPRESS/GRATITUDE 03)' FIL IPB 



TO 3 TO U.S. 



I bring with me not only the greetings of the Filipino people - to the 
People of America, but also a message of gratitude for the great work accom- 
plished in the Philippines by the altruism of the American nation culminating in 
the establishment of the Commonwealth of the Philippines. 28 

The present relationship between the United States and tlie Commonwealth 
government, as established by the Tyding-McDuff ie Act, offers possibilities of 

evils so inherent that they can be corrected only witli the advent of complete and 

29 

final independence. ■ 

QUiUZON FOR MORE REALISTIC P.I. - U.S. TRADE RELATIONS 



I hope the question of the trade relations between the United States and 
the Philippines will be considered both by Americans and Filipinos from a more 
realistic point of view, and not by making us feel more obligated than we already 
do because of our desire to acknowledge every good work done by tlie United States 
in the Philippines. 

hy acquaintance with current world events is doubtless more intimate 
oecause I have travelled quite a lot abroad and have become acquainted with res- 
ponsible officials in different countries. Consequently, the position that I 
aold has placed me in a vantage point to see the international forces, botli 
Political and economic, at play. 

jjMT_0F MUTU ALITY; EQUALITY I N FIL-AMKRI CAN TIES 

I do not think it is at all impossible for the United States to accept 



Speech in the U.S. H ouse 0 f Representatives, March 10, 1937. Q?> MR#39, TNL. 

U/ Speech before the Foreign Policy Association, Hotel Astor, New York, 
April 5, 1937. Quezon Me ssages, Vol. 3, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 81. 

28/ Radiogram on his arrival in the United States, 1937, n.d.m. QP, MR#40, TNL. 

22/ Report to the Congress of the United States, 1937, n.d.m. Ibid. 

22/ Speech on Philippine-American trade relations, October 11, 1937. 
MR#39, TNL. 



11-97 

cur products under a limited free trade or under a preferential arrangement . 

But if we must Bell to the United States we must/fif °f rem hern..... If we seek her 
.,, r] , c t we must also open to nor our market. If we receive a preferential, we 
,. uff t likewise offer the same treatment. If we obtain protection, wo must also 
give her protection. A business arrangement must be mutually beneficial or it is 
,, 0 t a business arrangement at all. Mo cannot seek a^'/sided arrangement and 
expect to get it. 

K 1 S ^l^JlhlUM^P J^ 33 B3ST 017 SITUATION 

To those of my countrymen who believe that the apparently untimely restric- 
tions and impositions upon our trade now and during the Commonwealth period are 
entirely due to American self-interest, I say that they are utterly unacquainted 
with the real spirit of American leadership in dealing with the Philippine ques- 
tion. I know from my contact with that leadership that America is unwilling to see 
the structure that she has built in this far-off land crumble to pieces and for 
this reason, aside from the motive of pure self-interest, she adopted those 
restrictions and the ten-year period of adjustment as means of preparation for 
our complete freedom. Whether or not we will succeed in making a proper use of 
this economic period of preparation for the independent Philippines that is to be, 
depends entirely upon the course that we are to follow and the decision that we 
are to make at the outset. 

?ILI PIN OS_MUST UlgggSTAjgD THAT U.S. IS JUST OUT OF WORS T DEPRESSION 

But now we are confronted with the facts of the present and of the future 
and not with what might have been in the past. The facts of the present are that- 
the rights and privileges granted us by free trade are now being curtailed even 
oefore American sovereignty begins to be withdrawn and during the process of its 
withdrawal in the Commonwealth period. To most people in the Philippines there is 
gross inconsistency in America's first enunciation of fair-dealing and her subse- 
quent act of curtailment. But this later conduct of America finds justification in 
the fact, which all fair-minded men must admit, that in the struggle for self- 
preservation resulting from the worst economic depression the world has ever seen, 

33 

s&lf-interest is the firr;t consideration. 

^^i-g^lAjjAVE_SAI-IE HOPES, AbT I^TTO^ 1 _MQ|4|^0BJjgTjVgg__ . 

Our aims, our hopes, our appreciations are the came. In the great moral 
causes, the great causes of righteousness, of liberty, of peace, tho groat causes 
which mean the perpetuation of life, the United States and the Philippines are in 
complete unison, not dominating nor conspiring against each other, but going on 
in accord, because in the essential things, we are in absolute and hearty agreement. 

&/ Untitled speech, 1938, n.d.m. Htt#41, TNL. 

22/ Ibid. 

2/ Ibid. 

14/ Address on Occupation Bav, August 13, 1938. Ibid,* 



11-93 



--I'ZON LAUDS U.S. FOR PASSAGE OF PHILIPPINE ECONO MIC ACT 

The Philippine Economic Act is a concrete manifestation of the abiding in- 
terest of the United States in our welfare and of the desire of the American 
p-opL'j to be fair and just to our people and to do everything reasonably necessary 
to prepare us adequately for independent nationhood. ^ 



5YALTY TO AMERICA BTJlLT Off HER SENSE OF F AIRNESS. JUSTICE 



In this critical moraont, I wish again to pledge to America, on behalf of 
oar people, our unstinted loyalty and our fullest cooperation in the promotion of 
tke ideals of justice and liberty and in the safeguarding of the legitimate rights 
.aid interests of both the United States and the Philippines. 

No want the government and thu people of the United States to feel that wo 
-2Q bound to them not merely by the presence of the- American flag in our country 
but by the nobler and stronger ties of gratitude and affection - bonds of senti- 
ent that arc born of the human heart and which transcend the obligations of alle- 
giance implied in the presence of that flag. Our loyalty to the United States is 
rooted in something more permanent, something more lasting, than legal or politi- 
cal relationship. Our loyalty is built on faith - faith in the sense of fairnoas 
and justice of the American people. Faith in the great principles and ideals for 
much the Stars and Stripes proudly waves over land and sea, over a free and 
happy pooplo. 

i J.mi ^IC^LIgf^^^^ pAL^GRAilDaOR 01' AMERICA 

Our loyalty to the great American nation is but the fruit of her altruistic 
policy in dealing with our people - a policy which has been characterized by jus- 
tice and goodwill and by both moral and material assistance. That loyalty, I am 
auro, will outlive the sovereignty of the United States over our country, and will 

fittest for all time the moral grandeur of America and the virtuality- of her own 

37 

institutions. 

M PROMISED TO RELIED! T-Il ACT IMPERFECTIONS - QUEZON 



One of the objectionable features of the hare-hawes-Cutting Act which was 

not corrected by the Tydirtgs-McDu£f-ie. Law was that regarding the trade relations 

between the United States and the Philippines five years after the establishment 
of the Commonwealth. But the Philippine Legislature accepted the Tydings-IIcDuf f io 
Law as a substitute for the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act not only because the most 
objectionable provisions of the latter Act had been eliminated but also because 
hie F resident of the United States assured me, and in a message to the Congress 
reiterated this assurance, that if there were found to be inequality and imper- 
fections in the Tydings-HcDuf f ie Law they would later be remedied. 



55/ Radio address on the significance of the Philippine Economic Act, 1939, 

n.d.m. OP, IIR#43 , TEL. 
%/ Message to the Second National Assembly, September 5, 1939- Quezon Messages , 

v ol. 5, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 343. 
2/ Message to the Second National Assembly, September 5, 1939. OP, MR#43, TNL. 
2§/ Radio speech, October 11, 1939. I bicU 



11-99 



- lit - 



vULffPIHE COOPERATION IN U .S. D EFENSE P ROGR AM is PLEDGED 



The government of the United States has embarked upon a program of - ; :hc 
national defense which, we earnestly hope, includes the Philippines; for, under 
the terms of the Tydings-McDuff ie Act, the defense of our country remains prima- 
rily the responsibility of the United States. 

This is as it should he, because so long as we are under the American flag 
it rests exclusively with the United States, and not with us, to determine 
whether we shall be at peace or at war. The Filipino people, desirous of coope- 
rating with the United States in the execution of this defense Program, are 
ready to bear their full share of that responsibility. To this end, I have as- 
sured the government of the United States, in behalf of the Commonwealth', that 

the entire Philippines is at the disposal of the United States in the present 
59 

emergency. 

L§ • BaTRY ™0 WAR MAKES PHILIPP E® IIWOLVaMElfl? IIE!VI r fABLE 

The trend of events seems to point strongly to the possibility of America's 

entry into the present world war. If such a situation arises, it goes without 

40 

saying that the Philippines would also bo involved directly in the war. 
mLIPPIIJES PLEDGES TO FIGHT SIDE BY SIDE. INJJAB_ 

Should the United States enter the war, the Philippines would follow nor 
find fight by her side, placing at her disposal all our manpower and material 
resources to help her in achieving victory, for the cause for which America 
would fight is also our own cause. 

The United States seeks to' defend the principles which we cherish and with- 
out which we could not live as a free nation. She is striving to preserve liberty 
end democracy and individual freedom, and these are things for which we, too, 
would fight and die. 

* * * 

Our stake in this war is more than the continued existence of democracy 

-aid individual freedom in the world. Cur stake is our future independence and 

41 

tli3 assurance that the independence may endure. 

jUEZON ACTIVATES RESERVE F ORCE IN RESPOISE TO KACARTHUR REQJJEST 

I take pleasure in reaf f inning, in this reply to the first official request 
for the services of the Reserve Force of the Philippine Army, that the policy 
and determination of the Commonwealth government- is to support the United States 



52/ Message to the Second National Assembly, January 31, 1941. Rivera Collection, 
Vol. V, p. 2274. 

40/ Message to the Second National Assembly on the extension of the Emergency 

Powers Act, May 15, 1941. Ibid . , p. 2297. 
41/ Speech on Loyalty Day, June 19, 1941. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, pp. 2302- 

2303. Also in U.S. Congressional Record, Vol. 87, Part 13, pp. A-3652-53. 



II— 1 oo 

luring this national emergency with all the resources at its command. 

I have this date ordered to active duty the elements of the Reserve Force 

, cs ted in your letter, and have instructed the Chief of Staff to issue the 

42 

0 rder3 necessary to make tnem available to you on September 1 , 1941. 

mm commits philippi cs to Africa's side in war 

The United States is struggling to prevent the domination of the world by 
dictators and we, too, would fight and die against such masters. The United States 
"ants to uphold the rule of right and justice in international relations, and to 
safeguard the independence of small nations, to free them from the fear of aggres- 
sion and subjugation by military powers - and we, too would fight and die to save 
our country from such threats and perils. And so, if the United States decides to 
enter this war, it will be our war as much as the war of the United States, and 
aor decisions will be our decision. In such/event, she will find all the people 

of this country to the last man on her side, fighting under her banner and praying 

43 

to Almighty God for the victory of her arms. 
j-RESIDiiHT PLEDG ES FILIPIWO GRAT ITUDE TO U NITED STATES 

We shall do our share - for our country and for the United States, for 
liberty and for justice, and for the rights of free men to think and speak freely, 
to worship God as they please, to work without restraint or compulsion in the 
pursuit of happiness, and to lead a way of life chosen by themselves. 

* * * 

For weal or for woe, in victory or in defeat, we cast our fate with America 

and the great principles she is striving to uphold. 

* * * 

We shall defend with our all this far-flung frontier of American liberty 

44 

2nd maintain untarnished the honor and glory of the United States. 

gILIPINOS CAST FATE WITH A^RlCA^F0R^W^_0RJf2g 

In this crucial moment, your sentiments are our sentiments, your ideals 
and aims are our own, the freedoms that you aro defending and for which you are 
rilling to shed your blood are the freedoms which we cherish and for which we 
aro willing to bleed and die. For weal or for woe, in victory "or in defeat, we ^ 
cast our fate with' America and the great principles she is striving to uphold. 

5^ _ Lette7t7Lt7Gen. Douglas MacArthur, commanding general, United States 
Army Forces in the Far East, August 2, 1941. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, 
p. 2306. 

12/ Radio message to the United States, August 19, 1941. QF> MR//45, ML. 
44/ Address on the occasion of the sixth anniversary of the Commonwealth, 

November 15, 1941. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, pp. O^y-O^. 
& Radio message to the U.S. on the 6th anniversary of the Commonwealth, 

November 16, 1941. OF, MR#45, TSL. 



U-101 



nxntWS. FILI?I|OS_gIgjgI : !ig _gIgg_j T 4J|Dg AGAINST JAPS 

Christmas to us this year is a rededication of loyalty to the ideals that 



d together the democratic nations the world over. Here in the Philippines, 

-H-v to those ideals is being demonstrated through the daily feats of heroism 
Joy"* ^ 

ox An 



laerican and Filipino troops fighting side by side on our battlefields against 
common enemy. My people in this hour of their greatest trial look with 
c/afidence towards America, secure in the belief that with the help of that great 
••orjuHic the ideals of democracy will never perish from our native land. 
FIGHT ifiTH AMERICA FOR AMERICA A Ifl) PHI LIPP INES - QUEZON 

At the present time we have but one task - fight with America for America 
o-d the Philippines. To this task we shall devote all our resources in men and 
•rtsrials. Ours is a great cause. We are fighting for human liberty and justice, 
for those principles of individual freedom which wo all cherish and without which 
lifo would not be worth living. Indeed, we are fighting for our own independence. 
Tt is to maintain this independence, these liberties and these freedoms, to banish 
foar and want among all peoples, and to establish a reign of justice for all the 
•,;orld, that we are sacrificing our lives and all that we possess. The war may be 
long-drawn and /.fought, but with the determination of freedom-loving peoples 
everywhere to stamp out the rule of violence and terrorism from the face of the 
opjth, I am absolutely convinced that final and complete victory will be ours. _ 

?-HLI?riK ES CAW SER VE AS EASE-WEST BRIDGE, 3AYS_ qUgS0N_ ■ 

Filipino civilization represents the merger of East and West. In the Phi- 
lippines, they have met on an equal footing, and the best of each has inter- 
mingled. We have been enriched by this fusion. 

Clearly, if we are to establish a world of peace after this war, human 
beings of all nations must learn to understand and respect one another. The Vest 
mist try to understand and respect the East, and the East must try to do the same 
for the West. 

Ue of the Philippines can help by serving as the meeting ground, as the . 
interpreter between the East and West. This will be our contribution to the free 
world of tomorrow. r 

3APAAH EPIC IS SYMBO L O F FIL- AHERI CAfl SOLIDARITY 

The epic of Bataan will go down in history as a symbol of American and 
Filipino solidarity. The Filipinos fought because they had faith - faith in 
46/"~Hessage~to~the~people of America, December 24, 1941. 
£j Message on Rizal Day, December 30, 1941. 

42/ Statement for the "Free World Theater of the Air" program, January 21, 1943. 



H-102 



,, er ica and faith in themselves. They fought because they love freedom and they 
• :new that freedom was worth dying for. That faith and that love kept them fighting 
in the face of overwhelming odds, and even after their physical endurance has 
V*en reduced to a minimum by hunger and sickness. ^ 

37. FILIi'INIS M 

n ' s time T0_mgmzE = PiLir l^£| = -^u|zow_ 

The time has come to Pilipinize the Filipinos, We have for many years been 
...gsindlating first with Spaniards and then with Americans. Let us assimilate our- 
r:elves with Filipinos, too. I don't know whether ours are Filipino or Spanish cus- 
toms; but we have customs which I have seen since my boyhood that are magnificent. 
It makes no difference to me whether they came from Spain or from ancient Malaya. 
For instance, our family life. That must be preserved;. 

IT 1 S IM?0aTAMT_TH AT F ILmN0S_SH0ULD JTEEL^ TH INK L IKEJ'ILIPINOSU 

It is important that we should feel and think like Filipinos - nothing more, 

nothing less. There are no separatists hero. If there are, let us throw them over- 

2 

board. They are better dead than alive. 

38. F I L I P I N 0 FLAG 
j'lLIPIiroS REJOICE OVER RiSAl^Si'JL'JiCE OF FILIPINO FLAG 



The reappearance of our flag will cause immense satisfaction in our heart3, 
ind it is but natural that the people should hold special celebrations of rejoicing, 
It is for this purpose that Governor-General Harrison will soon fix a date for our 
Hag Day to celebrate such an important event. ^ ^ 

[Note: The following is the message of Governor-General Harrison to the 
Philippine Legislature: 

"The time has now long passed for suspicion and distrust between the two 
peoples, and Act No. 1698 known as the Flag Law was passed during a period of suoh 
temporary feeling which has long since been allayed. I recommend to you, therefore, 
tiw repeal of the Flag Law, so that it may no longer be a crime for a Filipino to 
exhibit in public that flag under which his people had set up a generation ago 
their own form of government . ] 

DESCRIPTION AMD SPECIFICATIO NS OF FILPIh T 0_FLAg_ 

"Whereas, section one, Article XIII of the Constitution prescribes what the 
Philippine National Flag should be without giving description and specifications; 

"Whereas, Act No. 2928 described the construction of the Filipino ilag 
without the necessarv specifications of the different elements of the flag; 



a_7 Statement on the first anniversary of the fall of Bataan, April 9, 1943. Ibid- 
iLa)/ Address at the San Juan de Letran College, November 7, 1937. C&ezon 

Messages. Vol. 3, Fart 1, JBVFF, pp. 169-170. 
U Speech at the banquet for Secretaries Blpidio quirino and Jose Yulo, Hala- 

canan, September 27, 1938. Ibid. . Vol. 4, *art 1, J3VFF, p. 221. 
llii/ Press statement on the reappearance of the Filipino flag, October 6, 1919. 

Rivera Collection, Vol. I, p. 526. 



11-103 



- m - 



"Whereas, compliance with this Act has not been uniformly carried out and 

jxas caused the making of Filipino flags in disproportionate sizes with incorrect 
Proportions of the different allegorical symbols of the flag; and 

"Whereas, to avoid irregularities and discrepancies, it is necessary to 
follow the Constitutional provisions and Act No. 2928 with uniformity; 

"Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do here- 
by promulgate and order that the following specifications for the Philippine Na- 
tional Flag be strictly observed by all civil and military branches of the govern- 
ment : 

"1 . The maximum length of the flag is twice its width; the minimum length 
is twice the altitude of the equilateral triangle; 

"2. Any side of the equilateral triangle is as long as the width of the flag; 

"3. (See accompanying illustration.) Solid golden sunburst without any 
narkings - Sun with eight rays, equally spread; Arc with Sun ray = Free arc; two 
opposite rays in the horizontal axis and two ^/vertical axis; sun's diameter 
D = W = each rays has one major beam, twice as broad as the minor beam on either 
side"lf length of major beam, R = 5_ D: length of minor .beam r = 4 R. 

"4. Three five-pointed go?den stars of equal size, each s^ar with one point 
directed to the vertex of the angle enclosing it; diameter of circumscribed circle 

of each star = £ D diameter of inscribed circle of each star = 2 D; distance from 

9 9 

each corner = D . 

2 

"Canvas- trimmed edge to the left of the triangle is approximately D wide-r 

5 

not counted in measuring length of flag. 

"Flags made of silk will be trimmed on three edges with a knotted fringe 

of yello w silk D wide. 

5 

jUiiZON SEES SPANISH FLAG REPLACED BY ST ARS A ND STRIPES 



As I saw in that late afternoon of August 13, 1898, the sun set in the 
clouds that crown^iariveles with purple and gold, in the gathering darkness of the 
Pacific, the royal flag of Spain came down and for the first time in my life I 
saw the Stars and Stripes run to the fore. 

Little did I realize then that I was witnessing what in ultimate result 
iiay prove to bo the greatest event of modern civilization in the Orient. Little 
did I know in my Immaturity that I was beholding the birth of a new ideology in 
Lsia. - ideology based upon what was then a strange, new conception in this part of 
the world - a conception that government is "of the people, by the people, and 
for the people" - a conception based upon the magic words - liberty and freedom. 
'Jo me, as I watched in the sunset glow the Spanish colors being lowered, it 
seemed the setting sun was symbolical of the falling flag - the waning ;of a 
Sroat empire. Little did I drecua that the first pangs of Philippine nationhood 
; 'ere in their beginnings, that forty years later I would be speaking as I am 

2/ S xe cutive~Order _ No. 23, "Description .and Specifications of the Filipino Flag," 
March 25, 1936. Quezon Messages. Vol.: 2, Part 1, JBVFF, pp. 635-637. 



11-104 



today* ^ 1 could see tiien was the s^ol "that I once loved passing away. I paid 
it then the mead of affection I felt for Spain as I voice now the measure of my 
ting gratitude to her as mother of our Christianity and of that indefinable but 

Is. _ 

.lelio'litful tiling the world calls Spanish culture. 
^SIDEIIT TALKS ON NATIONAL J?LAGjlHD MYSTERY OF SYMBOLS 

Strange the hold that a national flag has upon its people. The mystery of 
spools lies deep in human nature. It is probable that almost as soon as man began 
to gather together for common purposes, some kind of conspicuous object .was used 
.'is an emblem or symbol of the common interests. They do not issue from prearranged 
culture of sentiment but by a process of instinctive fervor spring from honest 
,and simple-hearted simplicity, prompting mankind to cherish and to stand by kith 
-nd kin, and engendering those sentiments of devotion to home and fireside upon 
which the perpetuity of nations depends. 

Symbols in all ages have played a large part in human affairs by stimulating 
xi'xt actions of men through their sentiments and imaginations . All written forms 
containing injunctions and rules of action and duty are precise and appeal strong- 
ly to the understanding, but are destitute of the warmth and color that awaken 
the immeasurable emotions of the heart. 

The signs and emblems of great movements have always laid hold on their 

followers with more vigor and tenacity than the history and written rescripts of 

the movements themselves. Attachment to the flag has been quite as potent as lo- 

4 

./alty to the law as a factor of national stability. 
■pZu;I ASKS PEOPLE TO REil-EW PLBIXJ3 TO FILIPINO FLAG- 



In the midst of your sufferings - and I share them to the full - let us turn 
our thoughts today to our flag of Sun and Three Stars, the flag that our heroes 
followed in countless battles for freedom. 

Let us renew our pledge that our heroes for it will not be dimmed, nor our 

f'dth in it fettered, nor our love for it weakened by the invader, but that each 

returning sun will make us more determined in our resolve that, as in honor wo 

merited it from our fathers, in honor we must bequeath it to our sons. That 

5 

aonor is the badge that only free men can wear. 

39. F I L I P .110 H 0 S P I T A L I T Y 

mmNojiospiT;jiiTY described atj^otary^omfJxWce^ 

In the old days, when a foreigner travelled in the provinces, he would 
ordinarily go to any house as there were no .hotels around. The owner of the house 

y Speech on the 40th anniversary of Occupation Day, August 13, 1938. Rivera 
Collection, Vol. IV, pp. 1838-1839. 

4/ Ittd*. Also in Quezon Messages. Vol. 4, Part 1, JBVFF , pp. 128-129. 

5/ Radio speech beamed to the Philippines from Washington,]). C., June 14, 1944. 
This was Quezon's last public utterance before hia death at ^ranac Lake, 
3ew York, 48 days later on Auguat 1, 1944. Ibjik, Vol. V, p. ^0% 



11-105 



- iNt - 



vnV jA open his door wide to welcome him; but more than merely receiving the visiter, 
ho would give him the best he had in the house. If ho had just one bed it would 
he given to the guest. If the family had .just one table, that also would bo given 
to him. ' 1,he owner wouxd not sit with the visitor to eat, but would prefer to serve 
him. 

This hospitality means that wc give to our fellow men all we have, regard- 
less of nationality. An ideal could not be expressed more emphatically than by 
tais general custom in the Philippines. 1 ^ a ^ 

sfflTOTCIA TION OP VIAR POLICY Hin'RHSSIVH OF F ILIPINO HOSPITALITY 



When our delegates to the Constitutional Convention drafted the Philippine 

Constitution, they inserted a clause that the Philippines renounces war (as an 

instrument of national policy - ^PBS). It is not merely a gesture of a small 

people trying to win the goodwill of other peoples. This clause is expressive and 

is in perfect harmony with our hospitality, which is proverbial. It is indicative 

of our frinndship to everybody. 

■In entering upon this new life our people have but one ambition, that ia, • 

the exorcise of their self-expression that they may contribute their part in the 

2 . 

furtherance of peace and goodwill. 

40. FILIPINO PEOPLE 
nLIPIN0_S0CI3TY I3_PAKILY- 3Afc'l!!D, SAYS qU3 Z0I-T . . 

Those who have come to the Philippine Islands and have lived in Filipino 
hones will admit that the Filipino loves his home, loves his family, and that 
family ties are strong. Our society is not yet based upon the individual. It is 
lp.sed upon the family. 

v» T oll, that mokes up our communities where the interests are shared by many 
people, and each family is interested in seeing to it that the members live a life 
that will not dishonor the name of the family. ^ ^ 

I have an abiding faith in our people. I know that they have all the 
faculties needed to become a powerful and enlightened nation. The Filipino is not 
inferior to any man of any race. His physical, intellectual, and moral qualities 
••ro as excellent as those of the proudest stock of mankind. But some of these 
qualities, I am constrained to admit, have become dormant in recent years. If we 
compare our individual and civic traits with those of our forefathers, wo will 

lid/ Welcome speech at the Fifth Pacific Regional Conference of the Rotary 
International, U.P. School of Hygiene and Public Health auditorxup, 
February IS, 1935. Rivera Collection, Vol. Ill, p. 1152. 

l-J Ibil. 

lW Speech at the Columbia University, USA, November 17, 1927. OP, MR#29, THL. 



11-106 



find, I fear ' that W0 ' the Fili P inos of today, have lost much of their moral 

strength and power for growth. 2 ^ 

One of our great weaknesses is our inability to appreciate the true value 

of things. Only a few of us have the ambition to accomplish important things, 
/those 

-ad I consider/ few persons as the most valuable elements not only in the govern- 
ment but also in our community. And I wish to tell them that, as far as I can, 
I an always ready to give them every opportunity and encouragement in the work 

to which they have devoted their life - a work which may appear sentimental now, 

3 

put which, in the end, may leave lasting benefits to humanity. 
I3T REASON, HOT FRIENDSHIP OR PITY, GU IMi OUR ACT IONS - QUEZON 

Filipinos hav,e one characteristic weakness. Ne are sometimes prone to be 

influenced more by a feeling of friendship and pity than by a sense of justice or 

duty. Wo must overcome our sentimentality and let reason guide our actions. This 

4 

is essential if we are to be a virile and strong people. 

41 . FILIPINO SOLDIER 
B!iiTTBR_SOLDIBR IN WAR, BETTER CITIZEN IN PEACE_ 

The whole philosophy of the national defense program of the Philippines 
is to make of a Filipino soldier, when he has got to fight, a better soldier, and 
in peace, a better citizen. 

■: # * * 

Military training brings young men from every place of the country together 
r,nd enables them to talk with one another and realize their oneness or common 
nationality. They come to know that they belong to one country which they must 
defend together or perish. 

SOLDI ER 'S UNIFORM SYMBOL OF I1TOEGRITY_ATO_PA^I0TI^_ 

. I want the uniform of the soldier in the Philippines to be a symbol of 

honesty, integrity, obedience to law, civic spirit, and patriotism, and that is 

why I am not going to tolerate any abuse or abuses on the part of any member 

?(h) 

of the Philippine Army. y J 

22/^dd^srbefore the faculties and student bodies of public and private 

schools, colleges and universities, August 19, 1930. V, MR,,41, ML. 
2/ Speech before Filipino scientists in Malacanan, March 2, 1939. W, HH#42, 

TNL. Also in ^ezpAi^sa 1 ges J . Vol. 5, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 
it/ Message to the Second National Assembly, January 24, 1939- IkM- 
J/ Speech before the U.S. Foreign Policy Association, Astor Hotel, New York 

City, April 3, 1937- MR#39, TNL. 

2(b)/ Speech at a press conference, Malacanan, November 3, 1937. 

OF, IIR#40, TNL. 



11-107 

in ~ 

^Z0N3MS_g^R^AgMY_OFFICER TO BEJogj^M^LTii ' 

I want to say to everyone here that I prefer to have no army at all in the 
Philippines unless every officer in the army believes and practices the ideal 
that he should be, above all, an honorable man. -I would rather have officers who 
icnow very little of military sciance and tactics provided they are honest and 
honorable, than officers who know much but are dishonest and dishonorable. I 
want every officer of the Philippine Army to consider his uniform as incontro- 
vertible evidence that he is a gentleman. I want everyone of you to love that 
uniform more than your wife, sister, or son, or even yourself; and that love 
should be manifested in your determination not to allow anybody to disgrace the 
uniform. 

^^SIDg HT'S HBSS;iG ^TOj ; iLI rI^_SOLDIIi!RS: LIVE yiTH_H0H0R 

Every soldier should bear these words in mind: they only are fit to live 
those who live with honor. A man who has no concept of honor, who does not know 
that honor is above life itself, should never wear the uniform of a soldier. So, 
to you, I have only that message to give: they only are fit to live those who 
are not afraid to die, and a man is only entitled to live so long as he lives 
with honor., ^ 

IILQ SALUT^_2 N^miPINq^I||4:fTRY ORGANIZED IN AMERICA 

With you, as you march, will go the hopes and prayers of the Filipino 
people. By your side will be the heroic spirit .of your brothers who laid down 
their lives in the battle of the Philippines and of our ancestors who also 
fought and died in defense of liberty. And over your heads will fly the proud ban- 
ners of your regiment. I know that you will carry those banners with the same 
high courage as the heroes of Bataan. 

I salute your regimental colors, symbol of Filipino bravery, of Filipino 
faith in God and freedom, of Filipino determination to fight on to victory. 

rR BSIDEHT _R|CALL3 MATCHLESS COURAGE OF FILIPINO S0LDIERS _IK BATMAN 

It is more than a year since the echoing thunder of the guns has rolled 

over the peninsula of Bataan - since the Americans' and Filipinos of MacArthur's 

^rny fired the last, desperate shots from their jungle foxholes. The memory of the 

/ Iis§ts6 , ^fee misery - and also of the insuperable courage of those men - is all 

6 

"at remains to us of that hopeless battle. 

1/ Speech at the oath-talcing of Brig. Gen. Vicente Lim as deputy chief of staff, 

Philippine Army, May 17, 1939. °J\ KR#42, TIJL . 
V Speech at the graduation exorcises of the Reserve Officers Service School, 

Camp Dau, Pampanga, Nay 29, 1939. Quezon H ^ssages^, Vol. 5, p art 1, JBVFF, p. 1 

5/ Message to the Second Filipino Infantry, Hay 29, 1943. OP, MR#45, TNL. 
§J Message to the Filipino regiments road for the President by Maj.. Gen. Basilio 
J. Valdes, August 2, 1943. MR#46, T1TL. 



II— 1 08 

- m - 

lam aware of your Bufferings, your privations, your sacrifices, and the 
dangers to which you are exposed. All these weigh heavily unon my mind, but I am 
consoled by the fact that I an. sharing with you your trials and sacrifices. Indeed, 
right now bombs are falling near me, just as they must fall around you. But we 
oannot allow them either to daunt our spirit or to weaken our determination to 
continue fighting to the bitter end. 

We must stand by the plighted word, by the loyalty that we have pledged to 
iuorioa and by our devotion to freedom, democracy and our liberty. Mo are fighting 
ttet the Filipino/may be the masters of their own destiny and that every Filipino" 
not only of this, generation but also of the generations to come, may be able to 
live in peace and tranquility in the full enjoyment of liberty and freedom. lour 
duty - our duty - is to fight and resist until the invader is driven from our 
land. You must not give the enemy a foot of ground when the battle is joined, You 
muat hold in place - and hold, and hold! ^ 

SOLDIER'S PROFESSION NOBLEST OF ILL CA LLINGS . SAYS QUEZON 



Of all professions, that of a soldier is the noblest. Its very essence is ' 
salf-sacrifice and devotion to duty. In every ether professions, of course, a man 
can be of service to his community and to his nation, but the soldier, from the 
aoncnt he embraces his profession, is dedicated exclusively to the defense and ' 
protection of his motherland and of his people. 8 

^SM, ^-JMim .T0_0BET > OFFICERS TC COIffiAN D - AM) GET AL L CREDIT ! 

here is what I am going to tell you - what a few of you know. You know the 
soldier, his duty is to obey commands - to do what he is told to do and taught to 
do. The credit is taken not by him, for what he has accomplished, but by those who 
aave given the instructions or orders; and consequently when you read articles or 
books written about Americans in the Philippines very little is said about what 
the soldier did. ^ 

42. F I L I P I N 0 W 0 II E N 
JgOLPigES WHOLESOME INFLUE NCE OF FILIPINO WOMEN 

Our women have exorcised in the home a very effective influence. The in- 
fluence of women, I thin];, and I suppose the ladies will agree with me, is always 
^/ wholesome. So that when you think of the Philippines, all you have to do is 

ll message to Filipino soldiers at the front, January 3, 1942. Same statement 
was presented to the Committee on Territories and Insular Affairs, U. S. 
ingress, September 28, 1943. 0?, ME/M5, TNL. 

^ io7c° h nS gues ' fc of the Canton Military Academy, Canton, China, December 13, 
lj36, SajggflaLtaSfifiSia*. Vol. 1 2, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 153. 

9/ c 

ii speech before the Military Order of the Caratao at the Willard Hotel,. Washington, 
°- C, February 27, 1937. Ibid, . Vol. 3, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 58. 



11-109 



to picture to yourself a country where m^r, 

. ^ J rG men and wom en are not different from the 

nen and women m other parts of the world 

° rlJ ' wh0 are neither better nor worse than 

ordinary human beings. 

The government that will bp na-i-n-kn • i. ■, . 

+ , .„ t bL established in the Philippines will be that 

government which will be satisfactory to P d„ M+nJ . . ,. 

] TJ t0 edu °atod, civilizod people, with loftv 

ideals of morality and religion. 

ESiL£^lJ£l^£££ = £I^IIlI3JI^0UT_G00D MOTHERS 

Our women must guide the Filinino vnn+h n-r-,- + /S 

xipino youth away from the many temptation/of 
modern life, influence them to dedicate +h**-» „+. 4.. 

ueaiCc.te bheir attention more seriously to their 

studies, for God icnows how much their country will have need of them Pnd their 
sound intelligence. The saying that the hand that rocks the cradle is the hand 

tufit rules the world, is an eternal truth 1 

irutn. ...ithout good mothers, we cannot have 

good and disciplined citizens. 
i^SIDENT_DEFIHgg JJ0KA£S_ DUTY II^HOKB 

It is peculiarly the woman's duty and prerogative to look after the spi- 
ritual and physical well-being of her household. A nice and well-governed home 

contributes largely to the ha Dnin nf - „i , . 

u 1- n«_ppin^ U o 01 .nose who live in it. And a well-balanced 

iiot is the first requisite to preserve health. 

In the present-day civilization housekeeping is at once a science and an 
art, and it is to be expected that the average woman should be equipped with 
nooeesery knowledge to perform this work properly and efficiently. 3 

We are about to face the most difficult task that, as a people, we have ever 
faced - that of establishing and maintaining a government of our own. It has been 
W lot to load the nation in this great undertaking and I appeal for inspiration 
and support to every Filipino woman, without which I cannot succeed. 4 

Smgg^IVE SLY3 U0M5H HAVa KlSSim SSHSE OF JUSTICB THAN M3H 

Women, if given a share in the administration of our government, can do more 
tov;n rd s the promotion of social justice in the Philippines than when such task is 
=!^--lL^!_!! andS ° f men alone ' for women have a keener sense of justice than men. 5 

^ Sf e T°!^ at the Hippodrome Theatre, Baltimore, Maryland, December 4, 1Q27. 
V, I>%-29, THL. 

?/ " 

?n,! 0h before tlie National Federation of 'Women's Clubs of the Philippines. 
1929, n.d.m. QP, IIR//31, Tl-.lL. 

° peech b °i'ore a group of Filipino women, October 17, 1933. QP, MR#34, TNL. 

lie ssage for the Women's Jour nal, October 4, 1935. QP, HR#38, TNL. 

Speech at the sixth biennial convention of the National Federation of 

■>oinen s Clubs of the Philippines, November 25, 1936. Quezon Messages. V ol. 2. 

iar t 1, JBVFF, p. 147, 



11-110 

~ Wn - 

-, T rTVTTflO WOMAN -.IOJJIJj TO BEST IN WORLD -^QUEZON - ■ 

The Filipino woman is the equal of the best in the world and there is no 
reason why shu should not enjoy all the rights and privileges of women in more 
progressive countries. 

\^^ f S JI^S^g^Ig_yO_^A^_CT^AC^Og^^IR CH ILDREN 

I am willing to give women more rights then those already granted. I will 
; j.v3 thorn more because it is their paramount duty today to educate, direct, and 
.;.;,pe the character of their children. That .is the greatest duty a woman has to 
■arforn as a citizen. ^ 

43. F I N A IT C B 
.^ gSIDEM VO WS TO MAINTAIN INTEGR ITY OF MONETARY SYSTEM 

I shall keep our present currency system in all its integrity and will 
allow no change that will affect its value. If new conditions should require such 
a change it will be done only after the most careful study and consultation with- 
coupe tent experts. ^ 

qOiBOH FAVORS REDUCED, MINIMUM : BONPBD INDEBTEDNESS 

As a national policy, our government should diminish, not increase, our 
bonded indebtedness. If at all it becomes necessary and urgent that the govern- 
runt should increase its public debt, it should be with the understanding that the 
bonds are to be floated locally and to be absorbed, if possible, by our own 
.r.tionals . 

uLO PLEDGES TO MAINTAIN GOVERNMENT ON BALANCED BUDGET 



A government draws the breath of life from its finances, and it must balance 

its income and expenditures as any other going business concern if it expects to 

survive. It is my duty, then, to see that the government of the Commonwealth live 

3 

within its means and that it stand foursquare on a well-balanced budget. 
1HACTICB STRIC TEST ECON O MY IN G0V5RSHBHT EX PENDITURES 

Confronted as we are with increasing demands on the public treasury, we 
cannot escape the duty of practising the strictest economy in government expendi- 
tures. N e must retrench if we hope to maintain a balanced budget. Wherever a 

§/ Speech on woman suffrage broadcast from Washington, D. C, April 4, 1937. 

IkiJ-, Vol. 3, Part 1 , JBVFF, p. 88. 
2/ Speech on the 21st anniversary of the first meeting on woman suffrage, 

October 28, 1939. Ibid.. Vol". 5, Part 1, JBVFF, pp. 198-199. 
1/ Speech on accenting his nomination as President of the Philippines, July 20, 

1935 \ Ibid. . Vol. 1, Sp. Rev. Ed., JBVFF, p. 237. 
IS Campaign speech, 1935, n.d.m. Oj.', KR//38, TNL. 

% Augural address, November 15, 1935. r MSS22 Mepaaees. Vol. 1, Sp. Rev. Ed., 

ms? f p . i5. • 



[1-111 



can be made, whether by elimination of unnecessary activities or personnel, 



or by a reduction of excessive salaries and other expenses, it should be accom- 
plished as soon as possible. 

, irF *n?J KSj?0RTS G-OVBmiHEHT lifCOHE ItTCRBASING FAS' 



i 



In connection with ay message to you (referring to the members of the First 
'lational Assembly - ABS) of Septenber 28, 1936, in which I raised the total esti- 
mated regular income for 1936 by S>5, 603, 100 on account of the increase actually 
realised in the revenue collections during the first eight months of the year, I 
hereby also raise, based on the same increase in the collection of the govern- 
i/unt revenues, the estimate of the total regular income of the national govern- 
ment accruing to the general fund by the amount of F?, 002, 600 or from £65,817,400, 
:.g originally estimated in the budget for 1937, to P70,820,000. 

i ^SIDaiW VjiiTO'i-iS LOiiHdJfO "AGRI " GfoDQAgaS FUR LACK OF FUNDS 

I realise the importance of giving financial aid to graduates of agricul- 
tural schools and colleges who have no capital of their own with which to under- 
take their chosen career, however, the financial condition of the government docs 
not permit at this tine the investment of one-half million pesos of its already 
ri;ch depleted accumulated surplus, in loans, the recovery of which will be very 
doubtful. ^ 

GOV j:&CTffii?T OF THK PK ILIIV DiES riUia7CIALLY WVW - A3 OF 1 937 

The national government is in a very sound financial condition, there 
being at the end of the first six months of this year a surplus cf nearly 
P45, 000,000. After making allowances for certain commitments and other obligations, 
it is believed that there will bo a substantial amount of unencumbered surplus. 

The considerable increase in collections is the natural consequence of 
the increase in the volume of foreign trade. I'ionetary circulation likewise 
increased as a result of our favorable trade balance. 

The improved local business conditions and the healthy outlook of our 
foreign trade, together with the adoption 'f sound banking policies, have con- 
tributed largely to the increase of our banking resources. 

CjPaZOH ffi-TJ O I K S ABSOLUTS H OUKSTY 13 &--aMDIIiG PBOPLS'S H03BY 

The most rudimentary principles of honesty, public and private, demand 
that we be true in everything wo do. If we receive a sum of money and we know 

1/ Message to the First national Assembly, December 12, 1935. Ibid-> P- 46. 
5/ Message to the First National Assembly, October 7, 1936. Ibid., Vol. 2, 

l J art 1 , JBVFF, p. 313. 
'2J Message to the First national Assembly on vetoing Bill No. 405 providing for 

loans to agricultural graduates, November 6, 1936. Ibid.,, p. 5fl. 
lJ hessaga to the First National Assembly, October 16, 1937. OF, TI1L. 



11-112 



. t the noney has been given to us by U.S. Congress with the prohibition that we 

s t not spend it directly or indirectly for a certain purpose, we can only fol- 
•' vr one of two courses: either we refuse to accept the noney so as not to comply 
.-••tl 1 that condition, or we take- the money and comply faithfully with the condition 

44, V li iil rl D 0 H 0 1? 3 j? il B C H • 
"HilC li-'AL DUTY OF 1 HESS IS TO BE TR U'THI ! ' UL LSD I I-ff/JCTIAL, SAYS .VUBZOH 

The main duty of the press as an expounder of facts and an index of public 
opinion is to be truthful and irapartial. ilo one has a right to demand that news- 
-ii'jsr should not have an established opinion on various questions which daily 
oa-ic under their consideration, nor should any one deny them their just prero- 
gative to weigh the facts as best they could, but the nub lie h a s the full right_ 
to demand that the press sho uld not deliberately distort the truth nor fabrica te 
y arns to back, un a certa in campaign or support a.,.proconcoived pla n. 

If to lie is bad jmough for a can, it is a so rious crime for the pre ss., 
iiiG reason is that when an organism, like the press, which exercises a dominating 
influence in the community, commits a falsehood, the; effect is such that it per- 
verts public conscience and obstructs the adequate solution of the problems which 

1 

:ffcct society at large. 

TiVifll-gj/iiNSITIVlS PUBLIC OFFI CIAL' S PLACE III WOODS OH HILLS 

A^hji^^g^g^ disdainful isola tion 

;,nd adidits no criticisj^or_listens_ to wise c ounsel, sh ould soek refuse In tho 
woods, or. in. the hills. Th^so__aro tho spots which bocon o hla. As for ne I do no t,, 
'.fish to be a wild^nan. 

■* * * 

1 welcome new sp aper c riti cism more than xiewspa&er_j)raisej, 

■;. * * * 

The place of a nan injpublic^f e_with_ th_in_ orJ^or^J^a l jB_^!M 

2 

hpuntaitis or t he t :ree-tops_._ 

qiBZOM MSURES EREEDOII OF SHS5CH. PRESS AilD BSLIljF. 

I wil_l_ hold, inviolate. aEd^TL^def on^ 
dual rights and libert ies. I shall safegu ard free speech, _ t ho freedon of the ,. 
Iross , ^ t ho ^l^L.CLS'l^Y ™" the.-law A Jioweve r .. p o ^ or H m flWrt . I 

..shall ..insure for every citij^o^ 

P~lpcecrbefor^loconut planters and municipal mayors, February 19, 1938. 

.Quezon Me ssages. Vol. 4, Part 1 , JBVFF, p. 29. 
17 Speech at a press banquet, Manila Hotel, January 12, 1917. 

Rivera Collection, Vol. I, p. 439. 
2/ Bid. 



11-113 



- MSB _ 



., L j^Jbg ri ght to w orsh ip Go d as his own conscience dictates. 

I have seen in a Sunday paper a news item to the effect that the Radio 
3oard kas decided at its recent session to order the broadcasting companies to 
submit their programs before they are held. If this is true, it is contrary to 
y v > views I expressed at a meeting of the cabinet not long ago. In that meeting 
I expressed my objection to the Radio Board censoring radio programs. All I wanted 
+Y' Radio Board to do was to require that speeches or news broadcast be in writing 
"iid copies thereof sent to the Radio Board . after, they have been delivered, in 
order that if and when a broadcast made be aga.in.3t the law, there may be evidence 
at hand for the prosecution of the guilty party. 

As I stated at the meeting, any attenpt on the part of the government to 
nonsor the radio programs is tantamount to a limitation of the freedom of speech, 
;..nd it was because of my opposition to any policy on the part of the government 
that would, in any way, curtail the freedom of speech or give the government a 
ncnopoly of any kind or means of information that I. have objected to the establish- 
ment 'by the government of a radio station, if it is going to be an exclusive 

- i '. 4 
franchise . 

m to CRi Ticiza GOV iaR issaM ? policies, but hot attack lansiDiiaT 

There is an idea, which is quite general among us, that if you express an ■ 
opinion contrary to those of your superiors, you go against them. The idea ia 
nonsensical. I want you to feel free in expressing your opinions. Now, don't bo 
afraid to express them; but don't criticize me. It is not right to lambast mo. And 

ss President of the nation I might suspend you. 

Now is the time for the provincial governors to express their opinions but 
not the opportunity to stand up and attack the President. You can say you are not 
in accord with our policies. But don't attribute our mistakes to bad faith. Uo_ 
all make mistakes. It is ,noJ_Jvami^ 

•*kJp_.Jl!i^j^^ mistakes ,. 
It is one thine to express your opinion freely, whether or not you agree with 
«o or with the secretary of the interior, it is another thing to start saying 
that we are dictators or something else. I welcome the first, but won't tolerate 

5 

the second, which is demagoguery. 

7 = 5ech = oni;c^ting his nomination as President of the Philippines, July 20, 
1935. Qaaaffi LssajLes, Vol. 1, Sp. Rev. Ed., JM* , ?. 2J6. 

4/ Memorandum for the chairman of the Radio Board on censorship of radio programs, 
September 20, 1937. Md., Vol. 3, Part 1, JBVEF, p. )b). 

5/ Speech on government policies at Malacanan, February 14, 1938. 
■Quezon Messages. Vol. 4', Part 1, JBVFF, p. 5 



Nhat I am going to relate is g, true story. I was sick in Baguio once, many 
.. tJ „ r g a go, I had a nurso; and, by the way, nurses are supposed to be educated or 
used to be. (Laughter.) They are now required to finish high school; but in those 
they were only required to pass the intermediate grades. 

One day, while I was resting in bed, the nurse came to ne and said, "Hr. 
President, the press." I said, "Tell the press to go to hell!" (Laughter.) 

Did you know who the fellow was? I found out later that he was a priest! 
(Laughter.) He was the Rector of the University of Sto. Tomas. (More laughter.) 
It was a mistake due to bad pronunciation of an acquired language. ^ 

45. FRIENDSHIP POLICY 

on orajj^^3^ = ^ = M^^joi^gs = ^^^w^_ 

Like other peoples, the Filipinos havr a national ideal which they cherish 
cad for which they have given the full measure of their devotion so that their 
country might take its deserved place in the community of free nations. And after 
the Philippines shall have bacome independent, with more reason they will cherish 
the goodwill of other peoples because they know that no nation can isolate itself 
fron the rest of the world. ^ 

phlippine security lies in policy of friendship uith all nations 



If the Philippine Islands are ever to become independent, the Filipino 

pooplo must make up their mind that they shall have to take full responsibility for 

their life as an independent nation. Wo must candidly admit that we are not yet 

living in the era of absolute security and peace for all nations, great and small 

alike, and therefore, peoples aspiring to be free and independent must take their 

chances as other peoples have done before them, some with success and a few others 

with failure. Fortunately, there are no longer governments, however powerful, that 

will boldly assert their right to conquer, simply because they have the power 

and the will. And any nation, no matter how small and weak, nay properly hope to 

1* let alone in the full enjoyment of its independent life, if it should follow .?. 

wise, just and friendly policy with all the other nations, especially with its 

neighbors, a policy that will give no excuse for any nation to interfere with 

2 

its domestic and internal affairs. 

gjjjgiaOS_gOR AMITY AMONG PACIF IC HAT IOHS - ^UBZOiT 

We are, more than any other people living in the Pacific, interested in 

y Speech~beforo coconut planters and municipal mayors, February 19, 1938. 

Rivera Collection, Vol. IV, p. 1702. 
1/ Speech on Balboa Day, September 25, 1933. QP» m #W> ™" 
ll Speech before the Fan Pacific Union, /November 14, 1933. Ihid. 



promotion of goodwill and happy intercouse among the Pacific nations. It is 

fQT ua a question of lif a and death that amity amongst us should prevail and 
rutual respect for our respective rights be the norm of our inter-relations. J 

It is necessary that now that we are going to realise our cherished ideal 
of independence and will sonn have to conduct our own foreign relations, we should 
i 98 rn more and wore of the culture, progress and achievements of other peoples 
particularly those nearest to us and with whom we have a certain degree of racial. 
' v 4 

kinship . 

GOODWILL T0\rAM3_ALL_NATI0NS_IS_?0LICY_0F 



Goodwill towards all nations shall be the golden rule of my administration. 
Hie peoples of the earth are inter-dependent and their prosperity and happine33 are 
inseparably linked with each other. International brotherhood and cooperation are, 
therefore, necessary. 

Amity and friendship, fairness and square deal in our relations with other 

v.tions and their citizens or subjects, protection in their legitimate investments 

aid pursuits, in return for their temporary allegiance to out institutions and 

Irvi.'s, nre assurances I make on behalf of the new government to Americans and 

■foreigners who may desire to live, trade, and otherwise associate with us in 
5 

the i-hilippmes. 

0| FRIENDSHIP AND GOODWILL WITH_0TH|R^^TI0^ 

We are just emerging from a condition of tutelage to that of a self- 
governing people. Soon we shall take our rightful place in the family of indepen- 
dent nations. Me seek and we need the friendship and goodwill of all the peoples 
of the world and we offer them ours in return. Me have but one ambition - to 
be able to take our share, however modest, in the onward progress of mankind. 

M-HASIS OIT FRIENDSHIP THROUGH PAIR DEALING, JUSTICE 



I want to assure you that Japanese in the Philippines will be more than 

?nply protected in their rights by our government and that they will always 

receive every courtesy and consideration from our people. A geographical fact is 

v> inflexible as a mathematical truth. Japan and the Philippines are neighbors 

and it is to their mutual interest that they be friends, and friendship can only 

7 

be promoted through fair dealing and justice on both sides, 
ibid. 

V i"'ress statement, June 10, 1934. HH#36, TNL. 

5/ Inaugural address, November 15, 1935. 3u22fl£jis§SSS2Sj- Vol « 1> S P- Rov - Ed " 
TOP, p. 17. 

6/ Address after receiving the Chinese decoration of the Order of the Brilliant 
Jade in Shanghai, China, January 23, 1937. M^> Vo1 - 3, -art 1, JBVFF, p. 

V Speech before the Philippine Society of Japan, February 2, 1937- Ibid., p. 38. 



11-116 

- w - 

It is with Christian love in our hearts +v.n+ ■, , , 

uui nearts that we seek to become a member of 

the family of nations., never to take part - except in self-defense in any armed 
struggle to kill men for the conquest of power or the accumulation of riches-. 

We seek the brotherhood of natinnc. ih-i-v, i 

nations, with love m our hearts for all mankind 

end a prayer on our lips for the salvation of humanity. 8 
'mS^^S^^^MJ^S^^^^^^mHii ALL_I^TIONS_ 

I now turn to the question of our future conduct towards the nations of the 
„orld. To America we owe a special debt of gratitude. To her altruism and gene- 
rosity, we shall be indebted for our national independence. She has made us heir* 
to her ideals of liberty and democracy and the beneficiaries of her civilization 
end culture. It should be our constant endeavor to preserve undiminished this in- 
stable inheritance as well as our friendly and cultural relations with her 
,-fter we shall have become independent. 

Toward the rest of the world, we shall follow a course that will insure 
tteir aoity and cooperation, without in anyway involving ourselves in their affairs. 
:ia shall adopt a most liberal policy in our foreign commerce. This is the policy 
to:nded by ° Ur best Crests. We shall thereby make friends and, being primarily 
;,n agricultural country, we shall in any case profit by it. In our foreign policy,., 
let our motto be: justice and friendship to all! ^ 

46. GOOD GOVE R N H iii II T 
ESB IS 30 PERFECT GQy^RM aST ON IL'^RTTT - QUEZ0I7 



I would like to find the country on the face of this earth where every pub- 
lic official is superb, or had never made any mistake. . One has but to read the news- 
iper to see that some investigations are going on somewhere. Mistakes or crooked- 
ness in government are not the monopoly of any people; they will be found in every 
country and in every form of government as long as men are men and not angels . 1 

The so-called pork barrel system, as known in the United States and as some- 
fees practiced in the Philippines, must definitely be discarded. It is a waste of 

die funds. I am in favor of continuing the building of roads and schools, in 
•-ecordance with a carefully prepared plan to be followed systematically in the 
Wiar of their relative importance to the general public. 2 

l J Speech at Georgetown University, U.S.A., April 17, 1957. £?, MR#39, TNL. 

3/ q 

• poech at the commencement exercises of the University of the Philippines, 
-pril 4, 1939. Quezon Messages, Vol. 5, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 73. 

l/ Speech, "A Plea for Philippine Independence," November 25, 1927. QP, MR#29, TilL. 

^ b illt Ch 0n ncce P tin & his nomination as President of the Philippines, July 20, 
i935 « Mezon Meaar ffftn, Vol. 1, Sp. Rev. Ed., JBVFF, p. 238. 



11-117 

284 

I wish to thank them all (referring to the Iloilo leaders - ABS), and I 
tries leave to crave their continued cooperation in my endeavor to tuxn the public 
rind, temporarily at least, from bitter, partisan politics to a more constructive 
and high-spirited administration of public affairs. 

The country needs ..a - common purpose and our combined efforts, and we must 
;1V o both with enthusiasm and determination. Thus only can we insure the future 
.i.-.ppiness, well-being, and liberty of our people. ^ 

Cf:iJ r ^CUTIVgJ^IYIgI2l T S ^ ST, HONEST, EFFIC IENT. STRONG- GOVERNI-SEin? 

Wo shall build a government that will be just, honest, efficient, and 
jtrong so that the foundations of the coining Republic may be firm and enduring - 
■ government, indeed, that must satisfy not only the passing needs of the hour 
/at also the exacting demands of the future. ^ 

SOViiRNHEflT IS MERE INSTRUMENT TO A CHIEVE NA T IONAL PURPOSE 

The government which we are inaugurating today is only a means to an end* 
It is an instrumentality placed in our hands to prepare ourselves fully for the 
responsibilities of complete independence. It is essential that this last step be 
teon with full consciousness of its significance and the great opportunities thp.t 
it affords us. 

GO VE RNMENT HAS FULL P0U3R3 TO PROMOTE GENERAL WELFARE 



The framers of our Constitution conferred upon our government all the power 
■M authority needed to meet the demands of a progressive and enlightened epoch so 
tnat it may be able to promote the welfare and happiness of our people and safe- 
guard their liberty. 6 

Qjjg COMMON O BJECTIVE: flCONOKICAL, E FF ICIENT, AND S IHt'LIFIIjD G0V3RMSNT / 

Together with the efforts ■ to effect economy we should promote efficiency 
".nd simplify the operation of the government. Duplication or overlapping of func- 
tions should be avoided. With new problems before us we should determine the 
relative importance of the different government activities and lay the proper 
■-ohusis upon each of them, "e need tc insure the expeditious transaction of the 
public business, for nothing breeds more discontent or casts discredit on the 
f.ovornment in the eyes of the people than its inability to act with reasonable 

V Speech at the inauguration of the City of Iloilo, August 25, 1935- Ibidj., 
3, Part 1 , JBVFF, p. 128. 

y Inaugural address, November 15, 1935. Ibid. . Vol. Sp. Rev. Ed.-, JBVFF, p. 13. 

5/ Ibid,. 

y Message to the First National Assembly, November 25, 1935. Quezon Messages, 
v °l. 1, Sp. Rev. Ed.., JBVFF, p. 18. 



11-113 



promptness. Every of fort should be made to introduce the approved practices of 

private business in all government offices. 7 

I don't agree that the government cannot render the same efficient service 
as a private company. The government can do anything that a private corporation 
doe3 provided we get the right men to do it. 

I cannot see why an individual, who is capable of doing a certain job for 
a private corporation, cannot do the. same work for the government. 

C^TRACTSJffiNJMEj^ 

It is wrong for the government to renew contracts without submitting them 
:.;iin to public bid. Not to do so places the government and the officials con- 
cerned in a vulnerable position: it gives occasion for the charge, however un- 
founded, that the government is playing favorites or that the officials concerned 
:ire being influenced by considerations other than those of public interest. ^ 

■■UfiZG'N HBBUKBS_LgAGUli; OF PROVINCIAL GOJ%K)RS_ 

The resolution of the League of Provincial Governors recommending the 
appointment of Mr. Maximino lloble, member of the provincial board of Camarinos 
our, as governor of the province, has been submitted to. me. Please inform the pro- 
vincial governors that I consider their action not very much to the credit of 
their League. The resolution would give the public the impression that the League 
of r'rovincial Governors has been organised for the purpose of promoting personal 
or political interests among its members. 

The League would certainly be a helpful organization if instead of appro- 
ving resolutions of this nature it devoted itself to the study of ways and means 

'•.'hereby the provincial governors could help one another and the national govern- 

1 0 

sent in the promotion of the public weal. 

fgBSIDBBr SAYS IT'S NOT DIFFICULT TO HAV5 GO OD , HOMES! GOVH RlsICgnT S 

I want to say to all the officials of the national, provincial and munici- 
pal governments of the Philippines that it is not a diffjcult_.ta^Ja_g^^j^p. 
ll^pl^jof^this country^ the best government they ^^^J^^L^J^SM^S. 
___ e Z. e iXi )f f icial of this rcvornmejrtj,_f ron th e r , rosid_e nt.,of_ the Philip pines..., 
the last jiqlicemanj should know, that the of f lce_j..a .npt,j^.ysn ieJtiini_for,. 
J)urp_o se_ of_h i s own p u r s p na 1 j^cgr£\iid iz ,@i cent. .p r. jir of i t j.„ nor..w.i,th the j.flga Of... 



iJ Message to the First National Assembly, December 12, 1935. Ibid. , pp. 46-47. 

8/ Speech at a press conference, January 31, 1936. <$?, MR#38, T1IL. 

V Letter to then Secretary of Finance Elpidio <Juirino, February 3, 1936. 

teiaaJiasaaijaai. Vol « 2 > pf - rt 1» JSVbt, p. 419. 

J 0/ Latter to Secretary of the Interior Slpidio Cjuirino, February 26, 1936. 
fii<L,, p. 437. 



11-119 



286 



,. : . r itjaJMLhiMJ^ office is giv en to a 

i" th e_ intGre _at_ oj^tj^o_xjQoplG of _the_ country. 11 

nr^Y FILIPINO OWES LOYALTY TO HIS CKWBRflMEHT - qPBZON 

Every Filipino citizen owes loyalty to this government not only as his 
in ty for living imdor it, but also as one who must abide by its laws. That loyal- 
ty is also his legal and moral obligation bum of the fact that he has taken 

• ,»rt in the preparation and adoption of the Constitution which now constitutes 

12 ' 

■jhe fundamental law of the land. 

-.rr,Q-.T ADKI: flSTRATIO'if WILL PROTIiCT "KAvTiS" AID EJIT "HAVB-IIOTS" 

I want to say to you (addressing the Hanila Rotarians - ABS) that I an 
going to run a purely hunan government here, a government that will consider the 
rights of everybody and protect all; a government that will try to do business 
as business is being done by private enterprise; a government that will attempt 
to protect those who have in what they have, and help those who have not in 
acquiring what they need. ^ 

mssBzzrs w ill try soi-imthdig mi jo a ccomplish iiore 

Judge our government by the results, for you are going to see new methods 
in the government of the Philippines, nethods that have not been tried before 
Don't get scared. Wait for results. The easiest thing for a Chief Executive to 
do is to follow the trodden path. Well, if that is all we are going to do here, 
I don't see the necessity of changing Chief Executives. 

Ue have to try new things in the Philippines if we wish to accomplish some- 
thing. We have a country here that has iixaense possibilities. We have been 
talking about economic development during the last 35 or 40 years and we are 

almost where we wore before. We have done nothing new, or very little that is 

/new 14 
new. . But unless we try something/ we will never accomplish anything . 

BAIT PUBLIC gSRYAJI TS' PARTICIPATION III BiSAUTY, P OPULARITY COZPIiSTS . 

In order to prevent the recurrence of complaints against officials for 
coercing their subordinate employees to cast, obtain, or solicit votes in beauty, 
popularity, and other contests, the taking part directly or indirectly of govern- 
uwrt officials in such contests either by soliciting votes or otherwise is herby 
prohibited, and shall subject the offenders to administrative penalties including 

11/ Speech in I lagan, Isabola, February 28, 1936. Ibidj., p. 55. 
12/ Speech at the Senior Teachers' Assembly, Baguio City, Kay 22, 1936. 
IkisL» P. 91. 

12/ Speech at tho Manila Rotary Club, June 4, 1936. }ML:t P- 
^ IttL&u pp. 107-108. 



11-120 

15 

Y ,;oval from the service. 

The present arrangenent has not worked out as advantageously as expected 
view of the fact that ex-officio nenbors hold office without regard to their 
■orscmal qualifications and special fitness for the work entrusted to then as 
. fibers of the I'etropolitan Nater District board. Moreover,, they attend to so 
• ; ,iy functions and activities pertaining to their respective principal positions 
,L;i tiie government that sometimes they find no tine to give the necessary atten- 
tion to demand thorough study and consideration. 16 

CI3Z0K WOS'T FILL UP POLITICAL POSITIONS ¥ITH ADMINISTRA TIVE MEN 

As a aattor of policy I do not intend to designate as Acting Secretaries 

of Department the Under-Secretaries whenever there is a vacancy in the post of 

Secretary of Department, because this is a political post and it should not be 

filled by non-political appointees. The Secretaries of Department are a part of 

the policy-deternining body of the Executive, while the Under-Secretaries are 

1 7 

purely and exclusively administrative officials. 

HLQ V0-.7S TO E STABLISH ECO-TOHICAL ADD SC^La GOTORMiSNT 

We are committed to the policy of establishing an economical and simple 

government, and this commitment makes it imperative that we do not increase the 

present number of departments unless it is clearly seen beyond question that it 

1 8 

would be in the interest of the public service to create a new department. > 
O&Y qOVgRI-JIGiST .-'IT U VISION CAN SURVIVE - QUEZON 



To establish a new government in our day, when a great social revolution is 
talcing place and new ideas and ideals are gripping the imagination and emotions 
of the messes, demanding the recognition of rights which have bean ignored and 
denied by governments since the dawn of civilization, only governments that have 
sufficient vision to see this worldwide change, and wisdom to meet it fearlessly 
"■lid squarely, can survive. 1 ^ 



.15/ Administrative Order No. 11, "Prohibiting the Taking Part of Officials and 
Employees in Beauty, Popularity, and Other Contests," June 4, 1936. 
lM.<k> P. 758. 

16/ Message to the First National Assembly re Metropolitan Water District Board, 

September 2, 1936. Ibid..., p. 232. ■ 
.11/ Letter to Assemblyman Benigno S. Aquino, chairman, committee on appointments, 

September 2, 1936. Ibid,., p. 234. 
W Letter to Assemblyman Antonio Villarama, chairman, Committee on Health, 

September 2, 19 36". .Quezon Messages. Vol. 2, Part 1 , JBVPF, p. 233. 
12/ Speech on the first anniversary of the Commonwealth, Novenber 15, 1936. 

liiii., p. 143. 



11-121 



01 



In 



-•^SgP URGES H/LTICIIAL A5CBHBLT TO KATETATTJ TTT G n CSBDIT 0? GOVSRKKEHT 

The bonds issued by the govcrnmont are contracts between the bond purcha- 
ses and the national government. T 0 divert, therefore, the use of the proceeds 
x such bonds for a purpose other than that specified in Act No. 3329 would com- 
itate a violation of the conditions under which the obligation was contracted, 
of foot, the approval of this bill would be iraparing the obligation of contract 
The Commonwealth of the Philippines has just finished its first year of 
existence with an established credit comparable with other countries of the world 
: . :1 d wo should not, by the enactment of this bill, give a chance for the bond- 
holder- to lessen their faith in the credit of our government. 20 

iovB up couiti^^g,!!^' 11 LIVI;,TQ utDSR G00D GOVii!a:i!'iii;in? 

T™„X°-YZ-°L M^MUSSRjor, .hip. jspjintry, should be not alone for the beauty 

of its panoramas nor for the riches of its soil. Love o f country springs from 

the satisfaction finds in li ving in it, from the intimate se curity in wh ich 

he can live frcelx..^d__quietly under a just governmen t, find wher e the natural 

resources of thc_cjxintry are the nation's own and for the .o-ood of all its in- 
- • • 2 | — ■ - — - - ^ : 

aabr&intn.. 

aiMnai^iiHT m ust coi^jjg^sjPL' CT for fairness aud j usticb 

The Philippines is a new nation on the threshold of its complete political 

independence. She is about to enter into the family of nations and she must 

carry with her a name that will command respect from all quarters for the justice 

v.vl fairness of the acts of the government of the 'Commonwealth. Our national 

credit will be enhanced and strengthened by the Act restoring pensions to retired. 

22 

employees which the National Assembly has just passed. 
PROMISE OF GOOD GOyjRj^ aT AM IDST TROUBLED 

de promised to give the country a government free from partisan influence 
md selfish motives; a government where merit is to be the primary consideration; 
a government where justice is tc be administered to poor and to the rich alihe, 
to the influential and to the humble. 

No one better than the President of the Philippines realizes how difficult 
it lias been for the members of the National Assembly and the officials of the 
government , from the head to the last, 'to sail through unrippled waters over 

^ssago to the First National Assembly on vetoing Bill No. 1052, "Autho- 
rizing the Province of Nueva iiioijft to Spend the Unexpended Balance of the 
Proceeds of Certain Bonds," November 23, 1936. Ibijk» P» 392. 

.21/ Speech on social justice and national defense, January 20, 1937. 
Ifei&w v ol. 3, Part 1 , JhVFF, p. 31. 

p ress statement, September 9, 1937. '^lP:4£>jlJ Le ssa ^ es -^ Yo1 ' 5 # Part 1, 
JBVFF, p. 329. 



11-121 



The bonds issued by the government are contracts between the bond purcha- 
se and the national government. To divert, therefore, the use of the proceeds 
of such bonds for a purpose other than that specified in Act Ho. 3329 would cons- 
titute a violation of the conditions under which the obligation was contracted. 
In effect, the approval of this bill would be imparing the obligation of contract 

The Commonwealth of the Philippines has just finished its first year of 
existence with an established credit comparable with other countries of the world 
3d wo should not, by the enactment of this bill, give a chance for the bond- 
holder- to lesson their faith in the credit of our government. 20 

IQVB OF COUNTRY ,7fP.K3 FROIi LIVING mm GOOD (XMSRWiziTI! 

l h J?-JL°JL & -^ not alone for the beauty 

of its panoramas nor for tho ?ichaa^J*Mo^]j^_ of country springs from 

fil^i!fiL°- n . £^ f^lg-ja-Ai ylng in It, fro m the intinato securi ty in w hich 
l] l™L}J?JLl?™2£- f^LS^l 1 ^ i l I^;LJLii s J^L 0 J^ the na tural 

m93122?-^..^±SJ^n^y..J 1 JS the nation's own and for the good of all its in- 
21 ~ 

ha bit ant o. 

C^iilM-TT MST COHi-jUfD Il i^Pi-JCT FOR FAIIKESS AND JUSTICE 



The Philippines is a new nation on the threshold of its complete political 
independence. She is about to outer into tho family of nations and she must 
carry with her a name that will command respect from all quarters for the justice 
and fairness of the acts of the government of the 'Commonwealth. Our national 
credit will be enhanced and strengthened by the Act restoring pensions to retired, 
employees which the "'National Assembly has just passed. 22 

PROMISE QF GOOD GO V^fl jV.Irr AMID ST TROUBLED TB3SS 

Je promised to give the country a government free from partisan influence 
PJid selfish motives; a government where merit is to be the primary consideration; 
a government "here justice is to bo administered to poor and to the rich alike, 
to the influential and to the humble. 

'■To one better than ths-j President of the Philippines realizes how difficult- 
it has been for the members of the National Assembly and the officials of the 
Sovcrnment , from the head to the last, 'to sail through unrippled waters over 



20/ Message to the First National Assembly on vetoing Bill No. 1052, "Autho- 
rizing the Province of Nueva Ecija to Spend the Unexpended Balance of the 
Proceeds of Certain Bonds," November 23, 1936. Ibid._, p. 392. 

U/ Speech on social justice and national defense, January 20, 1937. 
ifeMt, v ol. 3, Part 1, JNVFF, p. 31. 

W Press statement, September 9, 1937. Quezon Mes sages . Vol. 3, Part 1, 
P. 329. 



11-125 ^ 

27 

, ling ful and comfortable life. 

t-fo must have . a_ coymtrx, that. ^an_ mrlce its citizens foel that the government _ 
•■•loy are oorving, in_a_governmej^ a nd undivided lo yal- 

ty because they have th&ir..rights protected an d their aeon s of livelihood are 
• r '"ured . If ue_ haye_n_c punt rv_ .lil^that ,_no ma tt er how sm al l f the pe op le will 



• wrL3'»> WJaiic'ijOa Ik PRxi ^uijt Gyii CiSuiii Or 1 GO ^mliiluiaii'T 



The welfare of the people should be the primary concern of the government. 

It is the duty of the government to protect the working men against abuses 
..pel exploitation, and to secure to 5iu.-m fair wages or a reasonable return for 
their labor. 

Ho who tries to curry favor with the masses by appealing to their passions, 

stirring up prejudices or magnifying discontent or human suffering, is unworthy 

29 

of public trust. 

LOYAL ARMY DBUKRVBS GOOD SOVflliripm' A}iD SOCIETY 



If we wish to be certain that wo can depend upon the loyalty and unswerving 
iovotion of our army to their goveram mt and the society in which they live, we 
■,ust aake this government and society of ours deal fairly with every man regard- 



less of his s tation in life. 



HiSSES BE COIWINCED gQVTiiir.-ii-iaHTJffi/iDY TO HELP TliEH 



Presidents (addressing the municipal presidents, the old designation for 
municipal mayors), I want you to treat the poor as you treat the rich, Show the 
Ben of the barrios that you, as town presidents are interested in their welfare 
and that you are willing to help then. Be frank with them, and make them under- 
stand that there are things the government cannot do because it does not have . 
31 

the means. 

TSMSBL ifgALTK NOR KNOWLI'-iDG.-i! BUT^OD 1 Jip^gg.J ^^^!Mg^ 

The government of the Philippines cannot give you wealth even if it wants 
to. The government cannot give you knowledge even if it wants to. But the govern- 
ment of the Philippines, if it wants tdf and if its officials are honest, sincere, 

21/ Speech at a^ess conference, November 3, 1937. OP, KB#40, TNL. 
iHd.. 

29/ Speech on social justice, 1937. n.d.m. . Ibidj. 

22/ Speech on the essence of democracy at the University of the Philippines, 1937 

n.d.m. OP, I'Ht/Mo, TNL. 
31/ Speech before coconut planters and municipal mayors, February 19, 1938. 

. •"•iP, im/Mi, Ti'iL. 



xl-1 23 ^ 

27 

.,-ain^ful and comfortable life. 

<;Ja , s^jL hg-Xg...g-SS>:i a l£^ ^^.-£2gJS£^ jj.g..P_i jiaona feel that the govern ment 
tw ^aerying ia a. .govermn ent that is worth thei r complete and undivided loy al- 
ty- T?ocauso.thoy.liaye_th&ir^j^^ ox livelihood are 

•iriured. If uo_ hay e_a_c punt ry_ .lil':_e__tliat j, no_ matte r how smal l , the people wi ll 
■■■■ \- : —~' 28 " " ' " 

'i'he welfare of the people should be the primary concern of the government. 

It is the duty of the government to protect the working men against abuses 
and exploitation, and to secure to sht.m fair wages or a reasonable return for 
their labor. 

Ho who tries to curry favor with the masses by appealing to their passions, 

stirring up prejudices or magnifying discontent or human suffering, is unworthy 

, , 29 
of public -crust. 

LOYA L ABK Y DiKflEWBS GO OD (KHn BUTOK lT AM) SOCIETY 

If we wish to be certain that wo can depend upon the loyalty and unswerving 
devotion of our army to their governm nit and the society in which they live, we 

asy'c stake this government and society of ours deal fairly with every man regard- 

i c i • s , , . . -. . „ 30 

less of his tatiou in In e . 

OSSES WifS BE CONVINCED (KMSWHSHT READY TO HELP TIIEH 



Presidents (addressing the municipal presidents, the old designation for 
aunicipal mayors), I want you to treat the poor as you treat the rich, Show the 
sen of the barrios that you, as town presidents are interested in their welfare 
and that you are willing to help them. Be frank with them, and males them under- 
stand that there are things the government cannot do because it does not have . 
31 

the means. 

j*^RJ2ALTE_ hOR KTTOWL-'iDGlS BUT GOOD, JiOIflliaT GOVLTMiff . 

The government of the Philippines cannot give you wealth even if it wants 
to, The government cannot give you knowledge even if it wants to. But the govern- 
ment of the Philippines, if it wants to, and if its officials are honest, sincere, 



TlJ Speech at a press conference, November 3, 1937. OF, HR#40, ML. 
W Speech on social justice, 1937. n.d.m. . Ibidt 

22/ Speech on the essence of democracy at the University of the Philippines, 1937, 

n.d.m. OP, KR#40, TKL . 
%J Speech before coconut planters and municipal mayors, February 19, 1938. 
. hR#41, TJTL. 



11-124 



, ud patriotic, can give you justice and a good and decent government. 52 

p^g^lL------i-£LgL-22L°!!BL=-^ ZOi ' 1 

We shall never win the confidence of our people in our government until we 
?r ove to them, by deeds, that we^are interested in safeguarding their interest 
c-nd in protecting their rights. 

?m?m\ m READY TO IMPOSE ITS AUTHOR ITY GAINST ANYBODY 



The worst tiling that can happen to our people, once given the right to 
choose their own officials, is to be incapable of giving them due respect and con- 
sideration. If there is any man who believes that the government we now have is 
■ ; joke, he had better think it over again. This is a government duly constituted 
by the votes of our own people, a government that will impose its authority 
iigainst everybody - and against the world if necessary. ^ 

C0VgENORg_UaGgD TO GIV g_g^ 0gLE_A_G00D ftoyaian-iEHT_ 

One of the things that give me the greatest pleasure in life is when I find 
isyself in a heart-to-heart talk with the people. . Good governors can be reelec- 
ted if they do justice to the people; and a good party man could do more for the 
party by carrying out its policies than by playing cheap politics. Give the 
ocoplo a good government and they will acclaim our party as the best. 

iDBLICJgTICERS SHOUL D SET GOOD EXAMPL E FOR COKM OHITY 

Public officers, whether appointive or elective, are expected to set the 
example in according due respect to the constituted authority. If those in the 
Henrico of the government were th-j first to undermine it by reckless and ground- 
less charges, it would be useless to expect others to show proper respect for law 
::nd the constituted authority. Consequently, we would have not order but chaos, not 

liberty but license; and democracy, instead of being a blessing, would degenerate 

36 

into lavflessness and anarchy. 

SOTiM-I^aT MERE IIJSTRUHEUTALITY TO A DKIuTSTER PU BLIC AFFAIRS 

There are people who seem to feel that it is the duty of the government 

Speech in Maasin, Leyte, June 10, 1938. ^zjOjul§s§M^ Vol « 4, Part 1, 
JBVFF, p. 93. 

W Speech in Virac, Catanduanos, June 10, 1938. QP, mUO, TUL. 

W Speech in Dumagueto, Wegros Oriental, November 3, 1938. Qu ezon Messages , 

^ol. 4, Part 1 , J.B VFF , pp. 246-247. 
25/ Speech on the new policy of handling provincial affairs, January 19, 1939. 

Quezo n Messages,. Vol. 5, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 6. 
W Letter to the Secretary of the Interior on the decision in the administrative 

investigation of Miss Carmen Planas, member of the Manila Municipal Board, 

March 9, 1939. Ibid. . p. 389. 



11-125 



t0 , iT e them every benefit and that the government has no right to demand from 
them anything. In a democracy, the government is only the instrumentality through 
Khieh the people administer its .affairs. The government is not an entity different 
from the people, '.font the government owns is the property of the people, what 
the government has belongs to the people, because tho^overnmbnt cannot have any- 
thing that does not come from the people themselves. ^ 

LAY WIS FO UNDATIONS OF _ STABLE GOVjjitNH ENT , ENDUR ING NATTM 

Fortunately for us, we have succeeded in setting aside partisanship and 
selfish motives, and the whole people are inspired by the single purpose of laying 
the foundations of a stable government and an enduring nation. Me are devoting 
our anergics mainly to the two most pressing problems we have to face; namely, 
the building of our national defense and the strengthening and improvement of our 
national economy. J ° 

C-OOJJ GOVERNMENT IS ONE ROT 3Y OFFICIALS -7I TH SINGLE PURPOS E 

The government is simply an organisation of the people. A government the 
Members of whose board of directors are in complete accord, will do much good 
for the country. But a government wherein the officers do nothing but criticize 
s&ch other in order to take over one another's power is bound to collapse. This 
hi my answer to those who say that a division is necessary in this country. 59 

iXiV3!01ENT MUST^C OiTSTANTL Y PROKOTE CONFI DENCE IN DEFENSE PLAN 

If eternal vigilance is the price of freedom, let as then be ceaselessly 
vigilant. Our defense system requires no unusual sacrifice by any individual, but 
its success depends primarily and almost exclusively upon a unification of the 
efforts of all toward this common and vital purpose. To attain such unification 

our democracy, the military plan must be supported by popular intelligence, 
ooniidence and enthusiasm. It is a special function of government to see that this 
confidence is fairly earned and assiduously sustained. To this end let us be 
vigilant that every law we pass and' every military measure we adopt shall reflect 
".n unselfish and national purpose, that it shall impose injustice on none, and 
hv:>.t it shall promote the security and defend the peace, the possessions and the 
liberty of all. 40 

jST_PROTECT INTERES T OF GOVERNMENT Iff ANY CONTRACT 

I do not want to assume that the Standard Oil Company of Hew York would 



2/ Speech at the cornerstone laying of Barrio Obrero, June 28, 1939. 
OP, VJV42, TNL. 

1/ Press statement on the appointment of Assistant Secretary of State Francis 
B - Sayre as U.S. High Commissioner to the Philippines, July 27, 1939. 
i&S^Jtesjsaj^Sj. supra, p. 458. 

22/ Speech at the convention of the Palihan hg Bayan, Manila Opera House, 
August 20, 1939. Quezon Me ssages . Vol. 5, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 182. 

42/ Message to the Second National Assembly, January 24, 1939. OP, MR#42, TNL. 



11-126 



-, tGr into a contract with me in bad faith, but it is my duty here as head of this 

govornment to make sure that the interests of the government are protected in any 

contract that I enter into. And supposing that the Standard Oil Company did 

enter in good faith into this contact, there was still the possibility that a 

third party, which is not composed of angels and having some ulterior purpose, 

wild initiate trouble. This third party, bent on making trouble, could easily 

find one of these skillful lawyers. So, even if the Standard Oil Company entered 

into thin contract in good faith, and was not willing to make trouble, some 

41 

other party might do it. 

■ffiffiOH WA HTS GOVflR IiKBNT TIL'J WILL DO JUSTICE TO FILIPHTO PEOPLE 



I am not interested in personalities or in parties to the extent of con- 
sidering them of great importance. I do not, of course, deny that I possess the 
.r.tural preferences of a human being for this associates. I have my natural 
affection for ray own political party, but I have a much broader affection for all. 

interest is to have a government in the Philippines that will do justice to 
all - a government that will win the confidence and faith of our people. I am 
interested in having . . ,. ; v the support of the people, for once the 

people lose their faith in the government;, they will destroy that government. 
On the hand, if they lose faith in one individual, they can simpl.y change him. 
But they must have faith in our political institutions so that they will support 
them. Of course, they will have faith in the government if they see it doing 
justice to all. ^ 

47. K A R E - h AMES-CUTTING CONTROVER S Y 

^HLIjjS-j^ ' r ° g I( l HT F0R APPLE'S IITOCREST TO TEE LAST 

What possible incentive could I have to strive for more power? I have 
reached what I consider is the peak of my career. I cannot go any higher. I have 
given the people all of my life, and I have served them with all I have got. Let 
them judge me by what I have done. 

There is no place, no honor that I have to fight for now. All that remains. 

for me to strive for is what there has always been - the people's interest, 
/that /to 
And/I intend to fight for/ the last; the best interests of the people as 

I see them - if I have to fight a lone battle to the end. 

Uli MOTIVATE D MOT BY At-iEITlUIT BUT ggRVICS TO PEOPLE - QUEZON 

Some people are hinting that my opposition (to the Hare-IIawes-Cutting Act - 
AES) is due to envy and to jealousy of the achievement of the (OsmefTa-Rozas) 

11/ Speech at a press conference, February 2, 1339. c iP> ^#43, TNL. 
.4?./ Rraooh xm the fourth anniversary of the Commonwealth, November 15, 1939. 
te-OJlJ^sagesj. Vol. 5, Part T, JBVFF, p. 237. 

U Exclusive interview with the SijnlaxJ^taij- January 22, 1933, explaining 
Quezon's opposition the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act secured by the Osmeffa- 
R oxas mission. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, p. 960. 



11-127 



isfiion. Now, such a statement, is not only unfair but also absolutely groundless. 

ill I have to say is that if it were only political ambition that inspired 
Fe there would not have been anything easier for me than to remain silent, 
acquiesce to the misoion, and say that the bill is patterned after lay Formula 
; 0 , 2 (immediate establishment of an autonomous government ..like the Commonwealth] 
:;.id the grant of complete independence after a transition period - ABS), and all 
■ m li have been well. If political ambition had been ray urge, nothing would have 
Loon better for no than to accept the bill (the Hare-Kawes-Cutting Act - ABS) as 
it is, have the Ccuanonwealth of the Philippines organised, and work to be elected 
its first Chief Executive. 

But in all earnestness I must say that I am not actuated by any such mo- 
tive. My career is about to close and I want it closed in such a way that in all 
aonesty I can say to the people, "I have done my best to serve our country well." 

This is not the time for me to compromise with that which I am firmly con- 

2 

yinced is against my people's interest. 

PRESIDENT EXPLAINS THREE ALTERNATIVES AFTER fflC REJECTION 



If we reject it (the Ilare-hawes-Cutting Act), one of three things may ha.}''' 

The first is that the U.S. Congress may ignore us entirely. This, I contol" 
Congress cannot do. The pressure of labor and farm interests, the force of or- 
.piized minorities who are anxious to get rid of us at all costs, all these wil: 
keep the pot boiling until Congress does something. 

The second is that Congress may re-enact the bill, omitting the (objection- 
able) provision, and submitting it to the Filipinos for their acceptance or re- 
jection. Well and good. We will have no say on the matter. We will have a law 
imposed on us, whether we like it or not. In that case, I or anyone else can go 
to the United States and ask for its amendment. Congress, in that case, would, 
"rery likely listen to us. 

The third alternative, and this has been brought up befo:re, is that Congress 
fight give us a worse bill, with more unfair provisions. I hold that Congress can- 
not do worse than give us this Hare-IIawes-Cutting bill. Unlike this last Congress, 
i:a the new administration, there will be a President (Franklin D. Roosevelt, 1933- 
1345 - ABS) and a Congress of the same party (Democratic Party) with full control 
of the executive and legislative branches of the government. They don't have to 
compromise to enact legislation but '-/ill have the power to pass the measure 
'•'Inch will do honor to their nation and justice to the Filipino people. 

If they gave us immediate independence, with an immediate closing of the 
American markets, it would still be better than, the liare-Hawes-Cutting bill. tfe 
are better prepared for independence right now than we would be after ten or 
twelve years, when under the unfair provisions of this bill we would be so 
tippled, so strangled, so maimed, that we shall never be able to stand alone . 

2/ Ibid." 



11-128 

- m - 

3 

. ,, an independent nation. 

[Nets: Actually, it was no longer a bill but an Act because the U.S. Cong- 
as overrode President Hoover's veto by 274-94 in the House and 62-26 in the 
Senate in January 1933. But the Philippine Legislature, under quezon's leader- 
ship, "declined to accept" the Law. Thereafter Ouezon went to Washington and, 
nlaost singlehandedly, secured the approval of the Tydings-MeDuff ie Act which 
eliminated some of the objectionable features of the rejected HEC Act. - ABS. J 

It is a fact that this law (Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act - ABS), as finally 

adopted, is the result of a compromise between advocates and opponents of Philip- 
pic independence such as Senators Bingham, ^obinson of Indiana, Pees and Smooth, 
Governor Forbes and many others. 

And it is also true, and painfully so, that American capitalists interested 
in Cuban sugar have brought to bear all the pressure they could exert, enlisting 
the; aid of beet rugar producers and dairy farm interests in the United States, 
to secure the passage of this Act for their own purposes. 

Our people are divided as to whether the law should be accepted or roj-y'' ' 
lut both those who oppose, and those who would accept this /vet, are inspired b; o- 
&e same motive; they seek the independence of their country - independence wit 
the least hardship to the people, if this is attainable - but independence pri- 
sarily, at any cost, if necessary. 

KIEF EXECUT IVE CLARIFIES HIS MAIN OBJECTION TO HEC LAU 

Some morning papers quoted me as having said last night (at the Olympic 
stadium, 3ta. Cruz - ABS) that I am not against military and naval reservations. 
::y speech was not written and I want to correct that impression at onoe. 

I have always maintained that the most objectionable feature of the law 
(^.re-Eawes-Cutting i'^ct) is the provisions which gives the President of the United 
States the right to reserve for the United States, after independence shall have 
^on^ granted, military, naval and other reservations, at the discretion of the 
^'resident . 

I have stated and I reiterate it now, that this clause, as it stands, 
-:osps in the hands of the government of the United States the power to deprive 
tie i'ilipino people of their national liberty and independence, at the end of 
tiie transition period. 

This does not mean that I am absolutely and unqualifiedly opposed to all 
Hnds of United States reservations in the Philippine .Islands, after independence 
have been granted. But it does mean that I will never give my consent to 

y ~ibidr ======:===:= 

y Radio speech over Radio Manila and re-broadcast over the United States by 
too Columbia network, January 30, 1933. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, 
PP. 981-985. 



11-129 



lav r that gives this discretionary power to the President of the United States. 

So that there may not be any question as to my stand regarding military 
d naval reservations, I want to say that in discussing the law in the United 
"t-iteo with Senators Pittman, Robinson, Cutting, Metcalfe, Hawes, and other 
roiaincn t Americans, I have practically confined my discussion to this question. 

I -j'OH'T BBl^OOI^D^SICO^TI^^yEZON 

I have learned my lesson . and I can't be fooled for the second time. I 
-^'duped by the Jones Act when, dazzled by the glitter of the preamble, I failed 
to see that the autonomy promised me by Congressman William Atkinson Jones was 
not in the law. 

So that is the difference between the (Osmefla-Roxas) mission and myself 
no w. I have been fooled once and I have profited by that experience. The mission 
is now dazzled by the fixed date of independence and it does not see the other 
provisions of the Kare-hawes-Cutting Law. They are holding on to it as I held 
tightly to my preamble. 



* -x- * 



I want to limit myself to painting for you the situation of the country'- 
rfter the so-called autonomous government has been established under the (iHiC) o- 
:,ct and comparing it with other so-called independent countries. 

India, of course, is not an independent country, but you all know how 
aorae of its princes and maharajahs are represented as ruling their respective 
realms. Apparently they really are, but the fact is that they are mere figure- 
heads and that it is the representatives of the British sovereignty that dictate 
to them what to do and not to do. 

Such a situation may be acceptable to othei countries but certainly it 

will be repudiated by the Filipino people. At least, as for me, I can s.ay that 

6 

I will never countenance any such humiliation, 
mm DIS TURBED 3Y IJ.P.^EA^S^SgUVT^a ^TTITU^ 

One of the things I regret in this controversy (over the Hare-Hawes- 
Cutting Act - ABS) is :, statement made by one of the deans of the University of 
tho Philippines who said that we should accept everything the U.S. Congress de- 
cidoo to give us because "wo. fire beggars and beggars are no choosers." 

This statement is more unfortunate coming as it does from a man who is 
opposed to mold the character of our youth. If I had a house and sombody wrested 
it from me by force, would I consider myself a beggar seeking alms if I asked 
iiin to return the whole house to me and not only the kitchen? 

I must say that I felt this statement most keenly and I am still smarting 

rPresa statement, date inadvertently omitted .^^^^^ 
Quezon's stand on the question of u .5. military <-nn iiuvc 
the Philippines after the grant of independence. l&LSU, f>. nw. 

y Speech in Iloilo, February 4, 1933. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, PP- 096-893. 



11-130 

, „ because what future has this country of ours if the education of our 

■ uth i s entrusted to individuals who have a distorted notion of national dignity? 
■jO fflI^T??G_Cy_C0Ui:T RY'3 F UTOKB UHBK K3 OPPOSED liKC ACT 

You know ny stand on the question (referring to the Iiare-Hawes-Cutting co:i- 
*roversy - ABS). I am against the Act. I took ;ry stand after a careful deliberation. 

I an looking into the future. I an thinking of you, of the rising genera- 
tion of today. I am thinking of us, we who are passing away, wo who know that wo 
do not have many years ahead of us. 

To lis, what arc five or ten years more or less of American rule here? 'Je 
. ye 3 tood it these many years and we can stand it yet. But I an thinking of the 
rising 'generation, of my children, and when I think of you, you who are the ones 
who will reap tho effects of the Hare-IIawes-Cutting Act, I realise the tremendous 
responsibility that I owe you, and it is then that my opposition to the law is 
strengthened and intensified. 

U3D3R HHC ACT, IT'S HU l-ilLLiTI UG HOT TO PU T UP A FIGHT - qUB2.0N 



If somebody moots mo in tho dead of the night in an alloy and with, a gun, ■■ 
compels me to give him my wallet with F1CO, I don't think it is humiliating th 0 _ 
Mo should happen to anyone. 

But if somebody scares me and, without any coercion, I willingly give my 
noney and I rofuso to fight, then that is humiliating. There is no humiliation in 
teing licked. It is humiliating when you refuse to put up a fight. 

That is what obtains with tho Hare-hawos-Cutting Act. If it is imposed 

ivoon us, won and good. But knowing it to be onerous and unjust and wo accept it 

' g 
aookly, therein lies what may be termed adding insult to injury. 

WEM HHC A C T TO BE ypRTKY OF BLESSI1IGS OF FRSuDOIi, SAYS CiUESON 

Let us not be afraid that if we do not accept this law (Hare-IIawes-Cutting 
Act - ABS), the U.S. Congress may enact a measure restricting our products and 
yet giving us no independence. When the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act is submitted to the 
Legislature, conscious of my responsibility to my people, I shall vote against it. 
If Congress approves a law restricting our exports and offering us no hope of 
freedom, lot it do so. It will bo an act of tyranny and lot it shoulder the 

responsibility. t 

But if the U.S. Congress does that, nothing can have more salutary effects 
for our nation. It will galvanise us into action, it will show us the utter help- 
lessness of our situation as a subject people, it will revolutionise our national 

ll Md., p. 988. 

p/ ,, . . , / TT xj , ra tt S T ) debeto on the HHC Act at 

W speech at the inter-universxty (U 2 . vs. u.o.i. ; ai^.uu u 

the Metropolitan Theatre, February 28, .1933. iMS^ ?• 

2/ Speech at the Philippine Columbian Club, March 11, 1933. In* The Monday Ha iJ ^ 

warch 13, 1933. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, PP. 997-1004. 



11-131 



-titer and it will melee us realize that if we want to be free we must make 

°* r ' r ""' ' , o 

ourselves worthy of the; blessings of freedom. 

';20i? TO nSMlS HA; DOH'T IIORTGAGfl OUR CniLDmT' SjrUffJRjii _ 

CU3201I: Sergio, you and I are growing old. "ie shall soon pass away. Do 
v reali^' 3 ^h.Q tremendous responsibility you and I are shouldering in accepting 
bill (Hare-tf awe a-Cut t ing Act), the affect of which will tie the hands of our 
tority? n j_ rJ mortgaging the future of our children! 7e are deciding their 
■■'>to, knowing that when we are gone, we shall be unable to help then! 

OSMBNA: Do you realise, Chico, the tremendous responsibility wo will bo 
"ssuning in rejecting the bill, as a result of which America may stay in the 
Philippines forever? 

oUiKON: I realise that, but don't forget that if America is in the Philip- 
•oinos today it is by force, and against our will, -'ith her sovereignty she has 
■ssumed responsibilities, both .legal and moral, to the Filipino people. But if 
m accept the bill she will remain in the Islands with our consent - exorcise 
ruthority without any responsibility; and I for one an unwilling to give my sane- ■ 

. ' 11 
tion to it. 

PE OPLE JILL UPhOLD L EGISLATURE AGAINST OS-ROX, SAYS QUEZON 

I agree (with the Osmena-Roxas mission -ABS ) that the issue before our 
country is independence, that is to say, whether the law (EEC Act) brought by 
tho mission redeems the solemn pledge obtained in the Jones Act or not. 

Opponents of the law rightly assert that it does not, and, if accepted by 
our people /releases' the United States from the solemn pledge, and limits our 
importation (exports?) into the United States, closes the door of America to our 
compatriots, gives us for ten years very limited autonomy and, therefore, if then 
a questionable independence. 

Our people will not be cajoled by words, hence the majority of the members 
ox the Legislature are ready to repudiate, as it is their duty to do, the acts of 
the mission in endorsing unconditionally the law. 

I am confident the country will stand by its constitutional spokesman, 
tho Legislature, as against a mission created only by the said Legislature to . 
net for it, and which ignored its instruction. 

The appeal made by Senator Osmena to sectionalism in his tour of the 
AS/ i^idj., p. 1004. 

Vj Radio dispatch to the .Tribune by Carlos P. Romulo , *™«gL? ^"J™ to 
Publications, April 20, 1933, on board the s.s. I^^Trance,. 
Now York, Ibid., pp. 1008-1009. 

.11/ By long-distance telephone from Baguio, date inadvertently omitted. 
Rivera Collection, Vol. II, p. 1° 2 )> 



11-132 



/iosyan Islands should be denounced in vigorous terms and condemned by every 
Filipino as a doctrine more destructive to our national unity.. 

(Jhen the split of the Nacionalista Party took place (in 1922 -ABS), Sena- 
tor Osmena also tried to secure the support of the ' Visayan islands by appealing 
to sectionalism. But he failed then, as the majority of the senators and repre- 
sentatives from the Visayas wore 'Golectivistas. lie will also fail now for the 
, -gority of the senators and representatives from said region are against the 
; f ,v.3-I:'awes-Cutting Law. 

Senator Osmena should never forget that the whole country supported him 
during nil the years that he was the national leader (1 907-1 91 6 - ABS). He was 
elected speaker of the first Philippine Assembly by unanimous vote, and we who 
initiated the campaign for his election were all from Luzon. 

It was I who made possible for Speaker Roxas of Capiz to succeed Senator 
Csnena as speaker of the House of Representatives (also in 1922 - ABS). And I 
suppose it is for this reason that Speaker Roxas has coined the phrase "fjuezonian 
justice." 

I an sure no Filipino can rise to power or remain in power by appealing 

to sectionalism. Our people are ONE people, and they will be united against 

■.nybody who wants to divide them into Visayans, Tagalogs, Ilocanos, etc. Sectio- 

1 3 

nalism is dead forever. 

IT UOTJLD 35 A VAIN SACRI FICE UND ER I5 I C ACT, SAYS -iUEZ ON 

My friends, I know that you and I and all of us are ready to sacrifice for 
our country, but unless he be a fool, no man is ready to make a vain sacrifice, 
?nd the sacrifice that is demanded from you here is a vain sacrifice; it is not 
sacrifice in the interest of your country but in the interest of other people; 
it is not a sacrifice that is for the interest and the freedom of your Fatherland, 

but it is a sacrifice that will finally mean the death of the very freedom for 

, • , 14 
"men you have fought. 

ll JM_ 2g0 ^gJ ^^^S-CUTTING_IA^_ 

I am against the Hare-IIawes-Cutting Law because, in my honest opinion, it 
dooj not safeguard the welfare of our people and it will not insure the achieve- 
ment of our national freedom. 

. * * * 

If that law is bad, reject it regardless of the consequences, because it 
is your duty to reject that which you think and know is bad for you and for your 
country. ^ 



! 

& £feisL> p. 1022. 

14/ Speech before the U.P. student body, September 24, 1933. OP, 1*4, TIJL. 
JV Ibid. 



•ole 



- m - 

to our responsibility toward childhood. The high rate of infant mortality 
s one of the most serious problems confronting this nation. Though we are making 
Pliant efforts to reduce the sickness and death rate of the be" -s and mothers, 
'ireaendous task still confronts us. 

TJST_GIV3 I!I p .ggTAIjCB_TO _HEALTn_AMDPUBLIC WEgjURE 

The country has attained some improvement in public health and welfare... 
Siicrc should be provided additional measure to fur-er reduce the incidence of i: 
3338 and deaths due to these and other preventive diseases. 

There is an urgent need to improve the water supply and the system of wast 
disposal of our communities. And additional facilities should be provided for the 
sarS of the insane and of the aged and invalid as well as for the education and 
training of orphaned, defective, neglected and delinquent children. 

Finally, we should provide for the relief of the needy and unemployed. 

All these are urgent necessities which should receive careful considerate 
:.n order to further improve the general welfare of the masses. 5 

MIOANCiB QF_ FHYSI CAI._DEVELOPK^^g_YOUTH_ 

Modern countries have adopted definite measures to insure the development 
if the physical vigor of the youth. 

The office of the national physical director, Bureau of Education, and the 
irivate schools have carried on systematically a program of physical' t Gaining, 
at the work has been handicapped by the lack of properly trained instructors. 

Games and athletics develop in the youth not only physical endurance but 
ilso resourcefulness and initiative. These are qualities which are as useful to 
is individual in times of war as they are in times of peace. 

I therefore submit for your consideration the plan of establishing a 
ational Assembly of Physical Education for the training of physical directors, 
thletic coaches and recreation supervisors. ^ 

SjIiIlg- £Igggg g|IZgL._. TOLji:ss SOCIETY PERFORMS ITS ROLE 

The problem of health is a direct responsibility of the government and of 
] °iety. But the government will be impotent unless society does its part. All 

je millions of pesos spent in sanitation, hospitals, and other means of preven- 
'°th° r treatmerrt of diseases will acoompiish little unless the living conditions 

he masses are greatly improved. No one knows better than you that the most 
?ortant factor in the fight against diseases is nature itself and the constitu- 
■°a of the individual. A weak constitution cannot resist diseases. 

Message on the celebration of Child Health Day, August 19, 1935. Ibid. 
Message to the First National Assembly, October 16, 1937. QP, HR#39, T3L. 

« Pee ° h at the annual convention of the Philippine Medical Association, 
a y 2 » 1939. Quezon Mess ages, Vol. 5, Part 1, JT3VFF, p. 118. 



1-135 , 

49. HEROES// HEROISM 



BGifl* 



••pAHTO IDE AL' H ERO AGAINST INJUSTICE AND TIRANI'IY_ 



If wg want to put forth our own efforts and evoke our own dignity beOausn 

iv find that the doors of opportunity and improvement are closed to us; if seeing 

round us nothing but injustice and oppression, and we want to work out our sal-- 

ition by concerted and united action-; if we see that the law is not obeyed and 

ight is trampled upon and the fundamental principles of liberty, equality, and 

raternity have ceased to impel human actions, then the apostle, the guide, the 

-I 

itting hero is Andres Bonifacio. 



The Revolution of 1896 is the most sublime adventure ever embarked upon 

by the Filipino people, the most glorious achievement of the whole race, giving 

phatic proof that ours is a strong and heroic nation worthy of its aspirations 
2 

or freedom. 

■3JBZ0ff_A8KS PEOPLE TO FAY TRIBUTE TO OUR HEROES 



As we enter upon the threshold of independent nationhood, let us pause fo:. 

moment to pay tribute to the memory of Rizal and Bonifacio, and all the heroes 

of our sacred cause, in grateful acknowledgment of their patriotic devotion and 
3 

supreme sacrifice. 

lONIFACIO'S SELF-SACRIFICE ANTIDOTE TO SPIRITUAL POVERTY 



At present, when the measure of service seems to be, with most people, tho 
yardstick of personal gain, a dose of the fine qualitites of Andres Bonifacio would 
ameliorate the current widespread spiritual poverty. The story of his life and defy- 1 ?, 
should re-impres3 upon us more deeply the fact that no sacrifice is too dear thai- 
tie cannot afford to make for the sake of our motherland. Bonifacio made a lasting 

one, the ultimate sacrifice. Those of us who are forever appalled at the idea of 

4 

personal loss will find new courage in the life of the Great Plebeian. 
&.YER_YIELD_A_F^ 



We are fighting that the Filipino people may be the master of their own 
destinies and that every Filipino not only of this generation but of tho generation 
to come mayj^, able to live in peace and tranquility in the full enjoyment of 
liberty and freedom. 

1/ S P Gech~It~tte"c^nerstone laying of the Bonifacio monument in Caloocan, 

November 30, 1929. QP, HR#31, TNL. 
2/ Bid., 

1 Inaugural address, November 15, 1935, Legislative building, Quezon , Messages, 

v ol. 1, Sp. Rev. Ed., J3VFF, p. 12. 
!/ Press statement on the celebration of Bonifacio Day, November 30, 1938. 
Ibid.." : ^ . ,.r _ Vol . 4 , Part 1 , JBVFF , p . 721 . 



11-136 | 

- - !PP - 

Your duty - our duty - is to fight and resist until the invader is driven 
from our land. You must not give up a foot of ground when the battle joins* You 
wa st hold in place - and hold, and hold! 5 

FILIPINO tfAR_RBCORg_-_A_MESoAGB TO WHOLE JTO^JtACK , SAYg^ QUEZO IJ 

(The record of the Philippines in this uar) has proven that the doctrines of 
democracy are practical and hard-headed. They (the Filipinos) have met the most 
ruoial of all test/- war! When the Japanese invaded the Philippines, they found 
a nation standing together in defense of its country - not the small army of the 
United States fighting alone in defense of their own flag. They found the bulk 
of HacArthur 1 s forces predominantly Filipino. They found a people who know they 
had a future worth fighting for unto death. 

The battle record of the Filipino people in this war bears glorious testi- 
mony to the difference between freedom and oppression, between the principle of 
human equality and the exploded idea of race superiority. 

That is why our Commonwealth Day this year is more than a Philippine an- 
niversary. It is an anniversary pregnant with a message for the whole human race^ 

]"felY BATAAN SCLDIiEl A NATIONAL HERO, SAYS QUEZON 



The fall of Bataan closes a chapter in the history of + the Filipino people 1 £ 
truggle for freedom &a heroic, if not the most heroic, that we have ever fought. 
Side by side with their American comrades, our forces fought without air support 
against a foe that had, at all times, absolute command of tho air and the seas, 
aid an overwhelming superiority in land forces. This fight lasted as long as re- 
sistance was humanly possible, for our forces gave up only after they had become 
exhausted from lack of food and continuous battle. 

I am proud of the part that the Filipino forces have taken in this epic 
battle, and I am profoundly grateful to the whole army which has thus vindicated 
the honor and right of the Filipino people to become an independent nation. Their 
country and their countrymen will consider every man who took part in this battle 
« a national hero and will feel undying gratitude for the service Lney have rendered 

1LIPIN0S SHO'J TTF.BTTAG-5 Og_HiM>ISH IN BATAM_-_QU5Z0N 

^^iTZT^ °™ heritage of heroism. We took 

up arms and fought the invader. No B«lf-« a P TOt ^. M i ion . co ^^!! b ^f ^ 9 S! 
challenge of that treacherous attack that started in Baguio ™ P"^^^ 1- • 
To have avoided that challenge or to have cowered before it would have been 
lose all pride and dignity, to have suffered a bottomless humiliation. 



5/ ProcIamltHnrFilipino soldiers in the field, Corregidor, January 3, 1942, 

itivera Collection, Vol. V, p. 2364. 
ti Message at the 7th Commonwealth Day celebration in Washington, D, C, 

November 15, 1942. Ibid. , p. 2402. 
1/ Press statement issued in Helbortme, Awtrali*, Apri3_Mr 1943... 
ai<k, P. 2327. 



11-137 

Vie Filipinos are not a people accustomed to crooking the knee to any power 
that may purpose to invade our contry and to hold us in thrall. We have been over- 
come by superior forces, but we have never been outfought; our country has been 
conquered, but we have never been vanquished. Every power that has ever dared to 
overrun our country has known the avenging anger of Filipino arms. 8 

50. II I S T 0 R Y 
EDITOR QUEZOH_m^S_MglICA gS_A LESSO H^IW HISTORY 

What became of the two great Republics of the ancient woild? Greece and Rome 
remained republics so long as they did not listen to the voice which spoke of con- 
quest, of extension of powers, of extension of territory. But as soon as the 
Greeks and the Romans alike sought to deprive weaker people of their liberty, 
they themselves lost thoir greatest privilege, their citizenship, and bowed their 
necks to imperialist power. 

This is not a matter of theory. No nation can permanently maintain two sys- 
tems of government based on conflicting principles. Sooner or later, one system 
will prevail over the other. Either the autocratic government of the Philippines 
ill invade American democracy at home, or the beneficent theories which govern 
them at home will have to be applied to these Islands. 

The American people cannot, without being untrue to themselves, continue 
to celebrate year after year the Declaration of Independence, thus roaf firming its 
doctrines, and at the same time assent to a policy in the Philippines which is 
in flagrant contradiction with these doctrines. They have either to confess that 
heir forefathers were wrong when they revolted against England and King George 
fas right, or else give to the Philippines that same independence, arid to my 
people that same privilege to pursue happiness in their own way, which the Decla- 
ration contemplated as being among the inalienable rights of every people. 

PHILIPPINES IS "EXHIBIT A" BEFORE BAR OF HISTORY 



The Filipino people have demonstrated conclusively their capacity for self- 
government, not only to their own satisfaction, but to the satisfaction of outsi- 
ders as well. We stand before the bar of history as "Exhibit A" to prove that an 
Oriental race, deprived for centuries of the God-given right of self-government, 
nay safely be entrusted with governmental powers. 

l^u^oTraddr^Trthe eighth anniversary of the Commonwealth, included in 
the U.S. Congress ional Record,. Vol. 89, A PP . Part 12, pp. A4907-08, by 
request of Repres7nt7tl7e"~John D. Dingell of Michigan, November 16, 1943. 
5| Rivera Collection, Vol. V, pp. 2470-2471 . 
1/ Article, "The Declaration of Independence," TheJ^i pino People, Vol. 1, 
I No. 5, January 1913. Rivera Collection, Vol. I, p.. 

\H Article, "The Jones Law: Its Effect on the tfnited Sta te s the Phili PP££» 
' and Otter Subject Peoples," ^mUS2iBS^2^ Vol. II, No. 12, November 
1917. Rivera Collection, Vol. 1, p. 447. 



11-138 

- Wm - 

jgPUlKS WHY HE 0P|03gD_HHC_AC T; IS_ VI|DICATH) BY HISTORY 

I am going to oppose the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act not upon the ground that 
• t gives independence to the Philippines,, hut upon the ground that it does not 

complete independence... If America is to retain these naval and military 
Aliens without adequate fortifications and garrisons, and a superior navy, it 
luld only serve as an invitation to war with Japan. 'The United States should 
entirely out... because Japan would then have one excuse less in attacking, 
that of protecting herself against the menace of your (American) military pre- 
sence in the Islands. 3 

33NATB CHI^JC^^S^S^^^S^SS" 

When the historian passes upon what we have all said and done at this 
.onontous period in our history - a period in which we either build or destroy, 
ovr nation's well-being - how petty and how small must our dissensions and dis- 
pu tes seem to him! How insignificant to him our cherished slogans by the side of 
the nation's future safety and welfare I 
UT « S_C0NS3RVE_OUR JICHJWORIC AL J|RITAGS = - JUSZON 

In our onward march to our national emancipation, we should not fail to 
look back to our T>ast as a people so that we may be guided by its tested ox. ■ 
-arionoe, It is, therefore, our duty not only to teach our children, and to point 
to the present as well as to the future generations, the heroic achievements of 
our forebears, the adventures they had lived as well as the mistakes they had 
committed, and the ideals for which they had cheerfully sacrificed their lives, 
but it is likewise our duty to preserve, to repair, to conserve and appropriately 
u* our historic antiquities and spots that abound in our country from BataneS 
to Mindanao. These historic antiquities are the heritage^ ancestral traditions 
which greatly enhances the supreme worth of our people. 
TO LOVE T HEI^ CQMTRY^^mi^TO^W^HI^^ 

We ought to give our people here the background of the race and the nation 
so that they may love their country and keep their tradition. 
gUSZON CREATES PHILIPPIgE JISTqRICAL = COMITTa^ 

Pursuant to CA No. ,69, and by virtue of the powers vested in me by the 
Constitution and by the said Act, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of 
======= in Theod ore Friend, Between Two 

2/ Quezon to Roy Howard, June 26, 193^ • , 1Qfiq « ^3. 

Empires . Manila: Solidaridad Publishing House, 1969, p. > 

^dressed to a youth group. Quoted ir 
\ti Undated Quezon holograph (1934 or 1935 J addressed 

Theodore Friend, 0£. pit..., P. 148. • t'on of P50,000 for 

|5/ Message to the First National Assembly on ^ e ^g^pJiUppines, October 27, 
identifying and marking historic antiqui^- 359.360. 
1936. Quezon Messages, Vol. 2 Part 1 ^ 
W Speech at a press conference, January Z^. ^" 



11-139 



Philippines , do hereby constitute and create a committee to be composed of nine 
-.embers, three of whom shall be appointed for a term of three years, three for 
+t, 0 years, and three for one year. Hereafter, three members shall be appointed 
each year for a term of three years. The members appointed shall elect from 
among themselves the chairman of the Committee and his secretary. 

The Committee shall meet at least twice a month or as often as may be 
nacessary to perform the duties imposed upon it by law, to wit; 

(a) To identify, designate, and appropriately mark the historical anti- 
quities abounding in the Philippines; 

(b) To preserve or repair important antiquities owned by the government 
of the Philippines or any of its political subdivisions; and 

(c) To acquire by purchase or otherwise antiquities owned by private 

. 7 
persons . 

DiaiilCTG ALL lI^^IC^_pOC^^ J|_TTO^ = ^mjO_TIIL_ 

Pursuant to the provisions of section 1699 of the Revised Administrative 
Code, I, Manuel L. Quezon, do hereby direct each and every office, bureau, or 
branch of the Government to turn over to the Director of the National Library all 
such public records, papers, and documents as are considered to be of historical 
importance for safekeeping in the National Library. Duplicate copies of such re- 
cords, papers, or documents to be turned over to the National Library shall, how- 
ever, be retained and kept in the office or bureau concerned for ready reference. 
In case of difference of opinion as to whether a paper, document, or public re- 
cord is of historical importance, the matter shallgbe submitted to the Board on 
Documents whose decision thereon shall be final. 
APPOINTS MaiSa RS OF PHILIPP IC HISTORIC AL COMMITTEE _ 

The President today authorized the appointment of the following as members 
of the Philippine Historical Committee, created under Executive Order ff 0 . 91, 
in accordance with Commonwealth Act. No. 169, appropriating ?50,000 for the iden- 
tification, marking, and preservation of historical monuments and places: 

Walter Robb, of the American Chamber of Commerce, for a term of 3 years; 

Prof. Jaime C. do Veyra, chairman of the National Language Institute, 3 years; 

fc. Miguel Selga , director of the Weather Bureau, 3 years; Dean Edward R. Hyde, 

U.P. college of engineering, 2 years; Acting Director Bulogio B. Rodriguez, of 

the National Library, 2 years; Dr. H. Otley,Beyer, acheologist, UP, 2 years; 

Dean Leandro H. Fernandez, college of liberal arts, UP, 1 ''f^'J^^ 
Bantug, of Bureau of Health, 1 year; and Luis Serrano, chief, education and 

i^ooutivo- Ordor Ho. gi^enting the Philippine Historical Committee , - 
January 23, 1937. SasSflSJJsSSafiSa* Vo1 - 3» Part 11 ' P * b1 * 

8/ Executive Order No. 103, "Directing All ^^^lli^^fi 
Government to Turn Over to the Natl IS* T«k (for the City of Manila), 
Documents of Historical Importance, City ot Jew oiv 
Jw~ lyjl. Quezon Mess ages,. Vol. 3, Part II, JBVil , p. wy. 



11-140 

- ill - 

3SS relations division, iualacanan, 1 year. ^ 

M'TTTBB CREATED TO DECID E ON ARCHIVE S AMD MPSEUH BUILDING 



cc: 



In order to determine upon the advisability of constructing a building to 
>ouse both the National Museum and Archives as contemplated by plans prepared by 
the bureau of public works as separate buildings for those purposes and the advi- 
ability of transferring the Aquarium from its present location to Port San An- 
tonio de Abad in Harrison Park, there is hereby created and constituted a Commit- 
boa to be composed of the following members: 

Mr. Arthur P. Fisher, Adviser to the President on Natural Resources, Chair- 
aaii; Mr. Eulogio B. Rodriguez, assistant director of the National Library; Dr. H. 
Otloy Beyer, professor of anthropology, U.P.; Dr. Bduardo Quisurabing, chief of the 
'fational Museum Division, Bureau of Science, and Nr. Antonio Toledo, supervising 
chitrfct, 3ureau of Public Works, members. 

The Committee shall study and submit its recommendations on the following 
propositions: 

1 . The advisability of housing the art and historical exhibits with the 
".rehires as contemplated by preliminary plans prepared by the Bureau of Public 
(forks for a building to be erected at Plaza McKinley, or of constructing separate 
buildings for the Archives and National Museum, and in the latter case, as to 
hether the building intended for the National Museum should house not only the 
irt and historical exhibits but also the natural history exhibits which are now a 
art of the Bureau of Seience. 

2. In case it is found advisable to construct separate buildings for the . 
National Museum and Archives, recommendations are desired as to whether the site 
ifflich would utilize the old foundations in Plaza McKinley may be considered a suit- 
able location for the proposed Archives Building and as to whether it is consi- 
dered necessary to construct such a building in the near future, taking into con- 
sideration that valuable records of the Government are now being stored in the 

ce Plant Building which is a fire-proof structure. 

3. The desirability of transferring the Aquarium from its proposed loca- 
tion to Port San Antonio de Abad in Harrison Park with an estimate of cost of 
such, transfer. 10 

51 . HOUSING 
SLg£lg ESSENTIAL TO CIVILIZED ^T^-J^ ZOU 

The proper housing of the laborers and of the people of meager income is 



!/ Press statement on the membership of the Philippine Historical Committee, 
September 15, 1937 . Quezon Messages^ Vol. 3, Part 1, JBVPF, p. 331. 

S/ Administrative Order No. 54, "Creating a Committee to Select Sites and Study 

Plans for the Proposed Archives and Museum Buildings and the Transfer of the 
Aquarium to a New Site," December 23, 1937. Quezon Messages Vol. 3, Part II, 
JBVFF, pp. 1187-1188. 



11-141 



c problem which governments all over civilized world are squarely meeting with 
-.11 their resources, and it is high tine that we started something towards the 
solution of our own. 

The government 1 s intervention in this problem is predicated on the propo- 
sition that citizens are entitled to certain essentials of civilized life; that 
iacont home is one of these essentials, and that low-salaried individuals, not 

,-blG to build adequate hones or to rent thorn on current commercial rates out of 

1(a) 

their own resources, can do so, if they are helped by the government. 
SLUMS BggSSDIjjS PLACE J|fffl_GKgIg_A ^_H00 DLUH5 

Slums everywhere are considered to be the breeding place of germs, causing 
physical, moral and social diseases. Thriving on filth, slums provide the atmos- 
phere for the formation of that type of hoodlums who ara not born criminals, but 
- 2(a) 
merely grow up to be so because ox the environment in which they live. 

52. H U M A II RIG K T S 



I am against communism. I am a firm believer in the institution of private 
property. I contend, however, that whenever property rights come in conflict with 
iunan rights, the former should yield to the latter. 1 ^ 

PROFIT MOST GIVE WAY TO SUPREMACY OF HUMAN LIFE - QUEZO N 



If we would preserve the institution of private property, we must hold 
fast to this principle, in the determination of conflicting rights between man and 
aan. . It is thus that we may draw the line between the rights of labor and capi- 
tal, and erect an economic structure based on the principle that human life is the 

aeasure of all other values, that considerations of possession and profit must 

. , 2(b) 
give way to the supremacy of human existence. 

EIGHT PMA CADETS DISCHARGED FOR HAZING 



"Whereas, the following named cadets of the Philippine Military Academy - 
?. R. Molina, E. 3. Villains, V. N. Ayaay, J. Victoria, G. L. Manikan, J. A. San- 
ches, J. Q. Arce, G. M. de Castro - have been found guilty of maltreating and 
abusing first year members of the cadet corps, in flagrant violation of the 

Ming orders of the Academy and in utter disregard of personal admonitions of 
ha faculty with regard to the offense of hazing; 

"Whereas, drastic punishment is necessary to be imposed in order to emphasize 

E/^^lTSe First National Assembly, October 1 6, 1937. OP. HB#39, TNI. 
W Ibid. 

W Speech on accepting his nomination as Resident of the 

July 20, 1935. Mes sages , _Vol. 1 , £>p. *av , 

Ibi^ 



11-142 • 

- m - 

the government's determination to stamp out and destroy the contemptible practice 

of naltroating subordinates at the Military Academy, for any military superior 
taking advantage of his position to humiliate or to inflict personal injury upon 
his subordinate who may not resent the act, is not only guilty of gross miscon- 
duct in a military sense, but ho also violates the true standards of a gentleman; 

Whereas, the mission of the Military Academy is to produce an officer coro 
of efficiency, imbued with patriotism, pride, and self-respect and that while dis 
ciplinary methods in that institution must teach subordination of the individual 
but must not produce or permit sertility; 

"Whereas, in the further development of its military academy, the Philippic 
Amy is privileged to take advantage of the better practices and experiences in 
aiailar schools throughout the world, with West Point and Annapolis as the best 
models; 

"Whereas, the defense alleged in favor of the above-mentioned cadets that 
the faults committed by them have become almost customary and have been tacitly 
condoned in the Philippine Military Academy; 

"Whereas, if this is true, there is the greater reason for taking the most 
drastic action, if it is desired to correct instantly and completely that state 
of things and that it might serve in the future as a warning to any upperclassman 
•no nay be so disposed to humiliate and demean his subordinates and lowerclass- 
Eon; and 

"Whereas, far more important than mere academic and technical training of 
the cadets in the Academy is their development into a body distinguished by per- 
sonal integrity, gentlemanly habits, professional efficiency, and high patriotism 
r. cadet corps capable of producing the r.en who must lead the future Philippine 
Amy in its high mission of defending our country; 

"Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon. .. hereby discharge the cadets above- 

3 

nened, effective immediately." 

The problem of our ago is how to harmonize property right with the right 

4 

to live - and the right to live is paramount and above every other right. 
COMPLY WITH YOIJT?. DUTIES, ? T IE IT DEMAND YOUR ^ IGHTg_ 

Life is not all pleasure, life means duties; and wh», a man. has learned 
liie duties and knows how to comply with them, he will then know how to demand his 
rights. ^ 

2/ Administrative Order He. 1, "Discharging From Military Service Certain Cadets 
at the Philippine Military Academy," January 29, 1936. C fe g z on Me ssages, 
Vol. 2, Part 1, JBVP?, pp. 741-742. 

hJ Speech on the first anniversary of the Commonwealth, November 15, 1936. 
Usi&s., P. 144. 

5/ Address before the Military Order of the Carabao, February 27, 1937. 
QP, MR#39, TI-iL. 



11-143 



.,r i/fY OF RIGHT TO LIFE OVJiJR PROPERTY RIGHT 

vfhile I believe that the right to life is a fundamental right, nobody can 
.. - r ive another of anything without due process of law. I believe that property 
•i'-ht is also a fundamental right, that nobody can be denied it without due pro- 
of law; although, in a conflict between the right to live and the right to 
.Til I nust say that the right to live is the nore fundamental right. 

PPO^CTjifflALLYJ^ITS^^QQV^^in? AIH) OF P EOP LE 

You (referring to the public prosecutors) are just as much in duty bound to 
otect -the government fron any encroachment upon its rights as you are in duty 
bound to prevent the government from encroaching upon the rights of an individual 
cr a third party. 

I do not want the government to ev.iploy any means, even if they are tech- 

7 

Really proper, to deprive anybody of rights that he has acquired. 
^yaRrSSiMT 3TAHDS FOURSCUARii! ON PROPERTY RIGHTS 

I enjoin you (referring to the farmers) to naintain peace. I wish you to 
bo peaceful, because a troubled country will never be progressive and its people 
cannot enjoy prosperity. Besides, the government cannot allow you to be always 
in chaos.- Our government is not a joke. The government will not allow any citizen 
to unlawfully cultivate land which is not his, or grab the property of another. 

RIC-HT_T0 3ELF-DEFEl!SiJ R^COGNIS|D_IK_ALL _LAvJS_ 

There is one law which is a natural law, and also recognized in -criminal 

9 

law, that everybody has the right to self-defense. 

Think not only of your rights but of the rights of others. Bear, in mind 
not only your needs but/ tht° needs of others. With these sentiments, I have no 
doubt that the day will come when we shall see a Philippines happy and free, which 

10 

is the .ambition of my life. 

53. I H M I G R A T I 0 H 
ffSSOII JUSTD'iaS PHILI PPINE IIKIGRATION LAVS 

^7^Z7J7^n S ~Zvae Philippines and the position of the Philippines 

r^rirn^f erence with the Solicitor General and other public prosecu- 
tors, September 10, 1937. QP> luL. 

l S!: h on r „po=t t « propel Hg*J-«— £ Si,"" 
Estate, at Barrio Cruz na Daan, San Kaiacx, ^j-c-^ , 
Quezon Message s. Vol. 5, Part I, JBVFF, P- ^ 
IV Speech at a press conference, February 2, 1939. QP> i • 

10/ Speech before the National Commission of Labor, Oune 5, 1939. 9. H*H2, 



11-144 



relation to Asiatic countries should impel us to eliminate the discrimination 
ff cainst Asiatic 3 now contained in our immigration laws. The Philippines can ill- 
"•■•ford to discrininato against her own neighbors. 

On the other hand, full protection to Filipino labor demands that laborers 
jp ii classes and of all races be denied admission into the Philippines, with 
the exception of skilled labor, when such is not available here. 

;j^STRICTED_IMjIGr^TION :IARMmjL TO PKIL IPPIi lB LABOR 

There is a great deal of unemployment in my country and abundance of labor 
both in the factories and on the f arras, and unrestricted immigration would in- 
evitably cause hardship, if not starvation, to our working people. 

EXCLUSION PQLICY_OM_^m^^D^LOM]^Y_qUEZ^ ; . 

We pro of the Oriental race and we are in the Orient, and the exclusion of 
Orientals from our country seens to be wholly unjustified. 

Immigration speaks highly not only of the opportunities offered here for 
individual betterment, but also - and this is really flattering - of conditions 
that stand for peace and order and insure justice and fair treatment to all, 
nationals and foreigners alike. 

There is ample justification to establish a system for the checking up of 
foreigners living in our midst, not only to ascertain, from time to time, their 
right to reside in this country, but possibly also from the standpoint of public 
safety and national security. 

It is bettor to adopt this measure now, rather than wait for the time whon 
the problem shall have reached its worst stage, and an/attempt in this direction 

4 

nay then encounter serious difficulties. 

54. IFDBPB D E IT C 3 

.... Let us suppose, for the sake of argument, that there is such a privi- 
leged class in the Philippines. But is this any reason for denying us our in- 
alienable right of independence? The form of government that the nation should 
establish is a matter of no concern to anybody except the nation itself. No 
peculiar form of government has been admitted as the one ideal government for 

1/ Message to th* First National Assembly on the regu elation of ^jntty^^ 

residence of aliens in the Philippines, September ?u, xjy j 

Vol. 2, Pp.rt 1, JPVFF, pp. 270-279. 

U Speech on Sino-Philippine Friendship at Canton, China, December 12, 1936. 
:>uoson Messages. Vol. 2, Part 1, JBVFF, pp. 151-152. 

2/ IbjLd^ ., _ 

U Message to the First Kionol Asscbly, Ootobor 16, 1937. V, MM. 



11-145 



1 

kinds of people. . 
w.S.^OLONIAL^B^BRI^^_U ITiqiJB II I -fORLD'S HI STORY 

The main difference between the record of America and the Philippines and 
that of any other nation and its colonies lies in the fact that America fron the 
-3rv moment she implanted her flag in the Islands told my people that the Stars 
an d Stripes, the syubol of liberty and freedom, was brought to the Philippines 
not to subjugate them but rather to bring to then the blessings of individual 
liberty and political independence. 

Such a solejan and alluring pronise acted as the most powerful incentive to 
;;ake the Filipinos, already a liberty-loving, progressive people, strive more 
raid more to be equipped with all the instrumentalities necessary for an indepen- 
dent national life. And today they are a full-grown nation, anxious to give ex- 
pression to their own genius, so as to contribute, in their own way, to the 

" " ' 2 
progress: of mankind. 



SOLVE PHILIPPINE QUESTIO N UIT HOUT CONSULTING FILIPINOS? 

The first difficulty and serious obstacle to a fair solution of the Phi- 
lippine question and problem lies in the fact that most of those Americans who, 
in private or official capacity, have come to the Philippines for the purpose of 
finding out the situation and the solution of this problem seen to have, as the 
background or the starting point of their investigation, the idea that the Fili- 
pinos need not be heard in the solution of this problem, because we do not know 
what is best for our country, and if we know,.it, it is not the good of the coun- 
try that we are seeking but only our own private and individual interests. They 
will listen, it is true, to what we may have to say, but few of them will take 
seriously what we say unless we belong to those few that will deny the capacity 
of our people for self-government or their right to be free. 

U.S. 10 LOI'GER RESPONS IBLE AFTER P.I. liiDBPEHDBHCE 

I think that if and when the United States . grants the Philippines their 
independence because of the repeated requests of the Filipino people, no further 
responsibility will lie at the doors of the United States, even should the 
Philipoines get into trouble with any other nation. 

\n any event, the question of Philippine independence is one of fundamen- 
tal right, and as long a, the Filipino people insist on the recognition of that 
right the nossible consequences to them are their own look out and the United 
states would have done its duty toward the people of these Islands by giving 
V^Trt^Ts. House of Representatives, 1912, n.d.m. OP, M#22, TITL. 

H Radio address from Washington, D.C, ^^iiSf ^ > 

20 , 1924 . The Philippin e Repu blic,. November 1 924 . Rivera 

P. 763. 

V Speech at Senate, 1926, n.d.m. W, WE#29, TEIL. 



11-146 



4 

cr.en what they want. 



NOTHING NORSE FOR PEOPLE ?HA1? UITCERTATOTV r,w T .T K5S TIII y 

If you don't intend to give the Filipinos their independence it is better 
to say so, And, if you intend to give it, it is better to give it (without much 
ed0 - ABS ) . Nothing is worse for a people than uncertainty. There are people, for 
stance, who are afraid to die. Why? because they have no idea of what it is to 
die. I have never seen a man or wonan yet who has not been afraid to die. Uncer- 
tainty is worse than realization because imagination presents things in such ter- 
rific clearness that we can see much more in the imagination than there is in 
actual realty. 



It is a question of sentiment. Filipinos are Filipinos. Their country is 
tho Philippines. They cannot turn their back to the Philippine Islands. There is 
this national sentiment among them, and while they realize the benefits conferred 
upon them by the government of the United States, still .they would like to have ' 
their own government, and Americans who believe in self-government cannot mis- 
understand that feeling and desire on the part of the -'Filipino people. 6 

FILIPINOS CAN NOT BE HA PPY WITHOUT INDEPEND ENCE 

Under an independent Philippine government, the United States can keep the 
commercial advantages that she now enjoys as well as the strategical advantages 
because it will be in the interest of the Filipino people to let them have these 
commercial and strategic advantages, You will have everything that you need in 
tho Philippines, without the responsibility of governing the Filipinos, which iB 
the one thing that the Filipinos do not feel happy about in the present relation- 
ship between the United States and the Philippines. 7 

HLJ = DISISTS_0N_FILIPIN0S ' RIGHT TO GOVERN THEMSELVES 



What the Filipino people want to have is immediate and absolute independence; 

but if they cannot have immediate and absolute independence, I think they will be 

satisfied to have full control of their own affairs. In other words, while it is 

our ambition and desire, to have our own government, just as free and independent 

as overy other absolutely independent government on earth, if in your opinion this 

is not to the interest of the United States, or in the interest of the Philippine 

Islands, or both, then something less than that might be acceptable, provided our 

8 

r] -ght to govern ourselves is recognized and granted, 
i/ Press interview, 1926, n.d.n. Ibid. 

V Speech requested by a prominent American, Nr. Brown, 1927, n.d.m. Ibid. 

y Speech, "Plea for Philippine Independence," before the Economic Club, USA, 

iTpvember 25, 1927. Ibid. 
1/ ibidU 

f/ Speech at the Hamilton Club, Chicago, Illinois, November 29, 1927. «P, tffi#29, TNL. 



11-147 

TPT T3PPIS B ISDEPEHDENCE kSD PR IDE OF U.s . M0T5ERH00D 



The strategic or commercial importance ox the Philippines, instead of being 
„ source of danger to her is, on the contrary, what nakes for. her safety. Mutual 
jealousies among the powers will be her very protection against any nation 
attempting to conquer her. It is the old game of diplomacy. 

Just picture to yourselves, if you will, a Philippines raising her head 
as mistress of her own destinies in the midst of the Nest Pacific, holding the 
torch of democracy and freedom and pointing tiie way to the teeming millions of 
Africa and Asia now suffering under alien rule; a Philippines, heir in the Orient ' 
to the teachings of Christianity, a fair daughter Republic upon which the sun 
Ins ever shone, and tell me whether such a picture does not make you thrill with 
the pride of motherhood. ^ 

HHPIM) COBSBflSUS; IMMEDIATE INDEPENDENCE! 



It is the consensus of opinion of the Filipinos with whom I have consulted, 
raid they come from all walks of life, as to what the attitude of our people would 
be, if they were to choose between the present status with free trade with Ame- 
rica, on the one hand, and immediate independence, on the other, without free 
trade, that the answer would be immediate independence. 10 

iSILIPPIflS INDEPENDENCE OUR SUPREME ASPIRATION - QUEZON 



Independence is and has ever been the supreme aspiration of the Filipino 
pdopie. It is a longing chastened and hallowed by sacrifices and strengthened by 
the conviction that through freedom alone can the higher destinies of our people 
be achieved. The struggles for independence have met with many disappointments, 
but the national spirit has never been broken. On the contrary, our people's 
faith has been renewed at every seeming disillusion. Whenever the circumstances 
denanded national unity, our people have laid down the arms of partisanship to 
rally under the banner of our paramount cause. ^ 

iSJIil-^£ = ll^_3UT^ 

My people who are already aware of the real situation which confronts the 
country, should not expect much from my trip. The coming session of Congress 
being a short one, it is a human impossibility that any legislation affecting 
the Filipino problem would be finally acted upon, and it is extremely hard to 
Predict what might be the outcome of certain administrative difficulties which 
tave arisen at the last hour. But I am p-;ing, heartened by the hope that in tine 



2/ Speech before the Chicago Council of Foreign Relations, November 30, 1927. 
IMda. 

iQ/ Press statement, 1929, n.d.m. 0^, I1R#31, TEL. 

U/ Message to the Filipino people, 1929, n.d.m. Ibid. 



11-148 m 

12 

our stoadfastness will bear fruits. 
-niCI^AlMY^DBLgT^RIOUS^TQ PHILIPPINE IHTBH333g 

Regardless of nationality, it is the consensus of opinion in the Philip- 
pines that the uncertainty as to the future relations, both politically and eco- 

.ronically, between the United States and the Philippine Islands is causing serious 

1 3 

injury to the interest of those Islands. 
?TT.TPINOS_gAHT IHKji Dj^EjJNDJ)? FOREIGH RULE 

The Filipino feels that he is entitled to rule in his own country and to 

the extent that foreign rule is obdious and obtrusive he is desirous of a prompt 

1 4 

cessation of foreign rule. 

MBZ OH TELLS SECRETARY HURLEY FILIPINOS WAIST THEI R OWN GOV ERNMENT 

The Filipino people are and have been dissatisfied with the present poli- 
tical status of the Islands, because they want to be free; that is, they want to 

1 5 

".lave a government of their own making with officials of their own choosing. 
m M DANGER S CONFRONTING PHILIPPINE MISSION TO AMIERICA 

The first danger which threatens us is that we nay not get anything, and 
that we may not take any forward step whatever. 

The second danger against which we should be warned is that independence, 
if granted us, night be given under burdensome conditions. 

The third danger - the most unjust to us - is that no independence bill 

in any form may be passed, but the entry of our products into the United States 

16 

nay tie restricted and Filipino immigration prohibited. 
FILIPINOS WANT INDEPENDENCE IN WHAT EV E R FORK 

Viewpoint of the Filipino- People: 

First, immediate establishment of a free and independent government; 

Second, if this is not acceptable, immediate establishment of an autono- 
mous government with all the consequent powers; and 

Third, in the event that this is not acceptable, immediate establishment 
of an independent government in the Philippines in whatever form the United States 

1 7 

"i;.y decide to grant it. 

ffilLIPPINS UNCERTAINT Y MUST END - QUEZON 

I emphasized that the most pressing need of the Islands was a definite 

12/ KessagTto" the Filipino people, August 2, 1930. OP, ^#31, TNL. 

Statement on Philippine independence, 1931, n.d.u. OP, KJ#32 f TNL. 
IAI Article, "Philippine Labor in the United States," 1931, n.d.m. Ibid,. 
15/ Statement at conference with U.S. Secretary of War Patrick T. Hurley, 1931, 

n.d.m. Ibid. 

& Report on his trip to the United States, November 9, 1931. IM<k 
M Press statement, October 23, 1931. 3P. Iffi ^ 2 ' THL * 



11-149 



understanding as to tho political and economic relationship between the United 
States and the Philippines on a basis satisfactory to both peoplos, and I assured 
liii (the President of the U.S.) that even the Americans, and foreigners here agree 
w ith the Filipinos that the insecurity of the present relations should terninate. 

HLIPINOS^^_IgMB^^gg-gYM^™OIg_? , ^ TRADE 

Tho nasses of tiio Filipino people, jointly with a great majority of far- 

■ ovS , merchants and professionals, are in favor of immediate, absolute and com- • 

jo-be independence of the Philippines, with free trade for sometime if -this were 

1 9 

possible, and without free trade, if need be. 
TMgraHMSHCB EVEN WITHOUT ECONOMIC READJUSTMENT 



1 



If we cannot secure some arrangement whereby we shall be given time for 
the economic readjustment of our country, we should unhesitatingly accept indepen- 
dence no matter how burdensome the conditions may be from the economic standpoint. 

FILIPINOS WON'T REVOLT , TH EY JU ST WANT TO BE FREE 



There is no cause,, nor intention on the part of the people of the Philip- 
pines to rebel against the U.S. 

But there is no question that the people of the Philippines desire indo- 

21 

DcndoncG and the majority of them want immediate independence. 
PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE FIRST - QUEZON 



This sudden termination of free trade relations between the United States 
raid the Philippine Islands would cause very serious hardships upon our people, 
and would, to some extent, affect the finances of our government. 

Every serious minded Filipino, everyone who has regard for the present and 
future of his people, will naturally make every endeavor to save his country from 
such hardships if he can, in securing its independence, which he must. 

yjmiVB view on the transition period 



With reference to tho transition period, the government of the Commonwealth 
would have the right to ask the granting of independence at any time prior to 
tho expiration of the said transition period whenever, in the opinion of tho 
government of the Commonwealth, the economic provisions of the law proved to be 
destructive rather than constructive of the economic structure of the islands; 



12/ Reporron~his"trip to the United States, November 9, 1931. IMds. 
IV Ibid. 

20/ Press statement, November 28, 1931. iMd.. 
Hi Statement at a press conference, December 14, 1931. MA*- 
22/ Speech at a luncheon in honor of Congressman Butler Hare, October 8, 1932. 
Ibid. 



II— 1 50 



,, the government of the United States would have the duty, of either granting 
.iiiippine independence forthwith, upon the receipt of the petition from the 
^onwealth, or else provide for such trade relations between the United States 
, ud the Philippines as will accomplish the purpose of strengthening the econo- 
.io structure of the Philippines for which the transition period was established. 
•^TLIPIflOS ; JAiCT FR33D0M TO RLlALIZEJRiETn remj^Qmpry 

Independence has ever been the supreme aspiration of the Filipino people. 
:t is a longing strengthened by the conviction that through freedom alone can 
t:,o higher destinies of our people be achieved. So far, our peaceful struggle for 
a separate nationhood have net with many disappointments, but the national spirit 
has not been shaken. On the contrary, our people '3 faith has been refreshened at 
every seeming setback, knowing as wo do that America will not fail us. 24 
IjggjflffiBflCB CH07MME GLORY OF OUBZOS'S YISARS OF SACRIFICE 

I am anxious to see our independence established at the earliest possible 
date. I look upon it as the most precious reward for the many years of ceaseless 
3fforts that I have spent in its quest. I pledge myself anew, resolutely, to take 
nil the necessary steps loading to the advent of independence, and to do every- 
thing in my power to make the Philippine Republic strong and enduring, and the 
blessings of liberty not only the cherished possession of this generation but 
the priceless heritage of the Filipi.no people for all time. 25 

BIKES OF » MKCIP3: AHBaiCA'S NOBLEST UiroKRTAK IM} 

We are bringing into being a new nation. We are inaugurating its government. 
! '>j are seeing the fruition of our age-old striving for liberty. \1e are witnessing 
the final stage in the fulfillment of the noblest undertaking ever attempted by 
•ay nation in its dealing with a subject people. And how well this task has beon 
larforrced is attested to by the blessings which fron fourteen million people go 
to Anerica in this solemn hour. 26 

IjffiOg ASKS CMfflT IOMS, BU T BIRD I ff GOLDiM ? CAGE HAS Till-; ANSWH R; FRB3P0M! 



What, I ask, would be the use of seeing our country free one day, with its 
'TO flag standing alone and flying against the sky, only to see ourselves the sub- 
lets of another power the following day, with its flag the sovereign in and of 
•^country? What would be the purpose of educating our young sen and women 

y Speech at the Senate, October 13, 1935. QP, HR#34, TITL. 

V Memorial to the U.S. President, December, n.d. 1933. Ibid. 

2/ Speech on accepting his nomination as President of the Philippines, 
J uly 20, 1955. q ueaon Me ssages . Vol. 1 , Sp. Rev. fid., JBVFF, p. 245. 

] J Inaugural address, November 15, 1935, Legislative Building. Ibid. , p. 11. 



11-151 



c0 rcernin.g their rights and privileges as free citizens, if tomorrow they are to 
gubjects of a foreign foe? Why build up the wealth of the nation only to swell 
the coffers of another? If that be our preordained fate, why seek a new uaster 

.-y.n the Stars and Stripes has given us not only .justice and fair treatment, wol- 

'■-re and prosperity, but also over increasing political liberties including 

i" c 27 

independence. 

,,,, mJ) Y T0_GRASP TORCH OFJFRiJgDOM -_AKD D EF ETOJ IT! 

National freedom now stands before us as a shining light - the freedom 
•that for many years gleaned only as a fitful candle in the, distant dark, tfe shall 
nqico ourselves ready to grasp the torch, so that no predatory force nay ever 
strike it from our hand3. 

3U3Z0N SPEAKS O F EARLY I?3'£PnW&:CT2 , BC0U0MIC REiJ)JTISTKBHTS_ 

It was agreed that a joint committee of experts (would make) recommenda- 
tions to consider the bearing . which an advancement in the date of independence 
would have on facilitating or retarding action on the program of economic adjust-. 
:ont of the Philippines. 

It was further agreed that preferential trade relations between the United 
States and the Philippines are to bo terminated at the earliest practicable date 
consistent with affording the Philippines a reasonable opportunity to adjust her 
national economy (through) a reciprocal agreement on a non-preferential hasi3. 

H^PR0P0S3S_T0_PDR_INDEPE|£ 

After reporting to the President (Franklin D. Roosevelt - ABS) on general 
conditions prevailing in the Commonwealth, and to . remedy ■ the uncertainty 
of our future trade relations with America, I proposed to him that the date for 
the recognition of the independence of the Philippines be set for the 30th of 
December, 1938, or the 4th of July, 1939. You understand, I suppose, the reason 
for the choice of either date. The thirtieth of December is our national holiday, 
M the fourth of July is America's. I gave the President my reasons for the pro- 
posal, and after listening to me with close attention and great interest, he sug- 
gested, without himself expressing any opinion on the subject, that I discuss the 
luostion with both the Secretary of State and the Secretary of War... ' 

P&on ax pLAiire miY ma IROP^sBDjmrauj^w^wcj^ 



29 



You must bo interested in knowing why I proposed that independence be 



W Hossose to the First National Assembly on national defense, November 2 5 , 1935. 
toon Messages. Vol. 1, Sp. Rev. Ed., J3VFF , pp. 34-3.. 

2§/ IbicU „ . 

22/ Press statement on Philippine independence and -nomic adjustments . ftp* 

is, 1937. aiflpo^Hqaaasaa^voi. 3, Rart 1, jm*, p. 3^u. 

W Speech on the p^pose 

the High Commissioner, at the Rissal nemo* j.^ 
Ibid. , p. 107. 



11-152 



- m - 



panted earlier than contemplated under the Independence Act. The nain reason 
iB this: If, as long as the Philippines is under the American flag, Congress 
siumld feel at liberty to make such changes in the trade relations between the 
tso countries as in its judgment may be necessary, then the only remedy to the 
situation would be to place the trade relations between the Philippines and the 
United States on the basis of a treaty between the United States and an indepen- 
dent Philippines. ^ 

KgiSIDENT qUEZON BSLIES "PROS" CHARGE KB UAS AFRAI D CF IKDEPENDEIICS 

There is a provision in the Tydings-IicDuff ie Law which establishes a sub- 
stantial difference between the two laws. In the Hare-Hawos-Cutting Law that 
virovision was there, but I am interested only in the substance of the thing. That 
ves not an independence bill. I cannot, for historical reasons, let the state- 
ment in your memorial lie unchallenged - that the 1'ydings-McDuf f ie Law and the 
Kpxe-Hawea-Cutting Law are the sa:/.e - because that is not true. That provision 
.■-.lone constitutes such a difference as to make one an independence bill and the 
other not. I was willing to accept the law (llare-Eawes-Cutting Law) when the pro- 
vision for military and naval reservations was removed. I an not afraid of in- 
dependence. It was nonsense what the "PRO" leaders said - that I did not want 
32 

independence , 

Iiffl.BPDM5NCB_N 0T_L/JSR THAN 1 93 9 OR ELSE... 

Let us be honest with ourselves and with the rest of the world; if we want 
independence and are ready to take its consequences, let us all join and ask for 
independence not later than 1939. 

If we are afraid of independence now, let us say so, and let us leave the 
question of Philippine independence for future generations - those that may have 
more moral and physical courage than wo have, or those that may be in a much 

33 

stronger position to fight for the independence of their country than we are. 
SBS/fl THINGS AHEAD A3 AFTERMATH Off INDjjPE HDEMCE 

human ingenuity has not yet devised a means whereby wo nay pierce the veil 

that hides the future from our view, but if it is true that forthcoming events 

cast their shadows before, then present indications give us reason to hope that 

the country is inexorably headed for greater and grander things which are in- 

34 

separable concomitants to that eternal boon of God - independence. 
2i/ Pbidj., p. 109 



12/ Conference with a delegation of the Young Philippines, September 29, 1937. 
Ibid-, p. 133. 

22/ Speech urging independence not later than 1939, October 11, 1937. 
OP, KR#39, TNL. 

W Message to the First National Assembly, October 16, 1937. WA» 



11-153 



4MHi 



I 



In my recent trip abroad I proposed to the President of the United States 
tliat he recommend to the Congreds the granting of complete independence to the 
Philippines on either the 30th of December, 1 93 8, or the 4th of July, 1939. . ' 

I can see no valid reason why, if the Philippines can bo given indepen- 
dweo in 1946, she may not have it in 1938 or in 1939. In the short span of seven 
years the Filipino people can hardly do anything that would substantially change 
their present situation. Any obstacles which would vitally affect the chances of 
,. successful and lasting independent nationhood in 1939 cannot be overcome by 1946 
The best interest, indeed, the very life of the nation is a stake. If it is our 
resolve to be an independent nation, this is the time, for every year lost is to 
our evident disadvantage. ^ 

lIIgL01I-i]^g^gliggj;^^gl>g™..QP FOREIGNERS? 

It is true that from the point of view of a foreigner, who does not intend 
to remain in the Philippines after independence shall have been granted and who 
is contemplating to liquidate his interests in this country, the remaining seven 
years (1939-1946) may, perhaps, give him the opportunity to withdraw his invest- 
ments. But, is this a sufficient reason to postpone the grant of independence : if , 
oa the other hand, it would be to the interests of the Filipino people to acce- 
lerate its grant? Is the future well-being of a whole nation to be sacrificed for 
the benefit of a few foreigners? Do these foreigners have any right to a special 
consideration? 

IJMPliWD3:iCE GRANT DURING FDR'S TERM MOOT ADVANTAGEOUS 



My main reason for asking that Philippine independence be granted not later 

than the 4th of July, 1939, is that I am sincerely of the opinion that it will be 

to our best interests to secure independence during and under the Administration 

of President Roosevelt. I know the President, his progressive and liberal ideas, 

his very deep sense of justice, and his friendship for and good will towards the 

Filipino people. I have no doubt that under his leadership we will receive from 

the government of the United States the fairest treatment that we may ever expect 

to receive under the leadership of his successors. And if the Philippines were to 

become independent not later than the fourth of July, 1939, President Roosevelt 

would still have more than one full year to extend his helping hand to the new 

Philippine Republic in the early stages of its dealings, as an independent nation, 
both with the United States and the rest of the world. We could, indeed, find no 
better sponsor than President Roosevelt to usher the Philippines into the family 
of free nations. 5 ' 



2/ Message to the First National Assembly, October 18, 1937. ttueson Message s, 
Vol. 3, Part 1 , JBVFF, p. 212.. 

& p. 213. 

2/ Ibid., pp. 214-215. 



II— 1 54 

rn -;; ? ^niii:?CS ONLY SOLUTION TO FIL-AKffltlCAR PHEDICiJ?j!M 

It oust be recognized, on the one hand, that America cannot,, in fairness to 
herself* concede aore governmental powers to the Conrionwealth than she has granted 
v-jthout endangering her own interest and peace, nor, on the other hand, can the 
Filipino people assume responsibility for their due preparation for independence 
T *th only such limited powers as have been vested in the Corsmonwealth government. 
In this predicament, it were better for America, and the Philippines to be inde- 
-,-.vi,j' t of each other so tlv.it each ->ay be free tc act ir. the furtherance of her 
n national objectives and interests. JKJ 

!i . S , 'JTTHD3 AWAL FROM P .I. 33I1AC03 LIGHT TO EUMAKITY 

In an age when defenseless or powerless nations are in constant dread of 
their very existence lest some powerful nation attempt to subjugate thorn, Ameri- 
ca's voluntary withdrawal from a country already under its lawful domain, so rich. • 
in natural resources and so promising in material returns, stands as the beacon 
lifeiit pointing the way to a distressed humanity out of the threatening universal 
danger which that great advocate of national rights, h'oodrow 'Jilson, appropriately 
called self -determinat ion . 

Here is the admirable example of two peoples thrown together by the hands 

of destiny and agreeing between themselves in goodwill and with best wishes for ■ 

one another to sever their political union that each nay go its own way as God 

39 

has willed that every people should. 

m mm iirosiPaMJca u^dhr uwr aiid^all^circukstahcbs - quiizcH, 

The economic policy of America affecting the Philippines which she promul- 
gated upon her own initiative and responsibility has created an economic situation 
'icro that makes imperative the granting of sufficient time for the economic re- 
adjustment of this country before the present trade relations are completely ter- 
minated, unless the granting of independence is to be made with utter disregard 
of the economic and financial consequences .with all its implications to the 
Philippines. 

However, both as the authorized spokesman for our people and as a Filipino, 
I shall not place myself in the position of refusing independence under any and 
all circumstances if and when it be so decided by the Congress. No self-respecting 

40 

people would do otherwise. 

HIILIPPIH ES MUST Ed FA IR, JTJ3*' ' m ™TE»m- SAYS QUEZON 

"7^1^ fool p^tly free to do as we please in our relations with 

22/ Ibid,., p. 217. 

39/ Speech on the second anniversary of the Commonwealth, November 15, 1937. 

on the attitudj ^^^^^^^ 
proposed resolution on immediate freedom, *abi s 
Quezon Mess ages. V ol. 4, Part 1, JBTFl' , p. 624. 



II— 1 55 



foreign nations without regard to their rights and the rights of their nationals 
living in or trading with the Philippines. The tine is past when any nation can 
; >ncloso itself behind forbidding walls. We are in the world and must live with 
the world . We oust conceive and devise, adopt and execute our national policies 
-rfth a clear vision and a full consciousness of the realities of the present- 
Ptatc of international relationship. We ijust, above all, be fair and just, tole- 
rant and neutral, so as not to give an excuse on the part of any foreign power to 

■interfere with our affairs or to charge us with jeopardizing the rights of ether 
41 

...etions . 

r,:naoN_CITiiia AM^ RICA_^S_ RO L S AFT3R GRATA? OP I W22Kffl)VaCE TO P.S 

I ara persuaded that America, in granting us independence, does it upon the 
assumption that she has stayed in the Philippines long enough and has given the 
Filipinos sufficient training to permit then to assume full responsibility for 
their national affairs, in accordance with the rules and dictates of international 
iustice and anity. America, once she has granted us independence, will not attempt 
to continue gliding our destiny, nor will she assume responsibility for otir mis- 
takes or misdeeds. Every sign points to the conclusion that when America leave 

the Philippines she will do it, feeling that she has discharged her duties fully 

4-2 

:.nd satisfactorily towards the Filipinos. 
HLIPIHO K 



The masses of our people are for independence at any cost and under any cir- 
ouastances. I am under the impression that many of them have gotten the idea that 
independence will automatically or miraculously improve their living conditions, 
fM that they would not be willing to listen to any discussion of the difficulties 
that would confront the Filipino people if our trade relations with the United 
States, which have been helpful to the Philippines in the past economically, are 
cut immediately, and therefore , I cannot give any answer as to what would happen or 
what should be done because I am not certain what the majority of the people would 
say because they have so absorbed the belief that independence will be the sure- 
solution of our evils. But it would certainly create a. very serious situation to 
the Philippines if all advantages that we are getting now in the American market 
for which I am convinced the United States is receiving compensation, too, in 
having this market, were terminated before we have succeeded in bringing into a 
successful culmination the program that we have to do. 
^3K_REEXAMINATI0H OF PTTTT.TPPTTHil SUESTI03 IS TRBASON 



I have .no objection to the rcalistc reexamination of the Philippine 



13/ ^ressltatemennn the alleged negotiations with the Japanese Government for 
the neutralization of the Philippines, July 19, 1938. JJuA« PP- 675-676. 

& IMA,, 

0/ Remarks in interview with Ford Villeins of the Mani la Daily * 3&«m*. 
February 9, 1939. QPi SR#45, TtIL « 



II-1 56 



•olitical question if the reexamination is baaed upon the fear that we may not 
• ( , 0 economically self-sufficient or that we may not be sufficiently strong to de- 
fend ourselves against foreign aggression. But when a reexamination is premised 
u-jon the assumption that we will not know how to establish or maintain a demo- 
cracy in the Philippines; when the reexamination is predicated upon the belief, 
Kieory or assumption that we will be more free under Americans than we will ever 
?,e under Filipinos, then I will aay that it is almost committing treason. 44 

■ ,P!7.0N SAYS Dro3PEM)B,']-TCE COMIHG li-T 1 946 - DESPIT E lUllW I, ROMERO 

I want you to know that independence is coming in 1946, despite Paul V. 
HcHutt and Jose E. Romero. That is settled, so make up your minds. There is no- 
body who knows what will happen to the Philippines better than Manuel L. Quezon. 
,;nd I an tolling you what I know is a fact; independence will come in 1946, re- 
c::aaination or no reexamination. Many of our people do not take this seriously, 
because they believe that something may happen yet. I know that many do not want 
is have independence in 1946, precisely because of those responsibilities which 
3. ,■ u 1 discussing today. But it is coming, whether they like it or not - indepen- 
dence in 1946 -even if the Philippines goes to the rats. So, what we have to do 

won is to bear in mind what will follow after independence is granted, for the 

45 

situation will not be as safe as it is now. 
?,'ILIP?.r,JE STAKE IN WORLD WAR II IS DDBPSnDiiffCE 



Our stake in this war is more than the continued existence of democracy 
and individual freedom in the world. It is more than the maintenance of a free 
economy and free commercial intercourse among nations, and an unregimented social 

life. Our stake in this war is our own future independence and the assurance thrt 

46 

fciu independence may endure. 

55. I "DEPENDENCE PRAYER 

God, father of all nations, fountain of all strength and mercy, Thy people, 
come unto Thee in this hour of danger and distress. Hide not Thy face from this 
nation, we beseech Thee. Do Thou outpour Thy holy comfort upon our afflicted souls. 
">'& are a weak people, but Thou art our refuge and our deliverer. Of Thy loving 
Undnoss there is no end. *7e entreat Thee, 0 Most Gracious father, stay Thou 
the hand that would smite our liberties. Send forth Thy spirit unto our rulers 
across the sea and so touch their hearts and quicken their sense of justice that 
t'«ey nay in honor keep their plighted word to us. Let not the covetous designs of 
few interests prevail in the councils of a sovereign nation, nor sway its noble 

: Af Speech at~the~inter-university oratorical contest sponsored by the Civil 
■ Liberties Union, Ateneo auditorium, December S, 1939. Qaggsn , Me.s.aagsa , 

v ol. 5, Part 1, JBVPF p. 224. 
■45/ Speech at the luncheon for division superintendents of the Bureau of Education, 

at Halacanan Park, December 10, 1939. Ihi&v PP« 237-23o. 
16/ Message on Loyalty Day, June 19, 1941. T3L ' 



11-157 

- Wl - 

Tjurposee toward our country. 

•Je pray Thoo, 0 Lord, grant us fcrace to forgive those who seek to destroy 
onr freedom. We thank Thoo, 0 Heavenly Father, that we can thus pray to Thee. We 
+■;;.;;!]-: Thee that Thou hast inspired us with a renewed spirit of national unity. 
Bo Thou bloss and sanctify our aspirations as a people. Guide us in our endeavors 
for our emancipation to the end that our every thought and deed may he acceptable; 
in Thy sight. And to Thee bo all honor and glory forever and ever. Anon. 1 ^ 

55. I 3 DUST R Y 
3 LOC AL I EM 5TRIES PROMOTE NATIO N'S PROSPERITY 

We should always endeavor to encourage the growth of local industries, es- 
pecially the small units in order to diversify the sources of income of our peopl- 

• * * # 

In all this, our objective should be the building up in this country of a 
citisonship that finds its strength and vigor on an equitable and fair distribu- 
tion of wealth. As a means to achieve that end, we should encourage the develop- 
ment of small manufacturing units .and small plants and, at the same, assist them 
to market effectively their products and merchandise . This done, we shall have 
built here a real and strong democratic nation supported and sustained by a happy 
and prosperous people. 

SOTJK D TARIF F POLICY TO FOSTE R IHDU STRIALIZATIOIT 



Wo Eiust adopt a tariff policy of some form to insure the growth of our 
industrialization. 

uTfhlSS GOVERNK-jNT POLICY 0FJjHCGURA0I?10 1101^3 INDUSTRIES 



It is the policy of the government to promote the establishment of now in- 
dustries, especially those that may be called home industries. Buntal hat weaving 
in the Philippines is one of the generally known home industries in the Islands, 
and it is a very serious matter for this industry to permit the continuation of 
the exportation of the fibers from which those hats are made. Previous legislatur 
attempted to prohibit the exportation of this fiber without success, and it is my 
opinion 'that the time has come when the government should stop this exportation, 

PKILIPPTtfias I GSSDS MINI N G EXPATS, HOT SP13CULATOR3 . 



The Philippine/goods mining experts to dig the gold that is flying in the 
imagination of the organizers of some corporations. 

li^~lritten _ on"Felrruary 22, 1926. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, p. 786. 
ihl/ Speech on the inauguration of the Trading Center and Exchange, 

August 17, 1933. 9P, HR#34, '» :L - 
2/ Campaign speech, 1935, n.d.a. OP, H8#38 f Till. 
y Message to the First National Assembly on the prohibition of 

of buntal fibers, September 30, 1936. 3iuffjgU£fiSflfl8^ Vol. 2, P ft rt 1, . 
JBVFF, p. 276. 



11-153 



I an going to prosecute in any form or manner I know of, any corporation 

„M- makes money out of nothing. 4 

l 1 -'■'iJ-''^ , ^:^:r*t"" 1 "*~ ~~~~ 

The mining industry which is fast becoming our great source of revenue 
. 1( ; receive greater supervision. 

The Bureau of Minos, organised to stop and prevent profiteering perpetrates 
unscrupulous owners or holders of ! lining claims, is handicapped in this dif- 
••cult and delicate work on account of lack of technical personnel. 

In order, therefore, that this bureau nay be able to accomplish the object 
, or tfhich it has been created and to foster better the development of the mining 
industry, it is recommended that a greater appropriation, be allotted for the 

■?ear 1938. „ 
In this connection, I wish to bring to your attention the urgent need of 

onding our Mining Law to facilitate the collection of rentals and royalties by 

Z Collector of Internal Revenue by vesting in him the same powers and rened.es 
onforc, their collection as those applied in the collection of other internal 



5 

revenue taxes . 



gflliLO PMEM OF OIL FIELDS ON BASIS Off ROYALTY, 

^ = TwIIrte invit7your attention to the need also of developing our oil 
,-iolds for the benefit of the nation. 

»„ t,o wit * m. » » ^ ~ dm4 ° th : c,un " 

.,, into 0 U strict, no that «o W be *U, mm tM, 
.Mc, districts *«» * and nnicn districts sHouid - ™- 

,. na „ „ do not intend to invest nn y ,ono y in Proooct i ™ 

w to adopt _s to encourage capitaiisto to dovolop those oxl *«. 



6 

the basis of royalty. 



wnsmm solution to problj^s_cf J|g = gffi 

tQ br . ng to producGPB 

The government will do everything within P 

■ n-„~v. -nd scientific research, as well 
the assistance of scientific agriculture ...nd 

•+■ +ho.i to imnrovc the auality and yield ox 
dit facilities, which will permit them to impio 



products. 



S * ... +h o organization of the National Abaca 

I nave refrained from author. - noW being made 

and Other Fibers Corporation until the ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

should reveal the practical steps that fe- ^ ^ ^ ^ out a spec ific program 
of these problems facing the hemp *£^J^" rf othQr countries that have 
of activities for the corporation. IV JP ofl or cartcla , should teach 

attempted to manipulate world prices throu„i - . 
=============== - :=== == 27 1937 , Ci P, IIR#40, TNL« 

i/ Speech at a press conference, August " ^ -^39, TNL. 

/ -, -, . • „i '.-qpriblv, October ID, 

5/ Message to the First National AssemDiy, 



Ibid. 



11-159 

- m~ 

„ 3 to be cautious and extremely careful in attempting to solve the problems in- 
volving these two industries through direct government intervention. 

I wish to assure the members of the convention, however, .that no effort 

•ill be spared by the government to give these two industries every assistance 
7 ' 

y ie y deserve. 

57. I H T E R IT A T I 0 H A L RELATIONS 
■ xl 'PfilM SS 3QU AL, COLORBD Wi Oim V/ILL 30T 22IMJ ATOS A GAIHST WHITE S 

Q. - what do you expect to see if and when the Asiatic peoples shall have 
.wrar commensurate v;ith their numbers? 

A. - I expect to see the states of the world living together harmoniously 
on the basis of universal respect for their several political and territorial 
rights. 

q. - You do not expect that the colored races, by way of retaliation, will 
f-ttoiapt to dominate the white peoples? 

A. - I do not. International education is advancing, v/e are wise today in 
■it least some things in which we were foolish yesterday. Our wisdom will increase 
uith the years. Doth practical knowledge and the humanities, in my judgment, are 
on the march against the ignorance and inhumanity of which we have seen so 
:rach in history. It will be a century, if not much more, before Asia can stand 
orcct in the full majesty of a strength now only potential. By that time, let uo 
hope, the moralities of the world, not amies and navies, will be the sheet an- 
chor of its national liberties. 1 

;,;.it mi standard in strong-weak nations ill ations 



Thirty two years ago the United States assumed sovereignty over the Philip- 
pine and assured the Filipino people that it was not its purpose to subjugate 
them or exploit their country but to help them stand on their feet and establish 
their own free and independent government. Thus, America set a new standard in 
international dealings of the strong nations with weaker peoples, based upon free- 
don and justice. ^ 

SiiMATE PR^SID^-fPT^RiilllCTa Cia;fA/_g_GJ/m^l^BBS^ 

The road to a glorious destiny is not strewn with roses. It is beset 
hero and there with the thorns and tumbles of disappointment, and at times, 
desperation. But happen what .ay, I believe that China will make good her goal, 
cither soon or late. ^ 

P Speech at the convention of coconut and hemp producers , February 10, 1939. 
,/-)ueao n Messages. Vol. 5, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 3;. 

1/ delusive interview with Edward Price Bell for ^^^f^^SU 
In: The Phili^i^^ubjdc^blished uont ****** 
by C^V— T^e^r. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, PP. 767 768. 
ZJ Message to American people on the Philippine. question, 1,23, n.d.m. 9, IO*l f 

/L, on 18th anniversary of Chinese Republic, October 10, 1929. IMA. 



11-160 



nmoniSS 0N CQimgRCIAL_RgMTIOFS_ifITE ORIETOAL COUNTRIES 

We shall endeavor under the Commonwealth to pay greater attention to our 
commercial relations with foreign countries, especially our Oriental neighbors, 
'liese relations must be based on natural economic laws, and founded on the prin- 
ci->li*s of fairness and equity. ¥e should not bo expected to buy from nations which 
ac not buy from us. Wo should not purchase goods from a country in amounts consi- 
iT'bly greater than those which that country purchases from us. In our desire tc 
build a nation that will stand the assaults of time and events, we cannot but ma- 
• iCost our appreciation for any show of friendship that nay come from any nation. 
Jo re aliae the necessity of cultivating and preserving, at the same time cognizant 
of our national dignity, the friendly attitude of all the nations of the world. 

0U3Z0N NOT SURE IF EGYPT IS REALLY I':?DEPEHD3.:]T 



I never believe that 3gypt was really independent. So I do not know how far 

will self-government go, and when I speak of self -government I do not necessarily 

mean in the Anglo-Saxon sense. I mean real independence which may or may not be 

coupled with self-government. I do not know how much real independence is given 
5 

to Egypt. 

i aaE CHIEF WISHES CHINA SUCCESS IN FIGHT FOR IHDBPElOaiTCE 

We in the Philippines rejoice over your success, vie want to see China occupy 
!:or rightful place in the concert of nations, not only because we believe in the 
right of every people to bo independent, but also because we know that the inde- 
pendence of China means the triumph of the principles of democracy and equality - 
the principles and ideals for which your own Dr. Sun lat Sen fought and died. 

^IPPINE-JAP ANJ^ 

Our association with Japan dates prior to the Spanish discovery of the Is- 
lands. Some Japanese historians and ethnologists say that the founders of this 
nation are of the Malayan stock, the race to which my people belong. But regardless 
of any racial kinship, it is a historical fact that there has been friendly inter- 
course between Japan and the Philippines running through centuries past. 
Jxd'AU iitJ P PhlLIPx^ SjJIEIg^^ 

Japa7Id"p"hili^pine3 are neighbors and it is to their mutual interest 
that they be friends; and friendship can only be promoted thru fair dealmg and 

o 

.justice on both sides. ° 

-==========3^== Commonwealth with foreign countries, 

'1/ Statement on commercial relations of the ocmmc-i.. 

1935, n.d.ra. QP, MR#33, THL. 
5/ Press conference at Halacanan, September A, 1936. IMd. 

ri i a~„t r^-nfnn China, December 13> 193° • 

6/ Speech at the Canton Military Academy, Cant °£' bnina ' 

■iuegon Messages, Vol. 2, Part 1, JEVFF, p. 154. 
y Speech aTTtntuet in his honor in Tokyo, February 5, 1937. 

Vol. 3, Part 1, mw, p. 41. 
8/ W utorc the PhiUpplne Society of J^. 1937, ..*.- <*, .«#», «*» 



11-161 



It is not easy to leave Mexico. Not only because we have been enchanted by 
the beauty of its panorama and by the magic charm of its women as well as by the , 
gorgeous profusion of nature's rifts that make Mexico a chosen spot of the world, 
but because we have found the Mexican heart is beating in unison with ours. Mexi- 
can hospitality in all its spontaneous sincerity is extended not as a mere gesture 
of courtesy to strangers but as a warm embrace from a long lost brother. 9 

President Cardenas is one of the greatest men that Mexico has ever produced, 
and under his honest and efficient administration, his wise and strong leadership, 
and with his great human heart, the common people of Mexico will have the oppor- 
tunity, as they never had before, of improving themselves economically, cultu- 
rally and politically. 10 

.jffiE OF RBSTLBS8JJ2SS AND ffiUIGN OF FORCE 



.13 

This/ an age of restlessness and dissatisfaction. The restraints of law are 

weakening for men are beginning to lose faith in its justice and validity. The 

reign of force is fast taking the place of law both in international relationship 

1 1 

:-'jid in the government of mon. 

Never, before could it have been said as truly as it can be said nowadays 

that every country is in the world and has to live with the world. The radio and 

the aeroplane have made all nations neighbors, and finance, commerce and trade have 

rmde them interdependent in their economic life. The prevailing economic system 

lias resulted in the concentration of wealth in the hands of small minorities at 

the cost of the well-being, and with the consequent impoverishment of the great 

nasses of the people. This has created discontent everywhere and forced even the 

•lost conservative governments to revolutionize their systems of taxation to direct 

and control or, at least, to regulate production and distribution in industry and 

agriculture, so as to effect a wider diffusion or redistribution of wealth and to 

1 2 

provide protection to labor against exploitation by capital, 
i-grcp Off SMALL NATIONS IN BALANCE , SAYS PRESiNENT_ 



No one can feel more keenly than I do the responsibility for the future of 
our people. The sacred duty of leading our government through these first years of 

3/ Press statement on his trip to Mexico, 1937, n.d.m. MR#40, TNL. 

W Radio speech upon his return from a trip to Mexico, August 1937, n.d. 
OP, MR#39, TNL. 

U/ Address at the University of Sto. Tomas, October 2, 1937. Ibid. 

12/ 3 Peech at the University of the Philippines, April 4, 1939. QP» MR#42, ML. 



11-162 

- m - 

-reparation for an independent national existence has fallen to my lot, and I have 
tried to discover by every neans at ny disposal if there be any compelling reason 
, fhy the plan, as decreed by the Congress of the United States and accepted by us, 
should not be pushed through. I am of the opinion that the international situation 
has not developed to a point where anyone can predict what the fate of small 
■lations will be in the years to cone. P 

gsK3 TASK: OF_GREATI tt G WORLD WITHOUT "FEAR AM) WANT 

When we achieve victory, when we reach the end of war's long and tragic . 
road, we shall have an even graver responsibility. For then the test will come. 
Then we shall be faced with the task of making good on our promise to ourselves. 
*.Je shall be called upon to make the postwar sacrifices that will take the prin- 
ciples of freedom out of a charter and translate them into our everyday lives. 
Je shall embark on the gigantic task of creating a world without fear and without 

vnnt, a world where all of us can live in freedom to speak and think and worship, 

14 

;■■ world where evil men can no longer break the peace. 

rE&ON EX PLA IN S SIGNIFICAN CE PI? FOUIl-POWBR PACT IN MOSCOW 

The Four-Power Pact signed in Moscow is significant in that it not only 
chows the determination of the United Nations to fight the Axis until total vic- 
tory is achieved, but also it recognizes the right of small nations to havo their 
voice heard when peace is declared, a peace America, Great Britain, Russia, and 
China have committed themselves in the treaty to maintain with an international 
organization. The Four-Power Pact, therefore, is more than a pledge to win the war 
and win in a total way. It is a formal commitment of the leader-nations in the 
fight for freedom and democracy to see to it that after the war shall have been 
■won, their strength and power will not be used for their own aggrandisement but to 

;avo security to a peace in which the large nations as well as the small will res- 

_ ■ ■ 15 

•wet the principles of sovereign equality. 

rMilJJiOilT qUhZOJ 3BBS WoiiLD_FiJIILY OF DSHOCRATIC HflTIOgS, 

The peace that will follow will be enduring. The new world will be consti- 
tuted by a world family of democratic nations - large and small alike - where ty- 
jranay and slavery, oppression and intolerance will have no place. For sucha world 
"itiia sacrifices of all liberty-loving peoples will not have been in vain. 



W Message to the Second National Assembly, January 22, 1940. (JP, Zffi#», THL. 

W Address during the intermission of the CBS Sumaer Symphony, August 9, 1942. 

I -TP, MD#45, THL. 

W Statement on the Four-Power .act signed in Moscow, November 9, 1945. 

| QP, MR#46, TNL. 

116/ Statement on the Teheran Conference, December 6, 1943. Ifei&a. 



11-1:65 

- m - 

58. INVASION , . . 
T'J CASE OF IiWAgIQNj.J^!g_gIGHT VfITg ^ ^ _ j-^lq 

Mr. MADDEN: Suppose the Filipinos ware given freedom now, but before they 
had time to build up an army and navy some European or Oriental country should 
undertake to take them away. To what civilized country would they look for 
protection? 

Mr. QUEZON: Mr. Chairman, I was just saying when J. was interrupted by the 
■oitleman from Illinois (Mr. Madden) that, in my opinion, the hypothesis of the 
gentleman is not likely to become real; but if it..^Iioul d L lej: m y flgsu rfi fr antic 

that we w p_uld_lQ_ok, , to. n.o_ cQu n trv f or pxat aation.; kb Mould fight aa-haat as 
could_with whatever means we had ; ; we would _unhesitat inr< ly consecrate o nce m ore 
to ourJLovg for freedom t he bes t blood there is in our JLand . (Applause.) 1 

I3 IIIEPIMB 3 AS A COU)M IS SOUitC L! OF DiJIGBR TO JAPAN 

I have no more confidence in the nations of the world now than had those 
patriotic Americans who in 1776 dared to establish a republic in this continent 
with but 3,000,000 people; but my people are just as willing, in fact, as desi- 
rous of taking their chance, as the founders of this nation were, and I hope in 
God's mercy, we shall be as successful, 

Thgjgiilippines as an independent, nation w^'Id-Tint he a aoircca of. flangac 
to Japan , but the Phili ppines under Ajjerij&n, 3.qvqre,ignty, Pligh.t^jreJJ, he a !,f>n 
to Japan's interest in the Far East. 

«)N BELIEVES FREE PHILIPPINES FACES MO DANGER FROM INVASION 



The Philippine Islands will be in no danger from foreign military or naval 

3 

aggression, once tncy are granted independence. 

OUx^WEilCHESS_IS OUR STRENGTH, 3iyY3 _qUE Z0N_ 

World conditions no longer permit an act of wanton aggression, such aa an 
attack on the defenseless Philippines. Our very weakness is our strength. Besides, 
it will be in the interest of every nation that the Philippines remain free from 
the control of another nation, once they have been given their independence by 
the United States. 4 

The safety of an independent Philippines lies not upon the fact that the 
Filipinos can defend themselves against a foreign invasion; it lies upon the fact 
tliat the Philippines are occupying a very strategic position in the Far East, 



l/ Interpellation while delivering a speech on the "Japanese Menace", in the U.S. 
House of Representative^ May 1, 1916. Rivera Collection, Vol. 1, pp. 357-^61. 

1/ Press interview, 1926, n.d.n. OJP, ffl#29, TNL. 
4/ Ibid, 



11-164 



-nd the jealousies of these great powers will prevent any one of them from being 
„llowed to take the Philippines. 5 

^T.tppt UBS CAU'T REPEL INV ASION BY FIRST CLASS POWER 

For many years to come the Filipino people will not be able to maintain 
ttoir independence and territorial integrity by force of arms against aggression 
D/ a first class power. 

S3 ilL NOT V OLUN TARILY RENOUNCE OUR BIRTHRIGHT TO BE FEES 

Admitting that the Philippines cannot protect herself even with our defense 
••reran, and that sooner or later our country is destined to fall into the hands 
cf a first-class military power, I would still .30 ahead and spend the money and 
time and energy we are now spending to give our youth military training. I would 
'0 ahead with our present program because I would not renounce, v oluntarily, our 
birthright to_be_ free _ and_ independent. _yhi_s_j:ight_ I de em the greatest, the most 
w.cred right of_3ver"_ peopl_e ,_ and would not abjectly surre nder it. I would fight 

desperate, losing f _ ight_ t o defend __it_._^_o_ might be v ^uished but we would keep 
our self-respect; we would at least sh ow that our people deserve t o_ be free be- 
cause they love freedom and j^J£^tj^ioi ^h_^ _a£cept the supreme sacrifice for 
it. The history of our c ountr y has tau^t_us_jhisj^sgn, ^ 

r^ON "PROrggsr^OH j;^A?TrJ S13 ACG PjiiSSIO N. CONQUEST OF Philippines. 

It is true that the Philippines can't defend themselves against the aggres- 
sion of Japan. I believe that the Philippines can be conquered, of course, by a 
first-class power, but when a conquering nation attempts to conquer a weaker one, 
it is not doing it for the pleasure of conquest in the days that we live; it is 
doing it for profit, and therefore.it is going to count the cost of that conquest 
ess arainst the profit. The conquest of the Philippines will mean a lot of money 

8 

and lives to the conquering nation. 

•JILIPIiTOS 3ILL FIGHT VALIANTLY REGARDLESS OF ODDS_ 

That is the. only thing that the Filipinos can do now (i.e., prepare against 



xoreign aggres 



5 sion), and ev^^if Jhe miginoB^o^ be conquered I wouldjee.1 



proud of being a F ilipino JJthgJiaj^ 

conouored, "and not Just s^mittcjij^ej^^ If tha Fili " 

j n" ;s don^To' ve their eount'rT w e" ,nn 11 f h toficht for it, T don't want to belong 
w that race. 



5/ Ipeech'entitled "Plea for Philippine Independence," November 25, 1927. JftlAt 

6/ Speech over the Columbia Broadcasting Station, January 26, 1934. OP, MV36, TI-TL. 

ti Address before ROTC Units, University of the Philippines, January 18, 1937. 

Quezon M essages, Vol. 3, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 25. 
§/ 3p eech before the Foreign Policy Association, Hotel Astor, New York City, 

H?ril 3, 1937. Ibid .. ?. 79. 
2/ Ibid. 



1 



11-165 



u-igntt PUT_A QUESTION vIHICH IIAY VnULL BE ASKED TODAY 

Jhat would be the use of developing the Philippines and developing the 
Filipinos, teaching then democracy, love of freedom, of peace, trying to so or- 
ganize themselves so the wealth of the country will be properly divided - what 
would be the use of doing all that if at any moment a stronger power would cone, 
take hold and exploit the Philippines for its benefits and not of the Filipinos? 

I'i ' ^ OUR DUTY TO B iJ READY HOT TO BEi KILLED SO EASILY - H Lq 

It is alright to speak of teaching our people how to live peacefully and 
happily. That should be our ain and it is our aim, but we are living in a world 
xhore people are thinking of killing one another; then it is our duty to be ready 
not to be killed so easily, and that is what I an trying to do with ny people. 

FILIP INOS HAVE TASTJD FRK'IDC?! UJIKHUUN I'O JAPS 

For the information of the world, I may add that I am certain that the Fi- 
lipino people are longing for the early redemption of tho Philippines from Japa- 
nese rule- This is the logical conclusion from tho report of General Tanaka that 
•:,oace and order are by no means perfect, which is one way of saying that the 
Filipino arc still fighting them with the same determination with which they 
fought in the past. It cannot be otherwise, for the Filipinos have tasted freedom 
under tho American flag, freedom incomparably greater than the Japanese have 
over enjoyed under their own government. When Japan invaded the Islands, the 
Filipinos were only awaiting the day of the establishment of the Philippine Re- 
public. The Filipino people love freedom more than life; and they know that under 
1 Japanese rule they cannot have that freedom, since the Japanese themselves do not 

1 -4- 1 2 

have it and do not seem to understand it. 
■VUSZON MESSAGE TO LUZON GUERR ILLAS RESISTISG JAP I?*VAD3HS_ 

I have watched the heroic and unrelenting struggle that you and your follow 
patriots are waging to maintain aloft the torch of liberty, with a profound sense 
of gratification and pride. In it 1 see being written a brilliant chapter in 
Ihilippine history that will challenge the most gallant efforts of other liberty- 
loving patriots throughout a distraught world, who are similarly resisting the 

• , , .13 
snackles of enemy oppression. 

FILIPINOS HBL3) ALL MORAL SUPH BTJCfl RESI STiaG_JAPg 

~3ubjecte7^he hardships of enemy occupation, and far from the scone 

"^n^rHhe Foreign Policy Association at Hotel Astor, April 3, 1937. 
Quezon Messages. Vol. 3, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 80. 
S 11/ ibid. 

12/ Statement on Japanese reports of Filipino acceptance of Japanese rule, 

January 11 , 1943. HH,v46, ^ TL ' 

12/ Message for civilians in Luson «*«*«■**■"!•, HwflSl 
MaoArthur to Lt. Col. Aoralta on i'anay Island, Jul/ 14, 194J. 



11-166 

j. -we battle, the Filipino people will need all the moral support they can 

of active ua 7 

->ivc in resisting the blandishments of Japanese duplicity. 
Ll1 . TH aq_-.^SISTIHG JAPS IN HI LLS AM) T0 HII3 

•'s our country lies prostrate under the invader's heel, new heroes are 

•Phtav are tbose who in the hills and in tlie mountains are continuing 
arising* rtJ -^ - 

*--.-bt for our country's redemption. They arc those who refuse to crook their 

the 2 Ils* 1 

t0 thQ Japanese aggressor and, whether on the battlefield or in the towns 
'-id barrios, are bravely doing their share to keep the spirit of resistance alive 
in e very Filipino heart. 15 

„. m 1>L3DGB_T0 DR IVE JAP INVADERS FAOH OUR 3H0R3 3 

A3 we honor our immortal heroes let us renew our pledge that the invader 
;iio dared tranple our shores will bo driven away by the avenging anger of our 

, MS . Cur honored dead will not rest easy while the soil in which they lie is 
" 16. 
desecrated by goose-stepping Japanese soldiers. 

JijP TW/.SIO N OF CHIN A jJIFLB WAMBIS TO FILIPINOS 

The Japanese aggression against China has revealed to the Filipino people 
true character of Japan's policy of so-called co-prosperity sphere, namely, 
to enslave politically and economically all Asia and the Jest Pacific; hence our 
^termination to fight her unto death. Hence, too, the utter failure of Japan's 
propaganda to win over the Filipino people. The granting of the so-called Philip- 
pe independence has been a conpleto failure. The Filipino people are fighting 
today their conqueror as they fought the enemy in the beginning of the war. Your 
heroic resistance, alone and unaided for so many years, was a^ great inspiration 
to us when we in turn became victims . of the sane aggressor. 

59. JO N 3 3 LA M 

'jJISZON ANSWERS, CORRECTS J^g-^gggS^S 

The President (Willi^ra Taft), in his message to the U.S. Congress cn 
Sth December 1912, characterises the Jones bill for Philippine independence as a 
revolutionary measure. There is nothing revolutionary in this bill. It meets 
frankly and loyally the Philippine problem according to African ideals and in 
consonance with the aspirations of the Filipino people. It grants independence not 
upon the passage of the bill, but within a certain future time. 

-r , ; ,, n ,i outcoPO of the American policy in the Islands is 

Independence as a imal outcome ox 1inni ,i a 

■4.-«n but the expectation of the American people 
not a new or revolutionary proposition, but tae e~ r 

f tha Islands. The Jones bill m reality 
aver since you took possession ox tno isxcuuo. _ 

sr^n=r« »«-«»•■ opMCh boalod t0 the philip " 

pines, August 13, 1943. p m ^ 6 T HL. 

15/ Press statement on National Heroes Day, November 29, 1943. A, 

^ i ,fChin- on the occasion of the Se- 

ll/ Message to Generalissimo Chiang Kai-^e k oi i - December n , 194 5. IbicU 
i cond Anniversary of the outbreak of the xacific 



11-167 

- m - 

introduces at once only one change in the present government of the Philippines, ' 

t0 wit i the election of the upper house (Senate) by the people which is now 
(i'hilippine Commission) appointed by the President of the United States. 1 
aa^^g_£gjg^gj^__gg^^g_IT_ ISN 1 T FILIAL 

The Jones bill represents far less than ought to have been conceded, but 
I strongly favor its enactment because it is a step in the right direction grant- 
ing as it does more autonomy to the Filipino people, and pledging the people of 
the United States to recognize the independence of the Philippines as soon as a 
stable government shall have been established in the Islands. 

I do not, of course, profess to regard this bill as a finality. Did it bar 
us from continued agitation and effort to secure the enactment of final indepen- 
dence legislation, I should oppose it to the uttermost. But such is not the case. 
The issue now presented is that of securing some forward step while a party (De- 
mocratic Party - A3S) friendly to the aspiration of the Filipino people is still 
in power. 

Opponents of this rule (Filipino autonomy) say that this is not the time 
tc consider the Philippine ( Jones) bill because of the European war. Were this 
Lill to grant Philippine independence, such an argument might have great weight, 
since troublesome days - days when the passions of men seem to run beyond control 
are not the opportune time for the launching of a feeble nation upon its earliest 
career. 

But the Philippine bill simply establishes a more autonomous government 
for the Islands and informs the whole world that the Filipino people are not to 
be forever under the control of the United States. I say, Mr. Speaker, that pre--' 
cisely because the bill does this that it should now be passed. 

The present, owing to the war, is the psychological time to enact such a 

ueasure. I have already stated why the Philippine government must have at this 

juncture a nearer approach to autonomy than ever before. It needs powers to save 

itself from a threatening disaster. And for a declaration to the world regarding 

the future severance of the political relationship between the United State3 and 

are 

the Islands, what better time than this, 'when other nations, though at war,/makin; 
similar declarations? (Applause.) 

J^g_ACT_PBMLTII.lixTM STEP TOWARD FR3SD0H OR AUTONOM Y 

The Jones Bill (Act) is a step toward the final solution of the Philippine 



i/ Speech at the annual meeting of the Anti-Imperialist League in Boston, 
January Yj, 1913. Rivera Collection, Vol. I, p.. 119. 

iJ Press statement on the Jones bill pending in the U.S. Congress. In: The 
Fil ipino P eople, Vol. II, No. 11, July 1914. Ibid*., p. 193. 

y Speech in the U.S. House of Representatives, September 26, 1914. 
pp. 201-204. 



11-168 



- 5» - 



but at the sane time it is a definite achievement in many respects. 
There will bo one more piece of legislation on the Philippine question - 
d only o ne * ^ sonG ( ^ a ' to ^e f uJcur0 - how soon I would not care to predict - 
3 Congress of the United States will grant to the Islands either complete inde- 
ce or autonomy. % independence I mean a complete withdrawal of the United 
-■j-ntes from the Islands, while by autonomy, I mean a government in which the l'i- 
'ipino people will be given full powers to manage their own affairs of government 
, f r as the Islands themselves are concerned, but left without authority to take 

GO I» /]_ 

,jjy action on affairs which would involve international relations. 
T „.„ f . , TT vis DiA'LCJTS BUT li! Cjj 1 TR/JISCEI'IDEITrjJj DifOaiVilCE 

The Jones Bill (Act) doubtless has its defects: no human labor is perfect. 
It is true, also, that it falls far short of satisfying our aspirations. No legis- 
lation has ever been written exactly in accord with the opinion and desires of 
oven those who have fostered or requested it, because the laws, especially in 
Lmtries with a democratic government, are the result of a series of compromises 
nd mutual opinions. Despite all this, the Jones Bill has substantial merits. I 
ill say more: it is of international transcendency. It marks out a new course 
for the colored people subject to foreign domination. 



cou 



* * * 

He must not forget that if the policy of the United States with respect .to 
the Philippine Islands (under the Jones let - ABS) turns out to be a complete suc- 
cess, sooner or later other governments possessing colonies will find themselves 

5 

constrained to adopt the same policy. 
PffttN J^PKASIZES JKN£IC^^CE = OF^JORES = ACT = 

preamble of this (Jones) Act tells us that it is the purpose of the 
:.,erican people to grant the Ihilippine Islands independence as soon as a stable 
"ovornment can be established here. 

'Jhat does this declaration signify? It signifies that America explicitly 
and solemnly recogni.es that we are a people entitled, like any other, to our 

•^•^.r, f.^thpr that America has deter- 
liberty and national independence, it signifies, further, tnax 

-ined to allow us to exercise this right as soon as the elements required for a 
ateble government are at hand. It also signifies that America has waived her 
rl*t, sanctioned by international practice, though contrary to all principles 
of ethics, to alienate these Islands by sale or transfer to some other foreign 
nation. This removes any possibility of America's abandoning the Philippines be- 
fore a duly constituted Filipino government has been inaugurated, whxle a war 

• wopc involved, or during a period 
pending or imminent in which we may or might bocomu i-ivo 

Manila l^-jl y B u llet in_on board the 
:i/ Press statement given to a reporter of _the Lza^.-JL--—* 
fepress o f Asia. September 27, 1916. lUli-.. P' W ' 

— < x. j. tt _ n 0 i Q i de France, uta. 

V Address at a public banquet in Que zon * h °™£ " g^tes, September 28, 1916. 
| Cruz, upnn his triumphal return from the United. , 

Ibid f f pp. 420-424. 



11-169 



- m ~ 



6 

- ,.,-,rious disturbance of the public order. 
lOlSS ACT TOJ Jff FOUagA TIGKS OF FILIPIIJC HATICUALIT Y_ 

The primordial purpose of all government is that of procuring the greatest 
-ood for the greatest nunbor of its citizens. Our first efforts should tend to- 
■■■-ii-ds the improvement of the condition of the masses. 

U"e now enter fully upon the grand labor of laving the foundations upon 

7 

•rhich the edifice of Filipino nationality is to stand until time shall be no more. 

jWTHITIO N OF U.S. POLICY IN it^I. IS IT SELF 1, GIu?ATJaICT0RY_ 

So long, however, as wo persist in our purpose to be completely indepen- 
dent someday, as sure as there is a sun in the f irmament , America will redeem her 
promise. Our mistrust of the past should therefore make way to confidence, and 
our incertitude and anxiety to certitude and peace of mind. To tell you the truth, 
if the Hones Act had done nothing but define the American policy in the Philippine 
Islands, that mere definition would already have bettered the condition of the 
Filipino people, for several reasons. As you know, however, the Jones Law has 
done more. It has granted to the Philippine government greater powers than those 

nich it hrd under the Act of July 1st, 1902, and has placed that government al- 

8 

nost entirely in the hands of the people. 
'jOBZOH BXHtoBiflSS FILIPI^iO_G PJJJ.TUDEjTC _^IL 

Mr. Jones, I have witnessed your untiring work on this bill (later the .Jones 
Law)? I have seen your unselfish devotion to the cause of Philippine indepen- 
dence, honestly believing that it was demanded not only by God's own law but also 
by the interests of both your country and mine. As the chairman of the Committee 
on Insular Affairs, which is in charge of legislation affecting the Philippines, 
you have considered it to be your paramount duty to write into law the covenant 
of your fathers and the spirit of ...erica's freedom for all. By this bill, which 
is the result of your hard labor - labor you have carried out at the risk of 
your own life, for you have been working in spite of ill-health. - you are enti- 
tled, in my estimation, to a prominent place in the list of the advocates of hu~ 
nan liberty. Surely your name will be written in letters of gold in the history 
of the Philippine Islands. You have earned not only the eternal gratitude but 
the love of every individual Filipino. God bless you! (Loud applause.) ' 

. - v t f1 ,„ t entered the hall of the U.S. House 
Seven years ago next December, 1 lir-o wii.rw 

+ur. ■F-n-i-.ino neonle. I came with a mandate 

of Representatives as the spokesman of the i'Hipino pee, j. 

6/ Ibid. , p. 422. 
1/ Ibid., p. 424 

8 Ib&u P-. 423 „ th u>s House 0 f Representatives, 

2/ Speech, "Solemn Pledge of a Great People, in tne 
August 10, 1916. jbidt, P« 564. 



11-170 » 



, for the innedinto independence of tho Philippine Islands, Ever since That 
M "T tho best of ny ability, I h,vo done everything I oould to carry cut that 
? To ny ..nowlcdS-o I have toon loyal to tho Mill of ny people, and no op- 
L havo I lot so hy unused that could ho enployed to prouoto tKoir »ol- 
t „,„ it True, I have not socursd their indepondonco, but I shall fool, 
m ll isolation (donoo bill) is enacted, that I havo not cono to this ocun- 
S °°° "in "«o one advocating contain legislation over g oto all ho vants an 
* " 1;^. Considering tho tine 1 have boon here, tho character of the 

m Ve ^« i * i r ^ - - — 1 - * 



aoS t surprised that I have secured as .,uch_ 



TOMBS ^CTBNABLSS U . S . JO MS = miLEttEfflS = 

"^ v rv7r7-rious doubts whether the .overrent of the United States 

.-,,•+. ,,--p n tn reduce its forces in this 
ji , + r + n , cv or considered it saie, to iv,uuo<- j-uo 
, 0 , la h ,,o fit at a„y , o »««,. prior to 

tse oa ,ct.,ont of tn o.. x tf ttc Cnitod states in tho 

Sonoral was in a pesataon to c..bl.. 

f «,„ «„r that every naoriccn soldier could bo trjen .amy " 
incipaency of th .ar tl y ^ ^ ^ be , b30 . 

islands, since the loyalty ox tn. <.x.x,.x.x 



11 

lutcly relied upon. 



rmon EXHIBITS. ME ^ ffi i^l B & 

*== =-=-— - - fnniliar with their traditions, their 

We know the African people. • Fe are f^lu 

n -jc 4.,, fi^iv, hodv nolltlC. ^'e sauuj-u. 
Mfltory and the principles whicn ,vc 1 dono by a Deno- 

ted the statement nade by those who af.xrn th,.t ^ 

n -iiv undone by n Republican Generous, .-no. znnv, 
cratic Congress can bo easily undon. D> 
q uently, the present Congress has the right to repeal the 

' , • -f liberty and justice, cannot act thus and will not 
Auerica, the champion uf liberty -n changed 

-it- wo-indopendonce policy nay no* 
act thus. This does not nean t^t * f . boUe vo 

to be free, they will become free. 

HLIFXNO HOPES UliffiJC*^^ _ We bei3n ' 

enac tnent of the Jones Law have been 

Our hopes which were raised by; the en.o 

SriS:7pp:i6r-366. m the Uni tod States the Philippines, 

11/ Article, "The Jones wiws ^^^iEESSSJSS^b Vo1 ' IX » ^ 1 '' 
and Other Subject Peoples, Thoj^JJl-^. 

November 1917. IbidjL> P« . . departure for the 

Speech at the Hotel f ^^^^^U^ ™> 1 °' 
United States to head the boeontt v 
1921. Rivera Collection, Vol. ia» !• 



11-171 



botrayed. This is a severe but salutary lesson for our people. It proves that the 

liberty of a country is not assured under alien sovereignty. People are not free, 

liberties are secured to the;,, by laws enacted by another people which nay be 

,-ltsred or repealed. A people are only free if their liberties are secured to 

the* by a law and a Constitution formed and adopted by themselves and cannot be 

■ : jvoked or repealed by any people other than they themselves or their chosen cons- 

1 3 

iitutional representatives . 
,;7Tj3S LAW A PLAYIHIfl S IN rgpUBLICAh iLP/iDS 



Ten years ago this day I was filled with joy to overflowing. A legislative 
:\»asure for the approval of which I have long labored, helping and encouraging the 
author, speaking personally with senators and representatives and requesting now 
and then the strong intervention of President Wilson, at last became a part of 
the statute books of America. 

Who would have said that, ten years afterwards, what proved so hard to 
sscuro fron Congress, what we accepted in good faith as an act of justice, nay, 
of generosity, on the part of the American people, was to be a plaything in the 
avuids of those who were to represent here the sovereignty of the sane people. 

It is useless to wreck one's brain looking for motives or determining or 
irking inquiries as to who was to blame for the present situation, "fobody is at 
fault. The underlying causes are simply that the responsible administration, 
having returned to power, decided to recommend its old policy temporarily changed 
by the Wilson administration. It was their intention to amend the Jones Law, and 
ueantime they re-established the system they have adopted in governing the Phi- 
lippines, stretching the meaning of the law when it was necessary or striking it 

1 ,1 

when it suited their purpose. 

GIVE FILIPINOS PULL RESPONSIBILITY FOR INDEPiiiLDLihT EXISTENCE 



The Jones Act, which gave to the Philippine people the full control of 
their legislature, was meant to be of a temporary character. In the preamble 
of this Act it is stated that it is the purpose of the people of the United States 
to grant the Filipino people their independence as soon as a stable government 
■ :"-y bo established therein, and that for the speedy accomplishment of this pur- 
pose the people of the Philippine Islands were to be given as much control of 
their affairs as could bo given them without in the meantime impairing the exer- 
cise of the right of sovereignty by the people of the United States. 

If the Filipinos have all the branches of the Philippine government in 
their hands, the success or failure of the government will be theirs. If the 
Africans have all the powers of the government in their hands, the success or 
failure of the government will be yours. Let us not have this divided responsibility 

12/ Article, "Ten~Iears Under the Jones Law: A Retrospective View," 
August 29, 1926. '•£>, HJt#29i THL. ^ 



11-172 

,.,. ic h C ets us nowhere.- 

60. J U D I C I A R. Y 

r-T q'YS POLITICS HOT FOR UAGISTRATES 

tfe, the people of the Philippine Islands, expect the members of our highest 
.+ to he wise and prudent; we expect then to he men who will not only inter- 
— et the law, but the first ones to obey it. Ve expect them to have nothing to 
* ,dth politics, not only because it is a dangerous game for a member of any 
cW rt to he engaged in, but because in the Philippine it is prohibited by law 
r .nd the civil service rules. 



* * * 



Any justice of the peace who would dare accept a designation to be a dele- 
gate to a political convention in the Philippines and participate in it would at 
once he fired from his office; yet a member of the Supreme Court (referring to 
Associate/ Johns 0 - ABS) has done this and no one over said a word criticising 
his act. ^ 

i^POIOTfyUpjrg BENCH TO BE BASED ,01? MERIT AlflHB 

I give ay pledge to the country that I shall make no appointment to the 
judiciary except after personal investigation of the character and ability of 
the men to he appointed. I shall allow no political consideration, in fact no 
consideration of any sort, except that of merit, in the case of appointments to 
2 

the bench. 

.rj3TICE3 OF PEAC E MS GOOD RECORD -JILL BE RETAIIIED... 

Under the Co health, no man can be appointed justice of the peace unless 
no he a lawyer. The institution, however, gives the .resident of the Philippines 
the discretion as to whether he should keep in his place a justice of the peace 
rlroody in the service oven if ho be not a lawyer. If elected, I propose to keep 
in the service every justice of the peace who has a good record regardless of 
whether he is a lawyer of not. I know justices of the peace who are not lawyers 
hut who are doing as well, if not hotter, than some justices of the peace that 
,re lawyers. These are men who .now enough law to perform their duties and whose 

j i _ pVlT ,„ nter intorr-ity and independence so 
conso of ■ justice is so high and whoso Charcots , mx-gi .> ^ 

well recognized that they are real assets to the judiciary. 

immmit^air, m^J^m^SMMMMM^ 

An _ indep^nt judiciary administering justice without fear or favor, 
S/ Speech beW the Chicago Council of Foreign Relations, November 30, 1927. 

M r T statonont on an Wioan ****** ***** *» 

tj St otatonont on ttio lo»er oourts, 1935, n.SS. *. ™- 
2/ Ibid. 



11-175 

- f» - 

..ronptly and impartially to rich and poor alike, in the strongest bulwark of in- 
dividual rights and the host guaranty against oppression and usurpation from 
:; yy source. 

JUDG3 PgggO CiNCEPCION O^ERBJ) I'liEHIDggCY OF CODBT OF APPEALS 



My first intention was to appoint you to the Supremo Court, because for a 
Ion--; tino now I have been of the opinion that you would constitute a valuable 
tuenont in said Court: but upon finding uysolf confronted with the necessity of 
i pointing a person to preside over the Court i.f Appeals that would not give rise 
to discussion on the wisdom of the designation, 1 have thought that I should se- 
lect you. 

The duties of the president of the Court of Appeals have, during the ini- 
tial period, at least more importance than those of a mere justice of the Supreme 
Court, and for that reason I think you will be able to render a service of greater 
transcendence tj the administration of justice as president of the Court of Ap- 
peals than if you formed part of the Supreme Court as one of its members. 

This is the reason why I have thought of you for this post, and I would be 

jrateful if you should consider the acceptance a duty. I understand that you are 

siaking a sacrifice by returning to the judiciary, but knowing your public spirit, 

5 

I do not hesitate m thus calling upon you. 

QUEZON LAUDS W.mW~, lIIGii SENSE CF DUTY, INTEGRITY CP CHARACTER 



You are fully justified in declining at present the appointment which I 
offered and which you accepted previously. 

Your refusal to accept the appointment, "for the noble and the high motives 
you have stated in your letter, is further confirmation of the high conception that 
1 have always held of ycur sense of duty, the integrity of your character and the 
firmness of your convictions. You already showed these when you refused' the post 
of Speaker under the circumstances in which it was offered to you, and your stand 
then was what induced me to consider your name for the Court of Appeals. 

EXPLAINS DIFFERENCE liBTW^ U PHILIPPINE. AMERICAN CONSTITUTIONS 

According to the Constitution of the Philippines, the post to which an 
assemblyman cannot legally be appointed is that which was created or whose emolu- 
ment was increased when he was a member of the said Assembly, whereas under the 
African Constitution/ or the Jones Law it is enough that the post should have 
been created or its emoluments increased during the term for which the senator 

^Ipennriccepting his nomination as President of the Philippines, July 20, 
1935. Quezon Me sage s^. Vol. I, Sp. Rev. Ed., JBVFj , p. 2 jB. 

5/ Letter offering Judge ledro Concepcion the presidency of the Court of Appeals, 
January 30, 1936. ^Bftailsggftfigftf Vol. 2, Part 1, pp. 417-410. 

y Letter to Judge Francisco Enage, on the la/ter's declining an appointment 
to the Court of Appeals, February 5, 1936. P- ^ ' . 



11-174 

epreoentative was elected for him to be banned from occupying it, without ta- 

Cr -to consideration whether at the time the post was created or its emolument 

n A hp was or had coased to be a member of the legislature. 

increased u<= 

r ? Z 0n G Ty J .Tj^Pggg_^^J0_A^0^_^g r KEdTO. JTOICIARY 

Constitutional Convention President Recto (agreed) that in order to give. , 
the Chief Executive a free hand in the reorganisation of the government so that 
.■-ht o-ot the best men available, although they might be members of the Na- 
tional Assembly, the language used. in the American constitution would be modi- 

into the text that now appears in the Constitution of the Philippines. So 
'Zt if, in tho opinion of the Chief Executive, a member of the National Assembly 
,|'ould be named, he could beforehand ask this member of the Assembly to tender 
lis resignation before the legislation creating the post to which he could be ,, 
pointed would be approved by the national Assembly. 
^-ct&ky Ta OFILO SI30H APPOi a TBD TO CO URT 01? APPEALS 

I have come to the conclusion that it is necessary to have in the .Court of 
toneals a man who, besides being a good lawyer and of unimpeachable integrity, is. 
closely familiar with the Administrative Code and all the machinery of govern,,^, 
*or there will be cases presented to the Court of Appeals which will require a 
thorough and expert knowledge of governmental affairs. Secretary Sison fully mea- 
sures up to these retirements and I, therefore, felt that we have to dispense 
,ith the services ox Secretary Sison in ^department of the interior in the 
interest of the administration of justice. 

j rncg „ kmc . MMinw v> «m wemeum 

There in no use of i.pro,in i: tho ad»,inietration of justice if the 

.aaticea of the peace are to he appointed throng political patronage *rrf«t, 

, . f Hl _ ^eace court is the only court to 
por cent of our population, the justxee of the peace o 

^ch they can appeal for the protection of thexr rxghts and the redre 

• 4.- nf thP neace knows that his appointment and 
•vievances. So long as the justice of the peact. *n _ oliti . 

-nnr, o-races of some influential poii^x 
retention in the service depends upon the *ood graces .....„__ 10 

•««+ +n the will of these politicians, 
oians, so long will he be subservient to the 

P OOR ARB TC CTPPOT IIJJUSTICBjaLllgj^=^ L 

- incomDGten0 e or dishonesty of a judge 

If they (the rich) sux.er from courts; ^ 

of the Court of First Instance, they can get redress 

2/ Ibid., p. 422. 

2/ IHSAju PP. 423-424. Toofilo Sison as/member of the 

oj Press statement on the appointment ^^ff^g. 

Court of Appeals, February 8, 193b. — ^ Assembly, March 16, 

10/ Letter to Hon. Jose Romero, floor leader of 

1936. Ibid. , p. 156. 



11-175 



j.i ie poor man who is the victim of an incompetent or dishonest justice of the 

eace has usually no other recourse but to suffer the injustice or abuse of which . 

... 11 
lie is a victim. 

Given a corrupt and incompetent judiciary , the average citizen will live 
in constant danger of financial loss, moral outrage, and physical harm at the 
1-ands of those who are thus enabled to violate the law with impunity. He will feel 
helpless and insecure even against the agencies devised by law for his very pro- 

". 12 
taction. 

We shall _assure all poor liti^aivfcs__an ..easy access__tQ_ ..the r;0"rts nn fthftt 
~ 1 3 

j ... is t i ce shall bo free and_urrtought . 

Hiffifl ffiS OF BENCH MUST BE FK5E FR0M_P0 LITICS 

To strengthen the faith of the common people in our courts, it is necessary 
that the utmost care be exerted in the selection of justices of the peace. 

I pledge myself to do everything in ny power to maintain these courts free 
from political or other extraneous influence and to appoint thereto only men of 
proven ability and integrity and of the broadest human sympathies. 

JUDICIARY IS A PROGRESSIVE, LIVING ORGANISM 

The judiciary is a living organism and the judiciary of a country is only 
useful to. that country if it meets the requirements of society. 

HJB50H TELLS HAPS3SRHASH TO USE CODRT DECIDE KINIHG CAS3 

Indeed, I must tell you (addressing Judge Haussermann - ABS) that the evi- 
dence in the possession of the government places the Balatoc Mining Company in a 
light that, I feel sure, you would not wish the company to appear and that you 
yourself will be interested in having the facts thoroughly presented to the courts 
for adjudication. Under the circumstances, I have authorized the Secretary of Jus- 
tice to go ahead and conduct this case in a manner that will compel the presenta- 
tion of the facts in controversy to the court and its decision as to what the facts 
are, as verified from the evidence of either side. 

This particular case which we have at hand does not appear to me the right 
case for an amicable settlement.. The government must protect its rights and must 

ll/ Ibid. . pp. 156-157.- 

12/ Address before faculty and students of the University of Sto. Tomas, . 

March 28, 1936.. Ibid. . pp. 71-72. 
12/ Ibid,, 
14/ Ibid, ' 



II-1 76 



r _ ot be placed in a position where it would seem to tolerate an open defiance or " 
violation of the law, done with the: full knowledge that the law is being defied 
or violated. 

. flippy MjJ^JgA^^ST_j^ISION_^_COPRAl&B TO ENFORCE IT 

If the law is but the essence of common 3cnse, the protest of many average 
i,en may evidence a defect in a judicial conclusion, although based on the nicest 
legal reasoning and profoundest learning. The two important elements of moral 
character in a judge arc an earnest desire to reach a just conclusion and courage 
to enforce it. 1 ^ 

■;0r FIRST 'JI||_JTO|^g_gLAC^D ON CARPET 

This is not the first time that I have criticized a judge for doing what, 
in ray opinion, is wrong? When a judge of the Court of First Instance, on technical 
grounds, absolved a man who caused the death of his servant - an old woman - by 
inflicting upon her cruel punishment all night long, I denounced the judge on the 
floor of the Senate and succeeded later in getting him out of the service. 

It will also be recalled that I have dismissed a judge from office despite 
the fact that the Supreme Court only recommended that he be allowed to resign, 
:;hon I found out that said recommendation was predicated upon the findings of the 
Supreme Court that he was guilty of the charges preferred against him, including 
acts of abuse in the treatment of litigants and witnesses, especially the poor 
and the ignorant. ^ 

JiJDGESJjUST Tfll HK I N ggjgHS OF REALITIES., NOT THEORIES 

Judges must be living organism S to serve justice in terms of realities and 
1 9 

not theories. 

;pjZ0I\T MUCH COlTCERI'iBD WITH ADMINISTRATION OF JU STICg_ 

It has been the deepest concern of my administration to improve as much as 
is humanly possible this branch of the service. Based upon a systematic investiga- 
tion conducted by my office and upon the record of each justice of the peace in 
the service, complete reorganization of these courts was effected through the 
elimination of undeserving incumbents, the appointment of lawyers meeting the 
qualifications prescribed by the department of justice to take their places, and, 
wherever possible, the consolidation of too or more courts into one circuit court 

^~lette7trJudg^ = John W. Haussermann, president, Benguet Consolidated Mining 
Company, on the Balatoc Mining Company test case, September 25, 1937. 
-Qaggfin Messages,. Vol. 3, Part I, J3VFF, pp. 289-290. 

U/ Speech on" the principles of law . and justice, at the University of Sto. Tomas, 
October 2, 1937. Ibix L.. p. 146. 

IS/ Ibid. f pp. 149-150. 

12/ Speech at a Press conference, October 6, 1937. QP> HB#40, ML. 



11-177 

j B order to justify and permit the appointment thereto of lawyers of higher qua-'- . 

jifications and broader . experience. 

I am vitally interested in the government extending all the facilities it 
can to so expedite the business of the courts that, if possible, no case, unless 
exceptionally voluminous, should be pending for more than one year from the time 
it is filed in any court until the time it is finally disposed of on appeal. In 
other words, we should aim at a consummation whereby a case started, either in 
th° justice of the peace court or in the court of first instance, can be finally _ 
disposed of by the Court of Appeals and, if possible, also by the Supreme Court 
in appropriate cases, during a period of, at the most, twelve months. 

JUSTICE OF THE PEACE; SYKSOL AMD GUApiAii 

Justice of thev.puace courts constitute the symbol of law and justice in our 
'■ur off communities, and should also be regarded as the effective guardian of the 
citizen against oppression and abuses. 

JODMSj_J^m_B^T^ = ^™^K i: ^^ = OT^ : JOT : ^^ =s 

It is not true that the executive power is the greatest and the judicial 
power the weakest. In a democratic form of government, the three powers are co- 
equal. If any of then is more powerful than the others, I would say that it is 
tie judicial power, because the members of the judiciary hold office for life, 
and because that power can, if it wishes, place itself above the people, in spite 
of the theory that the people are sovereign, by rendering decisions that run 
counter to public opinion. And there is no way of counteracting or annulling its 
decisions. The executive power and the legislative power, on the other hand, are 
at all times subject to the rule and dominion of the people, because they do not 

22 

hold office for life. 

JUDGE SHOULDN'T PLACE HIMSEL F UflDBR 03LIGATI05_T0_AHYBpM 

Offals of the government must be made to realize that whenever they 

irvPnno- to make of themselves they should assert their 
have a case to present or defense to raose ox 

ri e ht through methods reooenieod by la„ - never through outside influenoe. 

In the oe.ee of a this is rueh »ore important. A Jud ge should never 

, f" - r * " ,I|T ** ^ * m 

ao less t han the indopenden eo_^fJh^udi£^^inj^IgS- 

egg" KCEiSl JuSIICIS OF P3AC3 giafflff Fn"gS. 

""ZZsZ'of iaTpoaoe „ho dees his duties impartially, does not need 
ir^lolhellrst National Asse.hly, Ootohor 16, 1937. flP. 

% Sates at San duan do Letran Colle g e, ~r 7, 1937. 

Vol. 3, Part I, JBVW, PP- 156-157. „ ltMralfal of Judge Zanduota's 

2/ Heesage to the First ™»<%£«»£5*. 4, Part I. WW, p. 400. . 
appointment, May lo, ly^o. — 



11-178 



t0 have political friends. His own protection will be the performance of his du- 
ties. But the justice of the peace who mixes in politics and decides questions . 
in favor of his relatives or friends regardless of the merits of the cases at • 
bar, cannot be saved even by the biggest man in the Philippines. 24 

While the justice of the peace is the lowest official in the judicial 
branch of the government, his job is nevertheless the most important of all, for 
it ia before his court that the immense majority of the people -the poor appear 
for redress of their grievances. 



QUEZON EXPRESSES FAITH IH DECISION S OP PHILIPPIC 3UPR3KB COURT 

As long as I am President and can help it, no decision of the Supreme Court 
against the government of the Commonwealth will be appealed to the Supreme Court. • 
of the United States. Let private individuals or private interests, if they so 
desire, take advantage of their right to appeal their cases to the Supreme Court 

26 

of the United States; let others follow the sane course but not the government. 

61 . JUSTIC E 
P&iiSIDBNT DENIES PARDON TO CONVICT WHO IS A MENACE TO SOCIETY 

It is the duty of the Chief Executive, in granting pardons, to consider 
details and circumstances attending the commission of a crime which courts cannofj 
consider under the law. The pardoning power is conferred upon the Chief Executive 
in order that the supreme interests of justice may be served when, in the concrete 
caae, the law has not been able to serve them. How could the pardon of Rafael 
Suayan be justified in the present case? 

The record of the case shows that Rafel Suayan, who assaulted the deceased 
on the day of the crime, is a citizen who is a menace to society, and that it is 
necessary that he be made to feel the full weight of the law in order that he 
r:ay mend his ways and become a peaceable and orderly citizen. 

QDBZON ADOPTS POLICY OF TEMPERING FIRMNESS WITH FAIRNESS 

It is my belief that a wise policy for any government to adopt is that of 
tempering firmness with reasonable regard for the sentiments and views of thoao 
•rf footed by a given, legislation, whenever it may do so without detriment to pub- 
lic interest. It is not only the right but also it is the duty of the government 

24/ Speech in Tacloban Leyte, June 10, 1938. Ibidi., p. 74. 

25/ Press statement on President's speech in Virac, Catanduanes, August 29, 1938. 
Xbid. . p. 695. 

26/ Letter to Hon. Roman Ozaeta, Solicitor General, Manila, November 28, 1938. 
StisLLt P. 612. 

i/ Letter to an unidentified provincial governor refusing to grant pardon to 
an insular prisoner, July 30, 1936. flaaSfflLfo 888 * 6 ? i~ Yo1 * d t * art A » 
JBVFF, p . 443. 

\ 



11-179 



- m - 



of the Commonwealth to make sure that its laws are obeyed and the taxes that it 
imposes are paid by those who under the law have to pay them. 2 

PQTr)GIP LB_Oy 3QUAL ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICB HOST BE UPHELD 

The paramount consideration that should be borne in mind whenever a new 

vovernmental institution is to be inaugurated is whether, in practice, more good 

than evil is to be accomplished. In the establishment of the probation system, wo 

• lUS t see to it that the principle of equal administration of justice is maintr.ir.ee 

•hi all its purity and integrity - a principle that is the basic foundation of 

3 

organized and civilized humanity. r 

Laws differ because the ideas, habits, customs and needs of people differ. 

p 

j.'ut the laws of a civilised and progressive community can have but one source - 
reason, and but one objective ~ justice. And it must be so, for human laws are 

but the application to human relationships of the eternal principles of divine 

'. . . 4 
justice 

Zi & EXECUTIVE KP3T BR AB OVE PITY IN PUNISHING LAW OFFENDERS 

i/hat exalts a nan is the purity of his soul, and if he resists any tendency 
to do wrong because his soul is pure, ho thereby becomes sublime. And because my 
soul will never permit mo to do anything which is not just, whenever my official 
duty demands that I enforce the law, even though I may deeply regret having to ^ 
punish the violator, yet I will do so, be he my relative, town-mate or intimate 
friend, so that my conscience and my soul will not reproach me. That is why I 
told you that there is no more burdensome post than that of the President of the 
5 

Philippines. 

62. LABO R 

For the stability of our national life, both economic and political, it isW 
such more important that labor be convinced that capital will treat the workers 
justly and fairly than for labor to feel that the government alone can do them . 
i 

justice . 

This is what I mean when I said that "my heart is with you but my mind is 

IT^ertrSlpeLer, National Assembly, on the effectivity of the Chinese 

Bookkeeping Law, September 14, 1936. Ibid^ P- 
2/ Message to the First National Assembly on the repeal of the Probation Law, 

September 1, 1937- IbjL<L., Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, p. 191, 
V Speech on the principles of law and justice, at the University of Sto. Tomas, 

October 2, 1937. Ibid., p. 141. 

v i r. A., w HmiT- Lnhor Law. etc., February 23, 1938. 

bJ Speech on the enforcement of the Eight-Hour Labor w, o , 

Quezon Messages, Vol. 4, Part I, JBVFi , p. 54. 
l/ Speech at a press conference, October 6, 1937. tf, MB#W, ™ L ' 



11-180 _ ^ 



and impartial." I n the first place, in the conflict of interests between the 
'•^ rent elements constituting the community, including capital and labor, the 
dlffer ^ nt \.;ill have to take into consideration every side of each question as it 
^^the public as well as the parties whose rights and interests have to be 
I also mean that I realise, as all must realize, that every important 
ad ' ]Ub Mpoi"]lY those that have. varied and far-reaching consequences and be- 

, , t ,th obstacle and difficulties in their ocelli***, «»»» *»• to ' 
"Ifin fruition. In such kind of enterprises, nhnt is important is that every for- 
: Z step should bo so taken that no unforeseen event m foreo its retraced. 

ciiWi, PROMT 01? tpw^saaLWS^BS&aJB. 

= ^Twan7to take this opportunity to mate, it kno.,n to oapital that even if 
it ha, a right to looh for profit, it also h» a corresponding duty to give Moor 
. , dM I sav thin because I believe in the truth of what economic experts say 
J t coital lust first respect labor. That is uhy if oapital sinks periodical* 
J d appears, the sincere cooperation of labor nakes capital spring on aga „ 
■ tt be used once «ore as a tool of Purees for the benefit of ^ind. «L*. 

is shoold use mes* »«— MlMI 

" h . „ t)l0 ,.w leaders uhe are honestly interested 

I besooak the cooperation « tne l..oor 

, o, Twin- cl-ss end are not seeking their o»n selfish ends. 

* *" welfare of he U n o ^ fe _ 01)ly legl! l H eans to ^ 

*« 3h0Uli Pltl T -tribe is, of course, lawful, but there ^ 

secure redress for their grievances. J.ue otr^ i-, 4 
* be no occasion for obeying it no, in the Philippines. 

MB IS LABOR'S SBW,, WI l«:s IW» Bfflj^l 

whomsoever it is used upon, but d^o „W strike, yet, from its 

yea should specially consider that ^^J^T^ - — ^ 
effects the sufferers would be not only laoor utiliti es, such as 

•o v.* etirrpd against public utilities, 
large; more so if a strike were ,o be s ^ ^ rice tentmtB declare 

transportation or electricity or agams a. ~ ■> > ^ as muc h as 

, strike, such a strike making the townspeople suffer m ? 
possible, I request you all not to resort to such methoc, 

Q03BON ASSERTS LABOR MO^^i|llffiS=^— + . , bor Labc 

— — . , s tH0 ri ght to make profit by exploiting labor. Labc 

Remember that no one has ,nc Ufa-" 
______ ^ thoir settlement, April 30, 19.8. 

2/ Press statement on labor ccrnlict., »na 

^miiesiia^es,. supra^ p. o4l. To , lcr , cn t House, Barrio Vitas, 

2/ S ? eech at the inauguration of the Go— t — 

Tondo, October 17, 1938. 1^,, p. ^ 1939 . Ibid,, Vol. 5, 

• V Speech on industrial and agrarian conflict., 

Part I, JBVFP, p. 58. g hr#42, TML. 

5/ Speech before labor leaders at Halacanan, «ay 1, 1.39 



11-131 



more important than capital, However, capital may disappear, but as long as 
rQ j_ g labor, capital will appear again. Whereas, if labor should disappear 
capital would be useless. 

Millions of years had passed before man came upon this earth. Hundreds of 
•"•ous^nds of years had to elapse before wan has learned and be able to provide 
--t only for his daily sustenance but for the morrow. This was the beginning of 
c ,, ,'ji'fcal« 

Again, the rights of labor are human rights whereas the rights of capital 
only property rights. Of course, property rights must bo respected not only 
.... th0 interest of capital but also in the interest of labor itself, for unless 
rooerty rights are recognized the workinguan himself will not have the rights 
v/QQV t to what he gains for his daily maintenance. Anything beyond that would not 
belong to him. He could not provide for his future or for the future of his child- 
ren. In dealing with labor, the capitalist should try to know the feelings of the 
aen v , h0 are working for him. The capitalist works and accumulates riches generally 
not so much for the pleasure of increasing his wealth as for his ability to satisfy 
]dB wants and his desires through his wealth, and accumulates riches not alone for 
,;ira but for his childrnn. Lot him rer.ieir.ber that the man who is working for him 
fools the same needs and has the sane ambition, and therefore let him see that 

the. laborer is entitled to receive not only what ho needs to live as a human 

6 

boing but also to provide for his future. 

:?0B0DY EAS A R IGHT TO GST RICH AT EXPffHSE OF IABOR 

vrduablTtha^ cj^i^ Jbjliia^ ^ """ ^ M ' 

t:"L isjabo r, time will com^en^t^n^a^nnr nmln But if labor is lo^, 
cap ital cannot do anything. He is blind wh^ d^j^ee this truism. 
™ HISTOR Y FILLED MEEK BLOODY STRITGG ^JTORJT S JIGHTJ^ 

^ _ ^iriroiril7hi;tory"7labor all over the world that in order to gain 
its rights, it must struggle and fight even to the extent of shedding bleed. Only 
through sacrifices, labor has been able to gain recognition of its rights so that 

p „„ +1 , p rif , h tc of labor have not only been rocog- 
today, in every democratic country, the. ngnt^ oi 

,8 , 
niaed but are also being enforced. / 

KLQ CREATES COMITT EE TO SOTDY_gjSga^L^^g^ 

" " " , A „ n .,i -..Bort on the advisability of auspon- 

For the purpose of making a study and ropor^on^ _ woV1 as the terras 



1/ Sp 0ech at the Labor Unit, Parade, Luneta, June 5, 1959. mmL^M, 

Vol. 5,' Part I, JBVFF, p. 139- 
8/ Speech before the National Commission of Labor, ffljES&u. 



11-182 



its report and recommendations to the President of the said law. 9 

63. LABOR-CAPITAL RELATIONS 

Mil ARBIT RATES INDUSTRY-LABOR , Li'JroLORD-T BWAHT DK'gBRENClSS 

In the field of social justice, there has been created a Court of Industrial 
•actions designed to arbitrate differences not only between industry and labor, 
but also landlord and tenant. 1 

jWatHMENI SET TO RBCTLATE J.ABOR_A^^APITAL RELATIONS 

There nay be some who believe that the government should not interfere with 
„ a r)ital, should have nothing to say as to what wages capital should pay, under 
■■•hat conditions capital should treat laborers, etc. The fact, however, is that 
order the Constitution this government is empowered to regulate the relations 
between capital and labor, and therefore this is one of the duties of the govorn- 
nent whenever in its opinion it has to issue such regulations regarding relations 
between labor and capital. 
Lj50R-C;^ITAL_COOPSM 

But you laborers should never think that because you are indispensable, you 
can ask for whatever you want. No! Exaggeration can never be an instrument of peace 
;.nd harmony, but in many cases it brings about disorder. What is necessary is the 
cooperation of labor and capital so as to continuously bring about and enjoy the 

3 

couforts which life offers. 

■3B0H UBQBS IiABOR-CAPITAL^ T B^yr-LANDLOilD COOPaiiATIOH 

I wish to impress in your minds and implant in your hearts that the capita- 
list or the landowner cannot live if there arc no laborers; and, likewise, that 
the laborers cannot exist without the landowner or capitalist. This is our land 
nil all of us have equal rights to live on it. We cannot remain in peace if some 
liv,; in prosperity while others suffer hunger and misery. Hence we need to coope- 
rate together... It should bo remembered by the landowner that the man who works 
on bis farm is a Filipino like himself. It should also be remembered by the labo- 
rer that our economic situation will not improve unless we can agree among ourselves. 
3ut our agreement should not be based on the night of a. few and the weakness of 
others. It should be founded on the welfare of everyone. Our agreement should 
■iuvor bo based on the idea of grabbing the property of another. 



ncra-tiiw a Committee to Study and Recommend to 

S/ Administrative Order tio. 10b, o renting a w^aIIv nr Partiallv. 

J7 Report to the Congress of the United States, 1937, n.d.m. QJ>, KH#40, idL. 

-w , • 4-- - ic^P n d m. QP> MR#41 f TNL. 

if Speech before the U.P. Alumni Association, 193b, n.a.-i. * , 

y Speech at the inauguration of the Government Tenement house^ Barrio itaa^ 

Tondo, October 17, 1938. itaaWaUSSUMUfiS^ 01 * *' Part ' PP 

V Speech before tenants and landowners in Cabanatuan, Nueva Scija, July 16, 19.9- 
■ Ibid., Vol. 5, Part I, JBVPF, p. 155. 



11-183 



- m - 



64. LABOR UNIONS 
r.?LQ fffLLS_LABORERS ^_^^_^_^WB^QUSJ^EJJmOiSJ^^ 

The lack of union among you is detrimental; as it is, you have a president 

s v eaC h group and it is probable that you will be used to your disadvantage and 
- J - of said 

for the selfish ends/ presidents, as tools for strikes. Beware of the labor pre- 
-idont who, taking pride in his power that attracts the backing of strikers, 
nunpes without reflection into any labor frs n knowing that while what he asks 
"or is impossible of fulfillment for the group yet it serves to foster hi3 own 
Eolfish interests. 

CiJl 1 T TCLERATS_VIOLATORS_OF C IR_0R^o_0N_LAB0R-CAP ITAL_CASES = 

Ho person who fails or refuses to support the policy of the Constitution 
•hi regard to the relations between labor and capital or to abide by the orders 
cf the competent courts issued in furtherance of that policy and authorized by a 
statute approved for the advancement of the public welfare, has the right to con- 
tinue enjoying special concessions from the State. 

fiOV3R3 «SHT UILL HOT A LLOU STRipj^LOCjCOUT J0_J^0PATO1ZE C03H0H tlEAL 

The State should not allow any strike or lockout to jeopardize the common 
. W eal. The service of that same interest, likewise, demands that some expedient 
be found to the end of preventing the occurrence of strikes in tho business while 
under the control of the government or to the end of recalling to the service of 
such business those who, prior to the assumption by the government of the control 
thereof, have abandoned their work, either individually or collectively, on ac- 
count of any dispute or disagreement between their employers and themselves. " 
P^.CTT>l!!OTJjrAnNS T.A.BOR UK 10 MS AGAINST mSJtm&tojaWMjL, 

Sometimes the dangers in labor organization come when self-appointed per- 
sons lead a labor movement net because they are interested in the workingmen and 
,o«en, nor because their hearts go out to those who have to work in order to make 
their living, but because they are interested in securing something for themselves 
through the organization they have formed. 
KLQ FAVORS CUNS0LIPATICHJ)F ALL LABOR TOTCOga 

I an in favor of »« ^^^X^ST^SS^ 
to orwmieo thonMlvw, out d» e «» 0 3 ''",„ i °t I live advised the 
Wt M> eetition and express thoir grievances. „ roat laboc 

Afferent laior organisations S *■» Ubor 

organization. That snows that I am m lavor ox 

V ™ «« «fc»«»t * «» Bi *!- F "^ L S: 5 f°" 25, 

2J nossa,e to' the First national Assembly on "^"^ an erects^ t • 
charter creating the Court of Industrial Relations, 11a/ H. 

+■ v-i-io- nwr bv the government 01 

5/ Message to the First National Assembly on taking ov * M&y u> 1938 . 

public utilities or businesses coupled with a public 

V St I: soli justice and labor unions, in Virac, Catanduanes, June 3, 
1933. Ibid. , pp. 69-70. 



11-184 



unions were organized into a groat labor organization, they would make that labor 

organisation a powerful force. •> 

Ollljff gjg£SllIL^H£L=i=£ll-^2I~-~IIlI12g COLLECTIVE EXPRESSION 

I thoroughly sympathize with the movement to give the laboring class of 
the Philippines opportunities for collective expression and organization so that 
it nay he able effectively to present its petitions and malce valuable suggestions 
tc the government. But you must, at all times, be careful not to be led astray b;' 
irresponsible or selfish leaders who are interested more in their egotistical air. 

•M-jjn in your welfare. Please bear in mind that social justice does not mean jus- 

g 

tice to some and injustice to others. 

(ThIffi_BXECUTIVB RIDC0GHIZ3S L'-IPORTMCE Off LABOR UN ITY 13 COUHTRY 

In my long public experience and appreciation of the feelings and thoughts 
of the people in our country, especially the poor, my belief is firm that the 
Filipino does not only aspire to have his rights - which are beneficial to hin - 
fcspocted, but also he is, if properly enlightened, ready to recognize the rights 
of others. That is why I am hopeful that this union of labor organisations in the 
rMlippines will not only be the cause of their complete integration in their 
hi;v.nds, but will also be instrumental in helping us all, because through the 
ro-orosenta±ives of these organizations, it will be easy to understand whatever is 

7 

being contemplated by means of equity and to uphold the rights of all the workers. 

65. L A N D 

,i03.LD LiitGB EilOUGH FOR BVBRXONB TO QUIT IuJfl) - QU3Z0K 



I believe that God made the world for man. I believe that He intended that 
every man should have his own land. That is why He provided us with such a large 
i-'orld. 1 

iiLQ iglPHAS IZIjiS PRCP SR LAUD USB A!1D COHSBRVAT IPff 

Bach piece of land should be devoted to such use as will give the highest 
returns. Our prosperity cannot be maintained entirely by agricultural development 
•:cr our land is not all suitable for agricultural purpose. If the suitability of 
tae soil for cultivation is to be the basis of clearing lands for agricultural and 
other purposes, at least 46 per cent of the total land area ox the Philippines 
should remain as virgin forest and the sooner such areas are reserved the sooner 
oar prosperity will bo assured by the conservation of our timber supply, of our 
*ator supply, both for irrigation and domestic use, and of our natural scenery, 
Mch is" so essential for the normal development^ the aesthetic side of our 
'•lature, in all of which I am keenly interested. 

Flp™at = threublic P la.a of Oraoe, Leyte, June 15, 1938. OP, ^#41, TML. 

-iso in Quezon Messages^. Vol. 4, Part I, JB7FP, p. 101. 
£/ Speech boflro a largo gathering of laborers in /,,;elos, P^paa,;a, September 26, 

•1933.. Quezon. Hes^es, Vol. 4, Part I, JBVFP, p. 219. 
U Speech at the Labor Unity Parade, Luneta, June 5, 1939. Ibid,, Vol. 5, Part I, 

J3VPF, p. 1^8. ' 
V Qpoeeh at the Columbia University, USA, November 27, 1*27. «?, Hftfcl, ML. 
11 Message en forestry development and conservation, 1929, n.d.m. QP, HM-31, ^ 



m 



11-185 

- 991- 



<)0/J)3 WlILITATE VOLUNT.mY_COLOHKA'riOH J|OTI ^4Ei;T_ARBA3 _ 

Bxporionco has shown that whorovcr ror.ds and other moms of coaiaunicfttions 
boon introduced to open up rich arena to settlement by the public, voluntary 
nizr , tion has invariably followed without the necessity of advancing consido-- 
"^lo suns of money to the colonists. It is believed that if the sums already ap- 
^rifted under the Act be spent in the opening up of roads through regions al- 
■Vdy selected for colonization and through others that may hereafter be found to 
I nd tod for this purpose, the government can bring about a voluntary coloniaa- 
noa of the adjoining areas. 

^^BTftW POLICY gfflVBMTS ILLEGAL 0CCTPATI01? OF PTI3LIC MHD8_ 

As a natter of policy, snail landholdings be interspersed between large 
„ rof , a of public land which are applied for pasture purposes either under the Fo- 
nJt Law or the Public Land Law... The reason is to prevent the pasture permittees 
cr\essecs from extending their holdings, thereby avoiding the clandestine occu- 
r^tion of big areas of public land in violation of the area requirements of the 
Public Land Law and the forost Law and also to provide available areas for snail . 



4 

■xisturo landholders . 



LL M DISTRI BUTION POLI CY 3B3BfITS SmgATIji Sl' ip^i^^ L 

^"fh7provisions of the Public Land Law which restrict public landholdings 
to rrees of limited sizes are, in ny opinion, wholesome, as the spirit animating 
the enactment of public land legislation has always been to encourage the distn- 
button of the great portion of our public domain to the greatest number of our 
people, and to prevent the concentration of big landed estates in the hands « a 
5 

few individuals . 

oa-ploitation and o^V* a ,„ for their «n profit in diehard of t» P* - 
,, sl . *- power of e,inent douain which is vested in every atata ia on 

■ 4-~,i -f-,T> -if derives from the fact Uat tne 
nition of the principle above enunciated for it d.riv corrooqin4? 

-,r t>.* "en, women, and children composing 
State represents the nation as a whole, or tu~ 

it. 6 

I P) (M13RSKIP BEST WBAPOH i^AIKS T^iim ^I^rJ^ 

===== =___==- - - has the right to own more land 

I am one of those who believe Uu.t no 
.-.-„_________._^_„___..-.. : - i colony roads, December 

>7 Message"^ the First National Assembly ^^"^ F> p? . 9 5-96. 

19, 1935. HasSfififiSj. Vol. a, • Tll1v 2 q 1936. 

!/ ta^ ^ *. Secretary of Agiculturo and Coerce, **, ». 

Mi,, Vol. 2, Pari I. «- P- • „ . ^ «U — ^ 

5/ Lottor to the Secretary of Agriculture "5? w , 

the Public land law, September 8, 1,36. 3>iSb.. P 
5/ IMi., Vol. 3, Part I, JBVPP, p. 197. Alao in *, ™" 



- flU- 



th3 n he can work. Of course, I am not going to apply that literally for, if I 
did, I suppose many of the Filipinos would be running away from the Philippines, 
but there is a happy Medium. In this medium the purpose of the government should 
ll0 to have as many people owning their land as possible. No bettor weapon can be 
vi, - nod in the hands of a country against Communism than the ownership of land in 
A ] ie ha nds of the small man in the district . ^ 

POOR P30PLB 1'TO B iiiTTiiR OF? THAN UURING fcjFiU.TIb'H Kd&IMB 

The Philippines has undoubtedly nade great strides both in the fields of 
politics and of economics during the last three decades. We have accomplished, 
too, considerable progress in sanitation, in education, in the construction of 
roads and all kinds of communications. But the main beneficiaries of this most 
remarkable progress are the rich and the middle class. 

The rich can live in extravagant luxury. Sone of their offspring grow' up 
in an atmosphere of ease, with an outlook on life which gives paramount importance 
to society affairs, vanities, trivialities and material possessions, devoid of 
discipline, love for work or human sympathy. The middle class have attained a 
higher standard of living as compared with that prevailing during the Spanish 
regime. The comforts of present-day civilization are within their reach and they 
■iro enjoying them. Their sons and daughters are better fed, better clothed, better 
educated - thousands upon thousands of them are now receiving the benefits of 
higher education. 

Sad to tell, but it is none the loss true, the same cannot be said of our 
laboring population. The men and women who till, the soil or work in the factories 
aro hardly better off now than they were during the Spanish regime. 

EXPROPRIAT ION OF K unDS_AT_AS3|SS|D^ALIJE_ 

My idea is that when the government is expropriating a property, the govorn- 
uont ought to pay only the assessed value of the property. In other words, the 
value as declared by the owner for assessment is the price that the government 
9 

ought to pay. 

The government, in exercising the right of eminent domain, has the power 
to expropriate a private property because it is intended^ or the public good but 
the government cannot expropriate property without pay. 

^ne'^ll'nltions in our day are not safe from foreign invasion, while 

^Snrt^^Iderf Astoria Hotel, New York City, February 20, 1937. 

Meson Messages. Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, p. 52. 
fl/ Message to the First National Assembly, October 18, 1937. IM<k, pp. 221-222. 
2/ Speech at a press conference, October 20, 1937. OP, «B#40 f TNL. 

is/ mu 



11-187 

- JH - 

iatomationaV ^ to haVe l0st a11 its force > "there is still something that con- 
quering nation^^pe^' and that is P riv ate property. A country may he invaded and 
its people conquered, but the victor d oes not dispose of the property of the poo- 
pie who are subjugat.~ d ' So if we cannot or, at least, if we are not sure that we 
nan defend the Philippines from invasion of a first class military power, we can 
at least make cer/ tain that our land and our natural resources are to be left in 
the hands of Fil APinos. 

It is th-* 3 ain of the government to develop our public domain and place it 
in the hand?* of our P 30 P le who are willing to work. Only in this way oan we hold 
/shut right to tnis wonderful land which God has given us. So, I repeat that it is 
tiio kind of education and training being given to you here which will make certain 
that "the Philippines will be for the Filipinos. 'Phis is the time for the govern- 
ment to emphasize vocational education and the time for the Filipinos to get busy 
?.nd work hard if they want to keep their country for themselves and their .prospe- 
rity. "Cultivate the land and make it produce" is the gospel of the day. 11 

66. L A if D E D J3 S T L TBS 

CTCHA3B OF FRIAR LfrP8_INJijIX PROVINCES ORIGINALLY C0I-?Tj3f-]PL/\TRD 

Pursuant to the provisions of Joint Resolution No. 2 of the Tenth Philip- 
pine Legislature authorising the Governor-General to -miter into negotiations with 
the owners of the estates in Manila, Batangas, Laguna, Bulacan, Bataan and Rizal, 
the SeOrotary of Agriculture and Commerce was authorized to conduct preliminary 
negotiations. A report on said negotiations was transmitted to the Philippine 
Legislature on September 24, 1935, but so far no definite agreement has been 
reached relative to the price at which said estates may be purchased. I would 
have desired to have positive legislation enacted at this season which would per- 
mit affirmative action... to bring about the acquisition of these large estates 

\ 

and the resale thereof to the tenants. 

Vfcen a class, family, or group has monopolised vast domains and the people 
thereby converted into mere serfs, history is replete with instances when m thair 
wrath the people have revolted and by force deprived the landlords of their pos- . 
sessions. The Philippines is not the first country which has faced the land \ 
m-.blem caused by the ownership of big estates. France during the I reach Revolu- 
tion, Mexico upon the downfall of the Bias regime, and Russia under the leader- 
ship of Lenin, to mention only a few cases, are witnesses to the human tragedy 
arising out of the big landed ownership that has covered the pages of human 
progress with tears and blood, ruin and destruction. 

jln^rSoTthe faculty and student body of the Central Luzon Agricultural 

School, Hunoz, ITueva Ecija, July 24, 1940. QP, m,M, idL. 
1/ Message to the First National Assembly on the friar land purchase, December 19, 

1935. Quezon messages. Vol. I, Sp. Rev. Ed., JBVFF, pp. 93-94. 
U Message to the First National Assembly on ex P^priation proceed inga for ■ 

acquisition of large haciendas, September 5, 1937. EuAxm. Vol. 3, Part l, 

JBVFF, pp. 197-198. 

/ v. 



11-188 

The Coalition platform is cor.uri.tted to the policy of acquiring estates at 
fair <" nd j ust P rice ? ' nd rssellin e these lots to those tenants occupying then. 

in view of our experience with friar lands, I an convinced that the pur-- 
rp^le of these haciendas would not solve the agrarian and social prob- 

ohase & Iia 

ng existing therein", that it would not prevent the concentration in the future 
' thea0 itxxiB in the hands of a few people; and that the benefits, if any, that 
'i*t acoruo to the tenants would not justify the large outlay of public funds 
-quired to cover the purchase price, which funds did not exist in the public 



3 

■:,;.3asury. 



:,ir^ou wi L^AdiNG Hi,cia,T)AS for 25 rare \imj>l ™JL!ZWL 

I an not prepared to enbarlc the government upon such a costly undertaking 
,ndwith such uncertain results. Moreover, we cannot nake these large expenditures 
Without neglecting entirely the just clains of a vast nunber of our population for 
.overrent assistance. There should be a relative balance in our appropriation 
of public funds in relation to the furtherance of our social objectives, so that 
to 'welfare of the nation at large nay be pronoted and the people nay be bene- 

•^■ : tcd in proper proportion. 

I cannot, on the other hand, resign to a policy of inaction and defeatism 
in the face of the problems created by these landed estates. Without the need of 
w l.rge expenditures, I believe we can effect a gradual but more real and las- 
ting improvement in the conditions of the tenants in these haciendas.. I recom- 
mend that the Chief Executive be authorized to lease these lands fron their pre- 
sent owners for a period not exceeding twenty five years with an option to pur- 
chase then during that period with a stated price. 

67. LAND QUESTION 

, • -+obl« where its nenbership own their 

tfe believe that a society is nore stabl- *n.r w<snlth the 

■ r~ tv,P wv-rnnent of the Commonwealth the 

- f »- constituti :\r ; ; ;rr 3 ,ion, -^«» * 

tracts of land to bo subdivided into sbo.11 of 
I „ convinced that we shall havo done away - J ^ 

public disturbance In the future if we »ahe use of this pow 

vernnent. ■ , . aa 
_ . . President to lease 

Tn^lT^rst National Assembly ^stated price, August 10, 

haciendas for 25 years with option to ^ ^ 

1938. !&3g£p&M232£S2jL. Vo1 ' 4 ' r a 

4/ iMd., pp. 533-534. e ^ ropria te haciendas, 1935. n.d.m. 

1/ Press statement on the plan to expropria 

ciP, im#3S, Tin:.. 



11-189 



... In the first place, if ve can get the people to own a piece of land, 
that is one way of solving it (the unemployment probleu -138); in the second 
place, as soon as we organise the National Economic Council, we will establish 
industries; and, in the third place, I want you to know that unemployment is some- 
thing that cannot be entirely abdicated in this or in any other country. 2 

Property rights are necessarily subordinated to the paramount interest of 
public welfare. Without annihilating property rights, individual rights must be 
respected and protected. ^ 

Another, pressing problem which in the past has caused recurrent troubles 
aid even uprisings and has challenged the best efforts and intentions of the go- 
vernment to effect an equitable settlement under the circumstances, has been fi- 
nally solved when the law, coi.ur.only known as the Homestead Act, passed by the 
National Assembly in its last session, was put into operation. 

Definite steps are being taken by the government agencies concerned for 
tho acquisition of lands within the large landed estates to be resold on easy 
tarns to their present occupants in small home lots. 

I an confident that we shall bo able to work out a suitable plan which will 

insure a successful delivery to the people of the lands to which they are so 
4 

dearly attached. 

LiliD OWNERSHIP: ROCK 3T0UKDATI0N OF DEMOCRACY 



The disposition of public lands should henceforth be used mainly as an ins- 
trumentality to cure our agrarian problems of today, and to prevent the occurrence 
of still greater social evil in the future, and to lay down J^hje jrqck foundation 
of a strong and genuin e derjocra c^^oj^osp^__"-' : ' -^nHopsnnRnt i sv-yall J2£PJftexty nwnnra 
'..'ho can be depended upon_to_ lovo _and_ stand t by t heir country whiflh w ill then mpnn 
to them something more than an abstract p roposition, something th at belongs to 
then, something which they may truly call J^J-J_SJ!£' 

68. LAWS 

■iU'EZOK SEEKS REPEAL OF SWEEPS LAW A3 IT DEVELOPS GAMBLING HABIT 

It seems that the holding of sweepstakes has in a way given impetus to the 



ll Speech at a press conference, February 8, 1936. OP, KR#3S, TNL. 

V Speech on the occasion of the first anniversary of the Commonwealth, 
November 15, 1936. Ibid. 

V Message to the First National Assembly, October 16, 1937. Wt MH#39, ™- 
5/ Ibid. 



11-19° yjf 

Prevalence of games of chance all over the country, and developed a certain in- 
clination on the part of the poor to borrow money with which to buy the sweeps- 
trices tickets in the expectation of winning the prize which, as is logical in 
r;0R t cases, must and not only in disappointment but also in added financial 
aibarrasstiont. 

The government must bo just, aust protect the people fron abuses and wrong- 
doings; and if anyone violates the law or commits abuses, it is the duty of go- 
7 ornnent officials to go after such nan, regardless of who he is. 

The law must be the sane for the- powerful and for the weak, for the rich 
2 

-nd for the poor. 

pftTRflTIVfi OF CRIM NAL LAWS IS BSgQ HH OF OFFENDERS 

Every enlightened co;;:nunity should be guided in dealing with violators of 
the law, not by any desire to punish the offender in a spirit of revenge, but with 
a view to the protection of society and for the correction of the offender him- 
self and the improvement of his own ways and outlook on life. In other vrords, I 
relieve that the objective of criminal laws should be not only to impose respect 
for laws on the part of the citizen for fear of the consequences to his life or 
lersonal or person? u l freedom, if for no other reason, but also to make a useful 

r " .3 

and law-abiding man out of one who was once a harmful member of the community. 
DISTI NCTION BfllWffifll COIJV ICT S JUSTIFIES PROBAT ION LA>f RlilPijAL 

The need for such a repeal (of the Probation Law) was clearly demonstrated 

the fact that it conferred, in effect, privileges to convicts by the courts of 

first instance of Manila which it did not cenfor to convicts sentenced by the 

4 

courts of first instance in the wovinces. 

iiLaitlLIING TO HELP COCONUT SEN, BUT_CAH'T VIOLATE LAW 

I an willing to support you in your attempt to do away with the tax on 
coconut oil. I aii willing to support you in your desire that the prohibition for 
the use of any part of this money, directly or indirectly, for the benefit of the 
coconut industry be lif ted./lVve said that as long as the law functions, I an 
i-oing to comply with the law honestly and strictly. I an not going to make any 
manipulation here whereby you may get the benefit from that money, even though 
it is prohibited by law. I wouldn't do it. It would be a violation of my oath 

7 l^agnrthnirst National Assembly on the repeal of the Sweepstakes Law, 
July 29, 1936. Quezon Messages. Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFi' , pp. 218-219. 

ll Untitled speech, 1937, n.d.m. qp, 1*0, TNL. 

V Message to" the First National Assembly on the repeal oftj. Probation Law, 
September 1, 1937. Quezon Me_ssages_L Vol. 3, Part 1, JJ»vn f 91 

V fiessage to the First National Assembly on vetoing Bill No. 2417 revoking 
the Probation Law, September 13, 1937- Ib£<k» PP« 206 ^ 0 '- 



11-191 



„ President of the Philippines. It would be a breach of our good faith; it would 
bs ^ evidence of lack of honesty on the part of the Filipino people; and as long 
ag I an the President, I am not going to violate ay oath nor an I going to do 
anything that will discredit my people and my action in this respect. 5 
Iffl'S iiBOPTJROG^ggIYg_M 1 i§.-lL J g^||Gg^LY - QUBZON 

l/o have to change an archaic system which we have inherited from our ances- 
tors and which has grown out of social conditions which cannot now be tolerated. 
But it is not merely a matter of enacting progressive laws which have proven suc- 
cessful in other countries; our task - and it is a difficult task - requires that 
ve adapt them intelligently and constructively to our social and economic struc- 
ture, lest we so disorganize our industries as to bring about a total economic 
collapse which, in the end, will do more harm to the laboring class itself than 
to other elements of our community. ^ 

Tho human equation can never be eliminated in the affairs of nan. and that 
the saying "government of laws and not of men" has no merit unless interpreted in 
the sense that laws must be executed regardless of who are going to be affected by 
them. But, of course, governments are of men, and men enact and execute laws. 
Laws are neither self -enacting nor self -executing. ^ 

69. LAWYERS 

Time there was in our country when the appellative lawyer was taken to 
Bean a champion of human rights, a veritable soldier of truth and justice, an 
apostle of peace and general well-being. Isaac Fernando de los Rios, Cayetano 
Arellano, Victorino Mapa, Florentino Torres, Manuel Araullo, Marcelo H. del Pilar, 
Apolinario Mabini, Rafael del Pan, and many others raised the prestige of the le- 
gal profession to that height. They were not only shining lights of their calling 
'out also commanding pillars > ? right and justice. One or two of them left some 
fortune, but most of them died poor; all of them embraced the profession of law, 
1! °t so much as a means of livelihood, but because in their hearts there burned a 
consuming fire urging thera to fight wrong and injustice. 1 

^s days went by, and as the spiritual and ideal things of life' gave way 



5/ Speech before coconut planters and municipal mayors', February 19, 1938. 
^ ME#41, TNL. 

& Speech before a large gathering of workers in Angeles, Pampanga, September 26, 

1938. flaggaaJfe ssageB . V ol. 4, Part I, JBVFF, p. 218-219. 
] J Speech on the proposal to amend the Constitution, July 7, 1939. OP, 1*2, THL. 
^ Speech on the principles of law and justice, at the University of Sto. Tomas, 

"ctober 2, 1937. Quezon Messages., Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, p. 139. 



11-192 



■< j0 the inroads of materialism, the lea-n, 
, ^„ ^ . . gal P rofes ^onal outlook became 



subj ected to materialistic influences, U ^~ ~ ™™ "* ^ 

nowadays is generally gauged by the amount of 7^ 2 \T ^ ' ^ 

j.v J.-, , uuney tnat he earns from the> i 

fsssion, rather than by the moral value of m„ „ • V 

aJ-ue of h ls services to the community. 2 



earns from the pro- 

bhe 

n™* 3 Wm — - HTWm HI 



To those of you who are now „ ag ^ 
^ prof anion let ns say that 

£=^-£^=^ 

baeincs s calling. It i s a vocation, an aooatlo-M,, „<■•*. 

V T„... H<„l m „ .1 ZTZ ~~ S -&2SSlSga£_2i justice and tgfa. flf , n1inc . » 

lawyers diploma should bo a to the ^ ^ ^ ^ _ , 

? .nent of fair play, an fpartlaTadvaaate of . ...^J. , 

jor the defeat of wrong and the tr i^T^^ ~ ™ 
fell* m the art of legal subtleties, for the benefit of a partioular client. ' 
magmM MIl BY ROTE ; Am_LEABI«T;_ jmr™ 

To know law is not .erely to too,, by heart the civil and criminal codes or 
the codes of civil and criminal prooednre. One nay well recite from -eaory every 
line of every code that is in force, and yet net really know law. On the ether " 

hand, one may have but general ideaq n q +« 4-v, 

b ifcxax ideas as to what tho codes contain, and still be 

m fact a lea ned and profound jurist. 4 

70. LEGISLATION 



I am constrained, however, to disapprove the bill under consideration for 
xhe reason that 'the means provided for carrying out its purpose is impractical, 
the amount of F20.000 it appropriates not being sufficient even for the expense 
■« establishing a single treatment and prevention clinic, and were it enough, 
there would be no available fund for its operation and maintenance. It is believed 
^hat the plan of campaign against tuberculosis, to be practical and productive of 
results, must include measures for tho care of the patients before and after their 
confinement in the sanatoria, and an adequate system of field wdrk for case- 
indmg, health-educational campaign, isolation or segregation, and follow-up work, 

... : ~ = _ = ^^ y be true thr -- t the defendant in the criminal cases mentioned therein 
-1 iMd., p. 140. 
Ibid,.. 

y ibid 

M Message to the First National Assembly on vetoing Bill No. 2026 providing for 
tiih esi:al:) - ! - isnraen 'fc of sanatoriums and clinics for the cure and prevention of 
uoerculosis, November 20, 1936. Quezon Messages. Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFF, 

■P* JOD, 



,7-193 

~ 989 - 

yd presented himself voluntarily -ho +h« ™-nw. 

. , x , y ° thG corr esponding authorities and suffered 

imprisonment for the crime committed by hin un +i i >,« , 

mm unuil he was granted oardon. The 
procedure that should have been followed in 

t u^iowca m these cases should have been the 

mentation of a motion in court to lift the forfeiture of the bonds in question 
, nd not to seek redress from the National Assembly, It is not believed to be a " 
• rise policy that errors committed in court ^ „ ^ , 

,2 s be cured , h y the enactment of 

special legislation. 

• ? SlLIII~L?£2 = l2LE£L2£lIIiI2^ officers 

The proposed bill would fix the minimum height requirement for commissioned 
officers of the Philippine Army at five foot, and this height is too low as com- 
pared with the average height of Filipino today. The height of commissioned 
officers in the Army may be very well covered by interior regulation instead of 
by legislation. 

The approval of the bill would tend to prevent mechanical and electrical 
engineers duly qualified by the Board of Examiners from operating boilers of 
steam engines and other engines run by motor power unless they also qualify in 
another examination to be given by the new proposed Board of Examiners for "ma- 
quinistas terrestres." Its effect would be to deny the very type of men capable 
of designing, .building and installing these new machines from operating them. 4 

The requirement that as soon as an offer is received for the purchase of 
the property at a price higher than the loany the said property should be disposed 
of without delay, may result in the nullification of the right of redenftion gran- 
ted to mortgagor by the statute governing building and loan associations, under 
"Inch said mortgagor may redeem the property within one year after its sale and 
Mspo3ition. . . Furthermore, there is the question as to the constitutionality of 
diia bill if applied to existing contracts. 5 

71. LEGISLATURE 

^^|M_Ij|gISL^ma lN_HEi^,ITY A DEBATING SOCIETY^ 

_____ rfe are not governing ourselves in the Philippines. It is true that we 

Message to the First National Assembly on vetoing Bill No. 1180 condoning 
bonds of Luna, et_al. , November 29, 1936. Ibid-., PP. 393-394. 

2/ Message to the First National Assembly on vetoing Bill No. 1584 fixing the 
minimum height requirement for commissioned officers in the Army, November 29, 
1936. Ibicu, p. 397. 

4/ Message to the First National Assembly on vetoing Bill No. 1965 regulating 
employuent of technical personnel in care of boilers, etc;, November 29, 
1936. ibid._, PP . 396-399. 

Message to the First National Assembly on vetoing Bill No. 2397 relating to 
he f inal disposition of mortgaged real property, November 29, 1936. Ibid.., 
P. 409. 



I 



11-194 



have 

■'rhp. S 



a part in the government. We hawe the Legislature in our hands. We elect 

the senators and representatives. But you know very well that the Legislature is 
not the governnent. It is only a branch of the government, and perhaps what you 
£ 0 not know is that the Legislature in the Philippine Islands is the least impor- 
tant branch of the government, and that when we have a Governor-General who is 
inclined to believe that he is the sole source of wisdom, the Legislature is con- 
verted into nothing nore, nothing less, than a debating society. 1 

^aiDSI'TTJtSSUfl^ 

In my opinion, the main responsibility for legislative action is yours. It 

will be my policy as Chief Executive to give you, in every case, the benefit of 

doubt. You may, therefore, rest assured that, if ever, I shall exercise my veto 

sower with reluctance, and only when I am strongly convinced that it is my plain 
* 2 
-nd unavoidable duty to do so in the interest of the common weal. 

CHIEF EXECUTIVE _ C ITES IMPORTANCE 0F ^LE GI5LA^U^_IN_A^jjH0CR^Y_ 

If our people want democracy they must realize the importance of the legis- 
lative department. They must have confidence in the men whom they elect to repre- 
sent them in the National Assembly until by their own acts they lose the right 
to their confidence and trust. It i3 to the interest of the people that the le- 
gislative department do its work properly. 
SEP ARATION OF POWERS D0ES_N0T nEAN_C0LLKI0N_ 

The success of the Commonwealth depends on the ability of the executive and 
legislative departments to cooperate with each other.. Separation of powers, which 
is basic in our form of government, does not mean collision. It only means the 
delimitation of the sphere of action of each and yet the inter-dependence of the 
three departments of the government (i.e., including the judiciary - ABS) is -such 
that sometimes the powers of the executive branch reaches the scene of action of 

4 

the legislative, and vice-versa. 

front of 

I was not in favor of a demonstration in/ the Legislative building. I 
thought that if they (the people concerned - ABS) have some petition to make they 
could send it either through the mail or through a committee. The practice of 
having a demonstration in front of the Legislative building is not right, and is 
"pooch at the ColunMa University, USA , November 27, 1927. <P, M*9. .™>- 
U Message to the First National Assembly -national defense, November 25. 1935. 

Quezon Messages. Vol. I, Sp. Rev. Ed., JoTi'h , p. lj. 
y Letter to Assemblyman Serafin Marabut, chairman Committee on Appropriations, 

National Assembly, January 3, 1936. IfeiS*. P- 
>J Mdress .t the openin, of t,e »a ti onal A— b*. «. **> 9. **• 



11-195, 

5 

-ot tlis proper way of doing it. 

gOLOBS TO BE_JTOg^^LJ^ ; ^n^OTJHjgraj^^ 

You (referring to the members of the National Assembly - ABS) are, in fact, 
"aying down c * 3? olicy for us a11 to observe, you are drawing an orientation which 
, th0 duty of all citizens, high and lav;, to follow faithfully. 

As far as the people are concerned, the success of your labors, and the 
VDors of the government as a whole, will be judged by the net results, and no 
•nourit of reasoning can make the people see that you mean justice, when under 
!-!>,•. authority of your enactment injustice is done. ^ 

30113 SOLONS C AN BE BL INDLY SU BfrERV IKfiT TO CUft'Sf ITUiiitfi'S 

We can be foolish sometimes... Some members of the national Assembly fight 

< thing only because they are subservient to their constituents and do not show 

that they can fight and must fight for their rights... Now anything that goes 

""•ainst the fundamental principle of government, such as honesty and efficiency 
'" b ' 7 
oi the government, that I cannot tolerate. 

The main purpose which animated the creation of the Council of State, when 

it was first established, was to give the Legislature a voice in the councils of 

government. This was done originally by an American Governor-General (Francis 

Burton Harrison - ABS ) in an effort to give the representatives of the people 

in the. Legislature an opportunity in the deliberations of the Executive affec - create 

ting important public questions, before, a final decision was taken. Were I to/or 

Simon the Council of State without letting the members of the National Assembly 

know that I shall be glad to have them represented in the Council if they so desire, 

ay administration would be branded as less democratic than the administration of 

o 

the American Governor-General who first created the Council. 

mmim ach ievements of fir st national assembly cited 

The First National Assembly set a record for constructive achievements 
•>mich will be difficult to surpass. As the years go by, the nation will come to 
realize more and more the transcendental value of those achievements. It laid the 
institutional foundations of the Commonwealth. It established the system of 
-national defense. It initiated social reforms and gave impetus to public services 
*ich minister to the health, education, and well-being of the people. It gave 

5/ Speech at a press conference, July 10, 1936. Ifelis. 
*/ message to the First National Assembly, October 16, 1937- ^»39, 
•1/ Speech at a press conference, November 17, 1937. '-If 5 . MHir40 , TML. 
5/ Letter to the Speaker of the National Assembly, March 8, 1938. ^ezon 
Passages,. Vol. 4, Part I, JBVFF, p. 305. 



11-196 



.-.^rjrcssioffl and realisation to the basic political and social pfcdi©s«fM.es 
lying the constitution, of our government and aade social justice the gaMing 
tt liiaate objective of ail its snaetments. ' 

It is vesting ia the JTaticaal Assembly a most dangerous power vto an it is 
allowed to act as prosecutor and judge at tho sane time, as is given t© a ©ammds- 
«=ion of tiie national Assembly, the cornission on dapoachnent; and the fact that 
the power to try inpoachaont is loft to that body itself , does mot alter the 
situation, since the coauission on impeachment is chosen by the ilatioa&l Assemble* 
fron amongst its own members. 

ceTpmtsi^S! 

. She unicameral system in a democracy is an experiment. All the ftM/- ^ 
the world have bicameral legislatures. America, England, France - they all hw 
bicameral legislative branches and democratic governments. But I do not knew of 
any country which, after adopting a unicameral legislature, has succeeded in sa- 
ving that institution permanent. So, I think that we had better be a little snore' 
conservative and create a bicameral legislature. 

The creation of a bicameral legislature is ay main interest. I can leave 
the presidency without forebodings of the future if, by the tine I step out of 
Falacanan, I already will have established a bicameral legislature. I would feel 
then that a democratic institution in this country had been established. 

KiOPLB'S EOaSS j^I^^^^^^J^^M.^^SM,. FUTURE 

That we should start the construction of the People's Souse - the edifice 
that will be used "by the law-making body of the Republic of the Philippines - at 
i time when the whole world is at war or being threatened by war because of con- 
flicting political ideologies, is the most conclusive evidence of ^ our unshakable 
faith in the ultimate triumph of liberty, democracy and justice. 

72. H A CART II U R 
M.AflAflTTTTiK TSSPIRES FILIPIH03 TO KSKM ^IlL™ ^ a BBSi'ISY. 

With clear vision he (General Douglas MacArthur) analysed our defensive 
oroblems and in forthright and honest fashion enumerated the measures necessary 
to their successful solution. He inspired us to renew confidence in our own destiny 

FTi^I^l^^cond National Assembly, January 24, 1939- V, 1*2, THL. 
10' Message to the Second National Assembly, Hay 15, 1939. Ihid*. 

,1J7 Speech at the farewell banquet for Floor ^^^STTist^ 
Park, Hay 22, 1939- ftiasfflL&SBBflffia. Vol. 5, Part I, JBVW, p. 154. 

.12/ Speech on the fifth anniversary of the Commonwealth, Sovcnber 15, 1940. 
QP, MR#44, TifL. 



11-197 



- m - 



he 



g B vc us a plan of preparation that by its accurate adjustment to our psculiar 
dQ nakes attainment of national security a practical goal within the limit 
-f our scans. He has labored diligently and effectively to establish the machinery 
through which that plan will reach fruition. But, more iiiportant even than these, 
h ■ has instilled in us the truth that attainment of security is not merely a 
" nction of money or wealth, but rather is a result of properly directed patrio- 
tic, of willingness to sacrifice self for the attainricnt of a spiritual ideal, 
r--,d is a practical expression of a unified and unwavering determination to remain 
free and independent - a fearless member of the family of nations I 

fCARTHUR gETjggS FROM U.S. A RHY, IS RSTADiED A3 COiiH(^mfBALTHJjILITi^Y^ ^ISj^ 

Up to the present tine (December 31, 1937 - ABS) his (HacArthur's) con- 
lotion with this transcendent and all- important natter (referring to our national 
defense - ABS), has been that of an agency of the American government detailed' to 
such duty by the President of the United States upon the request of the President 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, under conditions stipulated in a special 
Act of the American Congress. Vith General llacArthur's retirement from the active 
list of the U.S. Army this condition changes. General HacArthur is now a free 
agent no longer acting under the orders of his government. 
AIM OP PHILIPPIC D^SM^ _raggg^i iJ0_ACHI B7K PBACB VttTIIOUT BATTLE 

In my discussion with General HacArthur, I outline the stupendous impor- 
tance of carrying to fruition the peace and defense plan for the Philippines, 
flic purpose of the plan is to prevent war. Its object is peace without battle. 
Its possibility of attainment is based upon a proper neutrality policy for the 
Philippines and an adequate defense establishment. This latter waB to be of such 
strength as to impose such a cost of conquest upon a potential invader as would 
exceed any hope he might logically entertain of political or economic advantage 
to be gained by victory. By thus removing any possibility of conquest representing 
,n economic short-cut, the chance of predatory attack would be greatly lessened, 
if not entirely eliminated. The prospect of peace for the Philippines is properly 
a hope and ideal for the world because it would constitute one of the strongest 
grantees of tranquility in the Pacific It is anneal that can and should be 
supported by every civilised nation of the world. 
I'1/.CARTEUR AfiSMSRS CALL OF DUTY- TOiRTDES TO STAT KiSRB 

" From _ th7beginning General HacArthur's faith and confidence in the ability 
of the Filipino P eo ? le to achieve success have never varied. They have matched 

IT1peS = rninnerf or Field Marshal Douglas ^^^^f^' 
August 24, 1936. Q»«g<m M essages^ Vol. 2, Part I, J3VFB , p. 1^5. 

II Press statement on HacArthur's retention as milit **" 
wealth, December 31, 1937. XbUu Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, p. 351. 

2/ Ibid. , pp. 351-352. 



11-198 



,von my own faith and confidence in my country and in ray countryman. I frankly 
told him that I would bo at a loss to replace him and that I felt unfortunate 
consequences might result from his departure. I, therefore, requested hin to ro- 
, ain and continue the great task for the Philippines, for America, and for the 
Horld, with which he has so completely identified himself. I am happy to say thr.t 
the Marshal unhesitatingly yielded any personal predilection he may have enter- 
tained and agreed to continue and help me. ^ 

* * * 

[Note: Commenting on this statement, General MacArthur said: "This is a 
call of duty I cannot fail." - ABS . ] 

At the request of General MacArthur, I have left the Philippines and 
joined him at his headquarters in Australia. On previous occasions, suggestions 
have been made to me ihat I leave the Philippines, but I have refused to do it, 
dotermined to carry on with the affairs of government in Philippine "territory. 

Having no other objective in mind than to free the Philippines, I did not 
hesitate to accept the suggestion of Gen. MacArthur despite the hazards that the 
trip involved. And so I am here (in Australia - ABS) where I expect to be able to 
bo of assistance in the reconquest of every foot of territory of my beloved coun- 
try. 

I call upon every Filipino to keep his courage and fortitude, and to have 

5 

faith in the ultimate victory of our cause. 
t ^WOS^^^^R_CCmmiL^I0^ 011 NATIONAL DBFKNSE_ 

QUEZON: General, do you think that the Philippines, once independent, can 
d-sfend itself? 

MACARTHUR: I don't think that the Philippines can defend themselves, I ■ 
know they can... We cannot ;just turn around and leave you alone. All these many 
years we have helped you in education, sanitation, road-building, and even in the 
practice of self-government. But we hav e done nothing in the way of -preparing yo u 
to^defe nd yourselves against a foreign ^foe^. 

73. MILITARY 
A DOUBLE-EDGED SWORD. ARKY CAN BB USEDJTO SUBVERT LAilFUL GOYijRHHjNT_ 

The amy is a double-edged sword. It is the arm of the government which is 
the last resort for the enforcement of the laws and so compel obedience to 

4/ Ikid^, p. 352. 

5/ Proclamation to the Filipino people issued upon Quezon's arrival in Melbourne, 
Australia, March 30, 1942. Rivera Collection, Vol. V, p. 2378. 

y Autobiography, The Go od Fight. Mew York: D. Appleton-Century, 1946., pp. 153- 
155. 



11-199 

- SMI - 

constituted authority, for the; maintenance of peace and order, and for the defense 
,f the national integrity and liberty. 

But as contemporary history proves to us, the amy can also be a disturber 
0 f peace and eneuy of law and established government, aa & ± n nany instances it 
has been the instrument for the overthrow of constitutional regime. 

1(a) 

Lift' '3 BB_V IGIL/*flT AGAIITS TJjlSUSSJF ARMED FOR CES, SAYS QUE ZON 

In building up our national defense and in organising the regular armed 
forces of the Islands, these tragic lessons of history must be constantly borne 

Q 

in mind, and ,it behoov e s us, who ar for the time being entrusted with responsibi- 
li ty of lead e rship over our nation, to be forever watch fu 1 and vigilant lest we 
sow the seeds of a possible future misuse of our armed forces. 

TR USTWOR THY OFFICER S A MSHACE TO THE STATE ~ qUEZON 

There is no crime in the military code, excepting treason and cowardice, 
that is as unpardonable. The foundation of every army is the honor and integrity 
of its corps of officers. Lacking these virtues, no amy can accomplish its 
-i.ission in peace or war. An armed force with untrustworthy officers becomes a 
nennce to the State rather than a support. ^ 

74. H I N D A N AO AFFAIRS 

mOli VOLUNTARILY RECOGNIZE AGUIITALDO GOVERNMENT 




The Filipino Moros belong to the same race as the Christian Filipinos, 
namely, the Malay; they speak the same native language that is spoken by the 
Christian Filipinos living in the island of Mindanao or in the neighboring island, 
to wit: Visayan; and while the difference in religion between the Mohammedan a.-.d 
Christian of any race is a great handicap to a good understanding, the tie of 
kinship would put a Filipino government into better position to govern the Moros 
than the American government. 

As a matter of fact, the Horos voluntarily recognized Aguinaldo's govern- 
ment, and thors was then no bloodshed in the Moro country. The assertion that 
the Horos and Christian Filipinos hate each other is groundless, as is also the 
statement that there has always been war between them. Although it i3 true ,that 
early in the 19th century there wore some pirates among the Moros who used to rob 

Christian towns, there was never any such warfare be^en Christian Filipinos and 
horos as took place between Americans and Indians. 

l.(a)/ Message to the First National Assembly on the country's condition and prob- 
lems, June 16, 1936. Quezon Messages, Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFF, p. 167. 

2/ Ibid. , pp. 167-168. 

2/ Letter to the Chief of Staff, Philippine Army, on the dismissal from the 
service of 1st Lt. Tranquilino S. Cabrera, P.A., March 30, 1939. 
Ibid. . Vol. 5, Part I, JBVFF, p. 391. 

iLkl/ Article, "The Right of the Philippines to Independence," The Filipino People ,, 
Vol. I, No. 2, October 1912. Rivera Collection, Vol. 1, pp. 108-109. 



H-200 



- m - 



STRIATIC ^cg^^^^j^^^^^^^^^V^^^KLJO^^ 

The tine has cone when we should systematically . proceed with and bring 

-■bout the colonization and economic development of Mindanao. A vast and rich 

i-,3rritory with its untapped natural resources is a temptation to enterprising 

2 

rations that are looking for an outlet for their excess population. 
,T|:|y;0N ngtt'IggS P0wBKS_0J^C0MiafrI0Ifca FOR MINDANAO AND SU LU_ 

The purpose sought by the Administration in recommending the creation of 
vie post of Commissioner for Mindanao and Sulu was to have a responsible official 
stationed in Mindanao, who could act and carry out the program of development with- 
out unnecessary delay. . . I think .the government of Mindanao and Sulu should con- 
tinue under the Department of the Interior as every other government in the Is- 
lands is under the existing laws. But the Commissioner may be given powers through 
administrative policy to act without the necessity of constantly having to seek 
the approval of the authorities in Manila for everything that he does or of ma- 
king previous consultation before talcing any action at all. ^ 

ITiESIDlSHT GIVES BASIC INSTRUCTI ON TO P EACE OFFICERS Hi MIICT)ANA0_ 



No member of the Constabulary or of the ^rmy, from the Chief of Staff down 
to the last soldier, at any station in the Philippines, is vested with any po- 
wer or right to enter into an agreement with any violator of the law whereby each 
offender is guaranteed or promised freedom from criminal prosecution. To do so is 
to assume, in effect, the right of granting pardons, a power that by constitutional 
provision is exclusively vested in the President. \. 7 hore any officer believes that 
such pardon should bo granted, his recommendations , with reasons therefor, will 
be forwarded through his military superiors to the President, after he has dis- 
charged his full official duty in assuring the prompt prosecution of the offender. 
The principle that in the court's alone, subject to the pardoning power of the 
President, resides the authority to determine the guilt or innocence of an accused, 
and to fix the degree of punishment for low violation, must be rigidly observed 
by every member of your command. Proven disregard of this principle by any indi- 
vidual will result in his immediate separation from the service. 
DESTROY ALL COTTAS SXCEPr THOSE W ITO HI STORICAL ViJflS - QUEZON, 

Every cotta now existing in the Moro region will be immediately destroyed, 
except such, if there be any, which, for its historical interest should be 

2rM^™™lirst National Assembly on the country 1 s condition and problems, 

June 16, 1936. >szon Messages^ Vol. 2, Part I, JBVffa , p. HI. 
2/ Letter to Assemblyman Apolonio D. Curate on the powers of the Commissioner 

for Mindanao and Sulu, July 28, 1936. Ibid,., pp. 216-^17. 
4/ LPttor to Mai Gen. Paulino Santos, Chief of Staff, Philippine army, on the 

suppression of lawlessness in Lanao, September 20, 1937. iM^onJ^es, 

Vol. 3, Part 1, JBVFF, p. 236. 



11-201 

proserved. In this case the' cotta nay bo preserved under the supervision and con- 
trol of the military authorities. Uith this exception, all cottas in every section 
of the territory inhabited by Iloros will be promptly demolished. 5 

••:rry/,0N P0IHT8 OUT WEjjKITBSS IN OLD POLIC Y OH hOROS 

It has been, in ny opinion, the weakness in the policy heretofore adopted 
by the government of the Philippines in dealing with the Mohammedan Filipinos or 
Horos in Mindanao and the 3ulu Archipelago to give some sort of recognition to th; 
,'atus, so that they have become in practice ex offic io officials of the govern- • 
nent. This must be stopped and changed radically. It gives the impression that 
there is a dual government for the Iloros - one exorcised by the appointed or 
elective officials of the governor and the other by the datus or sultans. It per- 
petuates the overlordship exercised through the ages by these datus and sultans 
over their sacup who, on this account, continue to be, in fact, slaves of their 
sultans and datus as they were under the Spanish regime. 

These datus and sultans should never be allowed to have anything to do 

with functions that are official. They should be heard exactly and precisely as 

overy other citizen has the right to be heard on natters affecting the nation, 

lis province, his municipality, or his district. Their help should be sought no 

raore than the help of any other citizen in any other part of the Philippines is 

sought, if and when the services of such citizen may be needed. By this, I mean 

that nothing must be done by this government or its officials that would give 

tJio impression that men without official responsibilities and powers may exercise 

any authority or intervene with authority on governmental or administrative affaire 

7 

of the nation, province, municipality or district. 

I am inclined to believe now that the tine has come for the appointment of 
civilian governors in every province largely or partly inhabited by Mohammedan 
Filipinos . its soon as wo can find the right men from amongst civilians, we 
•'*iould appoint then an governors for these provinces... Lot these governors speak 
to the people about the peaceful objectives of the government carried through 
peaceful means. Let (them) visit their respective provinces constantly and mingle 
with the common man, see him in his heme, on his farm, talk to the masses and tell 
thorn in what way the government can be of help to them in improving their agricul- 
ture, their small trade, in ameliorating the hardships of their lives, in raising 

5/ Ibid., pp. 286-287.' 

y Memorandum for the Secretary of the Interior on the administration of affairs 
in Mindanao, September 297 1937. Ibid. . p. 358. 

& Ibiit., P. 359. 



11-202 

ci.ieir standard of living, in combating disease, in creating sanitary conditions, 
and in protecting them against abuses from evil persons. In one word, let the 
inhabitants of these provinces to which I an referring, feel toward the govern- 
ment, by means of civilian officials that we will place at the head of these pro- 
vinces, exactly as the average good citizens of other provinces of the Philippines 
feel toward the government of their country. 

Please. . get information from all sources as to who are the men who could 
do this work well in Mindanao, and submit to me a list from which I nay pick the 
.•sr. I shall appoint. Vie may get men already in the government service, or outside 

the service, men who have shown executive and administrative ability, industry 

p 

r.nd, above all, unimpeachable honesty. 
V: J fl GAS_ BXPLLINS^3UEZ0r S = P0LICY^0N MUSLIM 

His Excellency (President Quezon) does not seek to interfere with the use 
of titles by Moro sultans or clatus so long as it is clearly understood that a 
title carries with it no offioial rights or privileges. T fhat the President desires 
to emphasize is that there are no privileged classes under this government and no 
authority vested on any individual not occupying an official position. In other 
words, the President is determined to consider and to act towards the Moharanedan 
Pilipinos as he considers and acts towards the. Christians, precisely because ho 
agrees with you that' the so-called Moro problem is a myth. ^ 

alUDANAO AND SULU DSVfeiLOPMEMT ,_gETS_DUg ATTENTION 

Commonwealth Act No. 75, approved on October 24, .1936, abolished tho Bureau 
of T7 on-Christian Tribes and merged its powers and duties with those of the Secre- 
tary of tho Interior. 

The same Act created the Office of Commissioner for Mindanao and Sulu to 
assist the Secretary of Interior in the development work of said region as well as 
tc take charge directly of the affairs of tho provincial and municipal governments 
therein. 

Under conditions now obtaining the problem of development in Mindanao and 
Sulu involved principally tho introduction of public improvements such as roads, 
bridges, ports, hospitals, public dispensaries, more schools, radio stations, 
aviation and landing fields, and the systematic colonization of vacant public lands. 

^ILBASGS A APPOIIOTEiNT PROOF OF 3QPA L TOJjUJMBMT O^ JIOgOS. 

Vie could not have given the Mohammedan people of Mindanao and Sulu a bet- 
tor evidence that we are treating them exactly like the Christians than by giving 
you a Moro governor. Following this step, every Moro province will be governed 

2/ M&jl, ?. 359. 

V Letter of Secretary to the President Jorge B. Vargas, in behalf of President 
Quezon, acknowledging Sulu Assemblyman Orabra Amilbangsa' s lottor, on the go- 
vernment's three-point policy for Mindanao and Sulu. October 8, 1937. 
ibid*., pp. 300-301. 

10/ Message to the First National Assembly, October 16, 1937. QP, M#39, TNL. 



II-203 



- m - 



c.vp.ctly as tlie C hristian provinces are boing governed, tie expect the Moros to feel 
thn t they constitute a very important element of the whole Filipino people. 11 

iirjzoK axp.jQ'fs ami lbanos/i to- sa a good hobo Govamo fi 

1 expect Governor Onbra Anilbangsa to bo a good governor. I have told hin 

that he can look to no greater conpwnoation for hie service than the recognition 

that he had been a good governor of his province. I want Governor Ombra to be, 

Voove all, impartial, just, and fair. I want him to devote hinself unselfishly 

to the service of the people of Jolo. As long as he acts in this way, he will 

Ivvcj all the backing, all the support, all the confidence of the national govern- 

"+ 12 
: lent . 

;.;r;3JA;^0_N0^ 

There is an island in the Philippines which we can bestow upon our children 

?nd descendants - Mindanao. It is no longer the boundless forest ravaged by ma- 

1 3 

laria, but the land of promise where people actually reap immense benefit. 

75. MINIMUM N AGE 

MDTIHCTMJJAGIi TO SECURE DECENT LIVING FOR LABOURS 

Many factors have to be taken into consideration in establishing the mini- 
;aua wage, such as the cost of living in each locality, financial situation of 
each province, ■ and the work which the laborer is doing. As to the rest, I am ab- 
solutely in favor of a minimum wage affording a decent living to the laborer. 
Since I have assumed the office of President I have considered it as one of the 
inescapable duties of this government to secure reasonable wages for the laborers. 

iIKiiLiR WAGES FOR WORKERS MEAN ilORS AIID^ETTER_70ffl( 

I have heard it said that if we pay higher wages to our workingmen, wo are 
doomed in our competition with the countries in this part of the globe. This is 
fallacious because to pay good wagos to our laborers is to give thorn proper nou- 
rishment, and proper nutrition moans health. A healthy laborer can do more and 

2 

hotter work than one who is sickly and underfed. 
rlULIPFKBSS IN HALCYON DAYS : MINIMUM MONTHLY SAL ARY OF ?30 ! 



In line with the policy enunciated in Executive Order No. 49 , I» Manuel 
L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers in no vostod by • 
law, hereby fix as the minimum salary to be paid to employees of the national 



11/ Speech at the provincial building in Jolo, Sulu, August 30, 1938. Prison 
Messages, Vol/ A, Part I, JBVFF, p. 200. 

Ibid... p. 201. 

12/ Speech at Atinonan, Tayabas, July 25, 1939. 2j&™L M92&BS3 1 Vol. 5, Part I, 

\l Letter to Eon. Enrique Magalona, chairman of the Committee on Labor, ^tional 
Assembly, August 5, 1936. Onftflon Messages . Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFjJ , pp. 220-221 

2j Address on higher wages for Filipino laborers, broadcast over station KZRII, 
Manila, August 19, 1936. Ibid., p. 117- 



11-204 



government the sum of P30 per month, unless otherwise specifically provided by la- 



•5 

effective September 1, 1936. 



* * * 



In line with the policy of this office and, in case existing laws and exe- 
cutive orders do not specifically compel the City to pay not less than P30 montly 
in salaries and wages to the employees and laborers of the City of Baguio, you 
(the Municipal Council) are hereby directed to approve an ordinance providing 
tnat all employees and laborers of the City of Baguio will no t receive less than 
:»J0 in salaries and wages per month. ^ 

SflaON ORDERS MINIMUM Li yi.NGJj AGB_FOR WORKERS, &TIPL0YS5S 

After a careful study of the prevailing living conditions of the laboring 
elements of our people in the different parts of the .archipelago, the fact has 
been impressed upon me that they are not being given wages that would enable them 
to adequately meet the bare necessities of life. To this state of affairs may be 
attributed, to a great extent, the present unsatisfactory living conditions of 
many of our people who, due to the lack of sufficient means to nourish themselves, 
arc- easily susceptible to the ravages of diseases. In order to lead the movement 
to give our working classes a living wage, I issued Executive Orders Nos. 49 and 
50 on August 19 and 20, 1936, respectively,, fixing the minimum daily wages to 
be paid to able-bodied common laborers employed by, or under the direct supervi- 
sion of the different branches of the national government, and also the minimum 
salary for employees of the government, unless otherwise specifically provided 
by law. ^ 

CIR DIRECTED TO CO NDUCT WAGE PROBili IN SUGAR INDUSTRY 



"Whereas, the Secretary of Labor has received reliable information tending 
to show that the wages of laborers and shares of tenants in certain sugar-produ- 
cing areas of the Philippines are inadequate to supply the reasonable needs of 
such laborers and tenants and are disproportionate to the profits received by the 
landlords and owners of lands in such areas; and 

'Whereas, such a condition, if true, is conducive to unrest among the peo- 
ple affected and would ultimately result in grave menace to public peace and order, 
to the great detriment of the progress of the sugar industry; 

"Now, therefore, pursuant to the authority vested in me by Commonwealth 
^ct Ho. 103, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do hereby order 
sad direct the Court of Industrial Relations to make an immediate investigation 



V Executive Ord~r No. 50, "Fixing the Minimum Salary That Should Be Paid to 
Employees of ,he National Government," August 24, 1936. Ibid . . p. 681. 

V Letter entitled "Minimum Wages for Employees and Laborers of the City of 
Baguio," -November 29, 1936. Ibid. . p. 468. 

V Message to the First National Assembly on additional appropriation for 
salaries and wages of employees and laborers, September 2, 1936. Ibid . , 
P. 230. 



11-205 



- 3W - 



:. n d examination of all pertinent facts in relation with the sugar industry, and 
,,,ftar such investigation in accordance with the aforesaid Act, to determine the 
necessity and fairness of fixing and adopting a minimum wage or share for laborers 
, m d tenants working in the sugar-producing areas according to the conditions ob- 
taining in such locality and to fix such minimum wage or share, and to submit to 
the President its decision thereon for approval in the manner provided by said Act. 

CIS T0^M)tTCT_^^ = ^^B = J^CKARJ^CT0niES 

"Whereas, the Secretary of Labor has received information tending to show 
that the wages of laborers employed in the cigar and cigarette industry are in- 
adequate to suppy the reasonable needs qf such laborers; and 

"Whereas, such a condition, if true, is conducive to unrest among the people, 
.affected and should ultimately result in grave menace to public peace and order, 
to the great detriment of the progress of the cigar and cigarette industry; 

"low, therefore, I Manuel L. Queson, President of the Philippines, do here- 
by order and direct the Court of Industrial Relations to make an immediate inves- 
tigation and examination of all pertinent facts in relation with the cigar and 
cigarette industry, and after such investigation in accordance with the aforesaid 
act (CA No. 103), to determine the necessity and fairness of fixing and adopting ■ 
a minimum wage for laborers working in the cigar and cigarette factories accor- 
ding to the conditions obtaining in each locality and to fix such minimum wage, 
and to submit to the. President its decision thereon for approval in the manner 
provided by said Aot..." 

RAISE LABOR WAGES- IN SUGARLANDIA - QUEZON 



We must all cooperate to find the means and use them to improve the lot of 
the working class in the Philippines. Particularly the provinces enjoying the be- 
nefits of the sugar industry should and must immediately raise substantially the 
wages of labor. 



* * * 



We are the servants of the whole people and we shall not permit an injustice 
to be done, much less perpetuated, against any constituent part of our community. 



* * * 



A man is more entitled to the fruits of nis labor tnan the proprietor to 
the. rents of his property. ^ 

6/ Administrative Order tfo. 32, "Directing the CIR to Conduct an Immediate Inves- 
tigation of All the Facts Relating to the Sugar Industry and to Determine the 
Necessity of Adopting a Minimum Wage or Share for Laborers or Tenants Working 
in the Sugar-ProSvcing Areas," January 22, 1937. ^egon jle ssagea , Vol. 3, 
Part II, J3VFF, p. 1154. 

ll Administrative Order No. 33, "Directing the Court of Industrial Relations to 
Conduct an Immediate Investigation of All Pacts Relating to the Cigar and Ciga- 
rette Industrv and to Determine the Necessity of Adopting a Minimum wage for 
Laborers Working in the Cigar and Cigarette Factories," January 22, 1937. 
P- 1155. 

§/ Speech at the inauguration of the City of Iloilo, August 1937, n.d. QP, MR#39, T 



11-206 

~ 373 - 

In order to establish a more equitable and uniform schedule of wages for 
como n laborers employed by the different branches of the national government based 
on the prevailing living conditions in the different provinces and chartered ci- 
ti3fl , I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, hereby fix the minimum . 
d ,ily wage to be paid to able-bodied comon laborers employed by, or under the 
llir oct supervision of the different branches of the national government, at not 
l0 sa than one hundred twenty percent™ of the present basic minimum daily wages 
?a id to said laborers as shown by the records of the Bureau of Public Works . 

The Secretary of Public -forks and Communications and the Secretary of Labor 
are hereby directed to prepare as soon as practicable an. official schedule of the 
minimum daily wages to be paid as prescribed in this Executive Order, the same 
to become effective on September first, 1936. 

In those cases where laborers are employed on work located in iaolated or 
■:juB8ttled districts, they shall be furnished the usual rations at the expense of 
the government, or paid an additional wage of not to exceed fifteen centavos per 
day in lieu thereof. They may be also furnished at the expense of the government, 
chargeable to projects concerned, quinine and other first aid medicines. 9 

* * * 

"Executive Order No. 49, series of 1936, is hereby amended to read as follows 
"In order to establish a more equitable and uniform schedule of wages for 
common laborers employed by the different branches of the national government 
baaed on the prevailing living conditions in the different provinces and chartered 
cities, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, hereby fix the minimum 
daily wage to be paid to able-bodied common laborers employed by, or under the 
direct supervision of the different branches of the national government, at not 
less than one hundred twenty per centum of the present basic minimum daily wages 
paid to said laborers as shown by the records of the Bureau of Public Wor&s. 

"The Secretary of Public Works and Communications and the Secretary of 
J-^abor are hereby directed to prepare as soon as practicable an official schedule 
oi the minimum daily wages to be paid as prescribed in this Executive Order; Pro- 
vided, That the minimum daily wage to be paid to common laborers employed by the 

national government shall not be less than one peso and twenty centavos in the 
"ity of Manila and one peso in the different provinces and chartered cities, the 
sane to become effective August 19th, 1937. " 

2/ Executive Order No. 49, "Increasing and Fixing the Minimum Daily Wage to be 
Paid to Common Laborers Employed by the National Government in the Different 
Provinces and Chartered Cities," August 19, 1936. Quezon Messages . Vol. 2, 
Part I, JBVFF, p. 680. 

12/ Executive Order No. 105, "Amending Executive Order No. 49, Series of 1936, 
Entitled 'Increasing and Fixing the Minimum Daily Daily Wage to be Paid to 
Common Laborers Employed by the National Government in the Different Provin- 
ces and Chartered Cities,' so as to Fix a Minimum Daily Wage of ?1 .25 for Com- 
mon Laborers Employed by the National Government in the City of Manila and ?1 
for those Employed in the Different Provinces and Chartered Cities, August 19, 
!937. I.bid.-,^ * Vol. 3, Part II, JBVFF, pp. 631-632. 



11-207 

- w* - 

sugar jEU^2^1=~~Ili=iM£MllLMII--^- a L 3S • ii_ 

Unless you fellows (sugar hacendoros) raise the wages of the workingmen, I 
• rf ill recommend to the National Assembly the passage of a law compelling you to 
r;; ise the wages of sugar laborers. 11 

^t.toRATING LABOR CONDITIONS GIVEN 3KPBASI3 BY P53SiDSj.1T 

Social influences of militant character that are sweeping over the world, 
coupled' with a growing national consciousness, apparent since the establishment of 
tlis present autonomous government, have stimulated the assertiveness of our masses- 
<nd this is manifested in an insistent demand for justice and more humane treat- 
lvJ11 t of labor. 

Lebbr conditions in the Philippines today arc the best in the last few vefti'S, 
sad I should say, are the best that wo ever had in this country, and it is my con- 
fident hope that they will continue to improve, as the beneficent effects of the 
ronsdial measures adopted for the protection of the laborers and the promotion of 
their well-being are gradually absorbed by the people. 

Our immediate concern should, therefore, be to equip the agencies of the 
government having to do with the protection of labor and the welfare of the people, 
with adequate means to expand the field of their activities so that no workor and 
.10 indigent man or woman in the Philippines can be found out of reach of their 
V.lping hand. 

We should also endeavor to bring up to date certain provisions of existing 

labor laws which, passed a decade or so ago, have become too weak or vague, if not 

altogether obsolete under rapidly changing social conditions and in the light of 

12 

present-day. views and appreciations of human values. 

q^aoi fixes h istohm wage for la bor in city, p rovi nces^ 

The Court of Industrial Relations was organised to adjudge labor claims and 
arbitrate industrial and agricultural disputes whenever the conciliatory function 
of the Department of Labor fails to attain its end. 

The establishment of the Court of Industrial Relations is a warning to radi- 
cal elements that imjustifiod propagation of strikes as a means to promote revolu- 
tionary purposes, will not be tolerated. 

By executive order I fixed the minimum daily wage for laborers working in 
the public works under the national government at Pi .25 in the City of Manila and 
*1 .00 in the provinces, and the minimum monthly salary for employees of the national 
government at F30.00. 

Thus the government has taken upon itself the task of showing the way to a 

1 3 

definite amelioration of living conditions among our masses. 

H/ Speech it n press conference,- August 27, '1937. OP, MR#40, TNL. 

12/ Message to the First National Assembly, October 16, 1937. QP, MR#39, TNL. 

•3/ Ibid. 



11-208 

- fn - 

One of the first acts of my administration was the ordering of * fact-finding 
survey of rural problems to be conducted by the Department of Labor, covering not ' 
only the relations between private owners of large estates and their laborers, but 
,iso including a thorough study of the general working and living conditions of 
•;, .rr.i hands in general . 1 4 

,v rBjmTO3TO 1 ^AG3_0F_LAB0afiR A MATTER OF JUSTICE 

The rich can only keep his wealth forever if he treats right the man who is ' 
„or!dng for him. It is not only a matter of justice that the man who works should 
bo paid appropriate wage. It is also a matter of business for the man who pays. _If_ 
,'OU pay a man w ho is working for you what he needs for his support and the support 
of Mo family , that ma n will work for y ou with love and with devotion and he will 
1 i£ 1 iL£°LJ^_i£ - tl }. e .._ i L¥ a g _ should that yo ur interes t is to b e defend ed. But if 

, : .ian_who is._ wrki^_fo_r you do3s not have what h e know s he is entitled to have 
aD?g-gg e - s that you are -i^U™ila^iMJjg.gilth, that man i n his heart prajys that' you 
s;a y lose what you have. That ±a considering the question of the relationship bet- 
V3.H1 capital and labor in a particular way. ^ 

I:.,: SUGAR CEIWRALS FOR BENEFIT OF Y/ORKIXKiSH 



It is my intention to recommend to the next National assembly the imposition 
of a tax for centrals which will be used by the government to serve the interest 
of tho workingman . ^ ^ 

mm>m ccmw®W'-w, labor for minimum v/age 



I want the people, especially the masses, to realize that I am not advoca- 
ting a one-sided justice. Justice can never be one-sided. The minute that you pro- 
pose one-sided justice, you are not proposing justice at all. V/hat I want when I 
speak of raising the standard of living of the masses of the people through the 
increase of their salary or better wage and better living conditions, is that they 
should justify this by rendering the work that they are expected to do in whatever 
capacity they arc. That is the idea. I do n' t want _the_ p eople here to be lieve that 
tne workingn an is entitled to a minimum wage_as a matter of right rega rdless of 
;jie_ther_he works or not. It must always be ba sed not- only on what the peo p le need 
£^Ji*£iL_^^ b ut als o the_ p^iqujn J^'j^ an honest working- 

■'■ga^pa ble of do ing the work that he is supposed _to j£,^h^ul^_rece_ive for a work 

Jion_^l u ^_in the field. That is justice, otherwise you would be making the 
corporation pay for something for which it is not getting the equivalent benefit, 
-o government has tne right to demand full compliance with tne minimum wage law 



H/ Report to the Congress of the United States, 1937. n.d.m. QP, MR#40, TNL. 
15/ Speech at the public plaza of Ormoc, Leyte, June 13, 1938. QP, MR#41 , TNL. 
W Speech at the inauguration of Bacolod City, October 19, 1938. QP, HR#40, TNL. 



11-209 

m ' 

exce pt upon the basis that the people doing that work are going to render a ser- 
vice commensurate with the wage that they are getting. 17 

76. M ISC.ELL A N Y 

One of the greatest dangers that menace new peoples with great ambitions, • 
,.-,.0 feci they have the strength to work out a great future, is that they are liable 
cf) bo so well satisfied with themselves and their own work that they forget or 
..wain the experience or resent the aid of other peoples with greater experience 
.ui the art of governing. The most advanced people on earth have not yet attained 
:: .;ir complete and perfect development. ^ 

Every nation has something to learn from the others, and any country which, 
systematically or from an excess of national pride, refuses to profit by the les- 
sons and the experience of other countries and even other men, not only hurts it- 
solf, but even exposes itself to public ridicule. When I say other men, I say so 
advisedly. Especially during the first years of our independent existence the aid 
of raen from more advanced countries who have excelled in certain lines of govern- 
ment work and whoso services may be required for the construction of our national 

2 

edifice, will be cordially solicited. 

J7DICI0U3 milliJATIOJI, ASSIMILATION OP BEST IN OTHERS 



To copy, without due examination and without talcing into account whether 
or not it is adaptable to our way of being, that which is foreign, merely because 
it is foreign, is as harmful as rejecting it in the same manner and for the same 
roasoa. 

The example of Japan, repeatedly cited, may very opportunely be cited again. 
Our neighboring nation owes its present enviable situation to the wisdom with which 
^-Ig thers of the Japan of today retained their own and assimilated t he best they 
fou nd in the fore ign countries. ^ 

The limitation imposed upon the .amount of Philippine products, exportable to 
too United States free of duty is so drastic that those of us who knew the condi- 
tions in the Islands predicted then that it would adversely affect the finances of 

12/ Reuarka in interview with i'ord tfilkins of tho iianilr. Daily Bulletin. 
I'Vhruary 9, 1959. '-jP, BH#43, T-TL. 

il «ddrjss at a public banquet held in Quezon's honor at the Hotel de France, 
Sta. Cruz, upon his triumphal return from the United States, September 28, 
1916. Rivera Collection, Vol. I, p. 424. 

y Hm*.> Pi 425. 
3/ ibid. 



0 



" m - 

the Philippine government and economic conditions in the country. 

I protested then against these drastic restrictions upon bur commerce and 
frankly stated that if put into effect they would throw many of our men and women 
iut w*, lower standards of living with- consequent hardship, and cause general 
discontent among the people. 

The disturbances (referring to the aborted Sakdal revolt of Hay 2, 1935 - 
,33) should not be considered a political uprising. The leader, Benigno .Ramos, is 
.political racketeer taking advantage of the economic distress. The whole econo- 
mic policy of America towards the Philippines provided in the Independence Act 
,nd subsequent laws should be revised in a manner beneficial both to the Philip- 
pines and the United States. ^ 

I think that one of the most important duties of a civilized government is 

to take care of these insanes and to accommodate them properly, so if the 'National 

issoiably raises the necessary revenues, my hope within the next two or three years 

is to take care of all the insanes in the Philippines the same thing with all 
5 

the lepers. 

^^^P^IC^^^^^^CRAJ^^SPECUUTO^ 

During the past few months we have been witnessing wildc at speculation 
in securities in this country. A serious problem pregnant with mischievous possi- 
bilities has suddenly been thrust upon us, which vre have to meet immediately. Every 
day corporations and associations of various forma are being organised for the 
avowed purpose of exploring and developing our mineral resources, and they have 
literally flooded the country with securities of doubtful value. 

* ■» * 

A securities and exchange commission is being established ifhich will enforce 
the law and regulations for the protection of the public... It is the duty of tho 
government to interfere whenever some people make repeated attempts to obtain 
something for nothing, usually at the expense of another; and that no man should 
bo permitted to enrich himself by an unearned increment, whifih is justified neither 
is legitimate interest or reasonable profit on capital nor as a just reward for 
labor. 6 

SiLDAHiIGHT SAVING- TIME ESTABLISHED BY QUEZON 



"Pursuant to the authority vested in me by Commonwealth Act Ho. 91 , and in 



1/ Quezon statement in Washington, D.C., May 4, 1935. Rivera Collection, Vol. Ill, 
P. 1155. 

5/ Press conference at Malacallan, July 10, 1936. QP, MR#38, TNL. 

§/ Message to the First National Assembly on more effective government regulation 
of securities, September 30, 1936. Quezon Messages. Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFP, 
PP. 283-284. 



one 
as 



11-211 

- 578 - 

or der that employees and laborers may be afforded sunlight for recreation purposes 
,d, likewise, to effect savings in the use of light both to the government and to 
the general public, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, hereby pro- 
claim daylight saving time for the Philippines between November 1st, 1936, and 
Tanuary 31s t > 1937, and order that at 12:00 o'clock midnight on October 31st, 1936, 
■y llQ standard time of the Philippines fixed in the aforesaid Act shall be advanced 
hour, and at 12:00 o'clock midnight on January 31st, 1937, the time so fixed, 
s above stated, shall be retarded ono hour so as to return to standard time. 

"Employers and the public in general are hereby enjoined to give effect to 
fcho purpose and intent of this Proclamation and of Act No. 91. For purposes of as- 
tronomy and meteorology, however, the mean astronomical time at 120 degrees East 
longtitude, Greenwich Meridian, may be used as heretofore." ^ 

READING G OOD B O^|^TH^^D_gOR_ EiniIGH TEHHEHT 

"Whereas, the ireading of good books or the printed page is one of the most 
affective methods of bringing enlightenment within the reach of the largest possi- 
ble number of people, and of promoting the cause of popular culture with its tre- 
mendous social benefits; and 

"Whereas, it is desirable that the task of arousing a widespread interest 
in the reading of good books be recognized as a highly patriotic duty as well as 
a privilege; 

"Now, therefore, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, do here- 
by designate the period from November 24th to 30th of each year beginning from 

Q 

1937 as National Book Week." 
^0K^E^ING_ENCOTP^ED = FOJ = |OCIAL^ 

The formation of the habit of reading and the encouragement of the reading 
of genuinely good books, two things which are essentially the duty of the librarian 
and the library to promote and the accomplishment of which will bring enlightenment 
to the masses, will go a long way towards the realization of my own policy of ex- 
tending the fullest measure of social justice to the people. Reading good books 
is likewise a tremendous factor for social advancement and popular culture. 

p res ident i ssaES _ PRoci^m gj_Rgl!^^J^gJ^il=IS= 

"By virtue of the powers conferred upon mo by law, I, Manuel L. Quezon, 
osident of the Philippines, hereby revoke Proclamation No. 104, dated October 30, 
1936, establishing the daylight saving time for the Philippines, and direct 
7l^:tirioT704, "Establishing the Daylight Saving Time for the Philip- 
Pines," October 30, 1936. Ihid, p. ^ 24 to ? 0 of Each 

8/ Proclamation No. 109, "Designating the Period "o 

Year as National Book Week," November 19, 1936. aaiU, P« " 
/ . * ^ a Librarians' Convention in Manila, 

3j Radio message at the closing of the Librarians 

November 29, 1936. QP, HR#38, TNL. 



11-212 



- 379 - 



a t 12:00 o'clock midnight today, January 15, 1937, the standard time fixed in tho 

sa id Proclamation shall be retarded one hour so as to return to the normal 
1 0 

standard time. 

ffimZ0| = SPEAKS_O F_^ LUHE_O F FR IEND5HIP^_BEF0R| JOLLYtfOOD STARS 

Really, Mr. Toastmaster, I prefer this informal luncheon, where I am sur- 
rounded by the stars of moviedom, to a big banquet, with fill the big 'shots' of 
California, as you wanted to make it. I come from a poor family and I like modesty 
and, really, the lure of power or of fame is nothing compared to the lure of friend- 
ship, and that friendship I know I have among you here today. ^ 

" JTJ3TENG" IS NOT GAMBLING BUT ORGANIZED FRAUD AGAINST _P00R_ 

Gambling is doubtless one of the weaknesses of human nature that should be 
dealt with by 'the government with sound discretion; but " jueteng" is not gambling. 
It is merely an organized fraud of such shocking proportion that it has become the 
greatest scandal in our community life. The worst victims of this criminal racke- 
teering business are the poor. Its existence is of common knowledge, but it has 
been impossible/ eradicate it because the penalty is cither a small fine or a few 
dajrs' imprisonment. ^ 2 

m VARIATIONS OF PHILOSOPHY THAT "ALL HEN ARE CRijATgij EQUAL" 

The irresistible forces of human progress have brought upon us a new philo- 
sophy in the science of government, new concepts in tho relations of man in the 

existing economic order in all its varied aspects, of that basic principle pro- 

13 

founded in the philosophy of law that all men are created equal. 
PH ILIPPINE AVI ATIO N REC O RD; NO FATALIT Y_IN_QNE_YEM 

It is gratifying to note that there has never boon any fatality or serious 
injury to passengers during tho past year - a record which compares favorably to, 
if not better than, that of civilian flying in any other country. 

The Bureau of Aeronautics is continually constructing and improving landing 

fields, and establishing radio and weather stations, making available instantaneous 

14 

weather reports for airmen and airline companies. 

LAGUNA MUST GET RID OF " JUETE NG%_W ARNS QUggpJL 

I am not interested in any candidate for provincial or municipal office in 

12/ Proclamation No. 126, January 15, 1937. Quezon Messages. V ol. 3, Part II, 
JBVFF, p. 76d. 

11/ Extemporaneous speech on the achievement of men, at Hollywood, California, 
February 15, 1937. Quezon Messages. Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, p. 44. 

12/ Message to the First National Assembly recommending a heavy penalty for 

jueteng, September 3, 1937. Ibid. , p. 200. 
12/ Speech on the principles of law and justice, at the University of Sto. Tomns, 

October 2, 1937. Ibid. , p. 141. 
W Message to the First. National Assembly, October 16, 1937. OP, MR#39, T.NL. 



i 



i 



11-213 

Laguna any more than I am in any other province. My interest in Laguna is that 
the provincial and municipal authorities who may bo elected rescue the good name 
of the province from the reputation of being the den of 'jueteng'. 15 

The unfortunate conflict wherein millions of people are now engaged in this 
part of the globe cannot but arouse our deep sympathy for the sufferings that such 
conflict brings in its wake. 

It is, of course,' not for me to pass judgment on the issues involved, but I 
trust it is not out of place for me to express the hope shared by the people of 
ay country that this conflict may soon end, and that, when it does end, peace and 
mutual understanding will be permanently established among the nations of the 
Par East. 1 



That there is a need of improving the living conditions of the workingman 
in the Philippines, bo he an industrial or a farm laborer, goes without saying; 
that downright injustices and abuses are being committed against the wage earner 
and the peasant, is also an undeniable fact, and that the efforts of my govern- 
ment are primarily directed to the amelioration of the living conditions of the 
masses and the correction of these injustices and abuses, every fair-minded man 
should be able to recognize at this time. But as I have repeatedly stated in every 
opportune occasion, it is impossible to accomplish these objectives in a short 
period of time, nor is it possible for any government to find a panacea that will 
satisfactorily bring about the results that I intend to accomplish which will cure 
all these evils thoroughly and immediately. We are facing a situation which is 
the result of traditional practices, dealing with the natural selfishness of human 
nature, the lack of habits of continued and persistent work on the part of the 
workers, and the backwardness of some of our methods in agriculture. This 1 is, 
therefore, a very complex problem which, even with the cooperation of all the com- 
ponent elements of our system and an intelligent direction on the part of the go- 
vernment, can only find full fruition after the ordinary human process of trials 
1 7 

and errors. 

Money has no intrinsic value... The benefit of money lies in the things 



15/ Press statement on his non-participation in the local elections of Laguna, 
November 19, 1937. Quezon Messages. Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, p. 347. • 

Ji/ Press statement on the alleged negotiations with the Japanese government for 
the neutralization of the Philippines, July 19, 1938. Quezon Messages. V ol. 4, 
Part I, JBVFF,' p. 677. ■ 

12/ Speech on the policy of the government regarding industrial and agrarian 
conflicts in Central Luzon, March 1, 1939. 4P» i'iHfM2, TNL. 



11-214 

it can buy; therefore if we are to discuss wages, we must base them on what we can 
buy with the amount that we shall earn. . . Money is not truly the measure of the 
needs of man, but the measure of what money can buy and of what man will need in 
his lifetime. 

^SlgL 1 ^ 5 .^!!!!^^^-^^^^!!-^^^ war 

You are convened at a tine when many countries of the world are in the 
throes of war. The agonies which the nations involved in the conflict are suffering 
cannot but touch our hearts. We sympathise with their sad fate and we pray to 
God that the tragic ordeal may, soon come to an end. No nation, however far re- 
moved from the struggle, can escape its disturbing effects. Even we are experien- 
cing the inevitable consequences of this war in terms of reduced trade with the 
warning nations and their neighbors, increased transportation and ins\irance ratos, 
depressed prices for export commodities, and many intangible effects which result 
from a stoppage or a drastic limitation of world trade. Withal, we are fortunate 
that we are at peace and that it is the policy of the United States to stay out 
of the war. With that policy we are in full accord. 1 ^ 

:;JEZ0H tJRGES_IHMSDIA TE STEPS TO C USHI ON OFF WAR EFFECTS 

We are living in a fast-moving world. Time honored institutions are being 
challenged and discarded. New social systems and methods are being devised and 
established. The old order i3 changing so rapidly that we are now facing a crisis 
in human affairs. The situation calls not only for serious reflection but also for 
determined action. 

While we have all along realized that an independent Philippines would bo 
confronted with grave and perplexing problems affecting both our internal affairs 
and our relations with the outside world, nobody ever thought, as it wa3 indeed 
beyond the human mind to foresee, that at the most critical period of our task of 
nation-building we should be faced with such a world situation as that which con- 
fronts us today. We arc really fortunate that we have so far been spared the grim 
horrors of actual warfare. I sincerely believe that our country will not be involvot 
in the war. But this does not mean that wo are absolute^ safe and secure. Already, 
we are suffering from the effects of the present armed conflict, and I fear that 
if this should continue much longer our people will, in many respects, experience 
the same hardships and privations that the non-combatant populations of the war- 
ring nations and their neighbors are now experiencing, unless we immediately take 

i 20 
the necessary steps to avoid, or at least minimize, the threatening evils. 



18/ Speech upon induction of Hon. Joso Avelino as Secretary of Labor, at Mala- 
canan, May 1, 1939. Quezon Messages. Vol. 5, Part I, JBVFF, p. ill. 

12/ Message to the Second National Assembly, January 22, 1940. QP, MR#43, TNL. 

50/ Speech before the National Assembly, July 15, 1940. QP, MR#44, TNL. 



11-21 5 

- 382 - 

3ILIBID^^A_SE LP-SUPP 0R^(^Pi;HAL INSTITUTION 



The recent survey of the conditions in the Bilibid Prison shows that with 
the efficient executive supervision being exercised therein, the prison is now in 
first-class condition as to efficiency, cleanliness, and sanitary conditions. Plow- 
over, it is very evident that there are more than twice as many prisoners being 
housed in the present buildings as there should be, and this is detrimental to 
the health of these unfortunate people. The various industrial and farming acti- 
vities carried on by the prisoners within the Bilibid Prison and also in the colo- 
nies show that a careful management of the manpower in this dependency of the go- 
vernment can be profitably utilized to make it practically self-supporting, if 
not a profit-making enterprise. 

During the past ten years, from 1924, to 1933, there was spent for food 
products which could be easily raised and obtained through prison labor, the enor- 
aous sum of £1 ,653,628.47, or an average of P1 65, 382.85 per year. This expense 
could be done away with, or at least greatly minimized, by the establishment of 
an Insular Prison outside the City of Manila where prison labor may be used, not 
only to the advantage of the government, but for the regeneration of the prisoners 
. themselves, to produce these food products. 

77. N A T I 0 IT B U I L D I N G 
G 0 VERi'MfS ^'^ £A^T_DQ_NAT 10 N-BI J I LP I UG SINGLB-HANDii!DLY_ 

The government alone is powerless to give prosperity to the people. All it 
can ordina ril $o is to give the citizens an opportunity to utilize to the fullest 
axtent their individual power of work in order to obtain the largest sum of bane- 
fit. In the last instance any progress we may make at any tine must come from the 
people themselves, ^ 

It is this full comprehension of my responsibility as leader of the entire 
country which moves me to seek unity of purpose so that we may all see clearly the 
pathways to the nation's material and spiritual strength. 

There can be no progress except under the auspices of poaco. Without poaoo 
and public order it will be impossible to promote education, improve the condition 
or the masses, protect the poor and ignorant against exploitation, and otherwise 



21/ Explana-tory note to Bill No. 184 introduced by the Committee on Judiciary, 
First National Assembly (Undated). Quezon Messages, Vol« I, Sp. Rev. iOd., 
JBVFF, p. 106. 

if Address at a public banquet held in Quezon's honor at the Hotel de Franco, 
Sta. Cruz, September 28, 1916. Rivera Collection, Vol. I, p. 426. 

ll Message to the people, 1934, n.d.m. qpP, MR#36, ML. 



11-21 6 

insure the enjoyment of life, liberty, and property, 5 

Unless a citizen can feel reasonably secure from depredation, there can be 
no domestic tranquility, no prosperity, and no cultural development. Fear, exploi- 
tation, paralysis, and disintegration can be the only result. ^ 

— — — — — — ItlS^--— Q^-^^^CTGR^_3FIRI^_0F ggT^V^R'^T^XA^TCiS 

We felt that continuation of paternalism, no matter how well intentioned, 
would tend to weaken our national character, destroy our self-reliance, and beguile 
us toward racial and national decadence. ^ 

CAREFUL STUDY Tv INSURE ECONOMIC SECURITY OF MASSES 



Wo deen it necessary that a careful study be made of the social conditions 
in the whole country, in order that a plan may be formulated looking . toward tho 
economic security and the welfare of the masses. 6 

l-'ILIPINOS WILL FIGHT TO KBSSERVB GAINS IN MA TERIAL LJF 'B 

It is an inborn sense in individuals as well as in nations to seek and fight 
for their liberty and independence mainly in order to improve their material con- 
dition, which is essential to their happiness. Our people have fought heroically 
and consistently during the last forty years for our liberty, well-being, and 
happiness. These blessings we now en.joy in a good measure and I am suro that our 
people will defend with all their might and ingenuity what they have so far ac- 
complished and will not consent to recede and go back to their former status of 
a century ago when wealth and prerogatives of civilization and culture were the 
exclusive privilege of a few and the great mass of the population practically lived 
in serfdom, being, to all intent and purposes, slaves of the few privileged ones. ^ 

PpACB^BASBD^ON JPHOP LE ' S CONTENTMENT . NOT JigRgLY_AT_GUUPOTiIT_ 

Progress is impossible to attain without peace. No country can grow rich 
without peace. Peace is the basis of every good thing in life, and peace, in or- 
der to be permanent and enduring must be, and should be, based not only on bayo- \. 

Q 

nets but also on the contentment of the people. 



~jj Inaugural address, November 15, 1935? Legislative Building, Quezon Messages, 
Vol. I, Sp. Rev. Ed., J3VFF, p. 14. 

&/ Address on national defense at the University of the Philippines, February 12, 
1936. Ibid.. Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFF, p. 34. 

5/ Speech at the commencement exercises of the Reserve Officers' Service School, 
Baguio, September 18, 1936. Ibid. . pp. 130-131. 

i>/ Speech on the coalition platform of tho Nacionalista ^artjr, 1937, n.d.m. 
OJ?, MR#40, TNL. 

2/ Untitled speech, 1938, n.d.m. QP, MR#41 , TNL. 

5/ Speech in Cebu City, June 14, 1938. Quezon Messages. V ol. 4, Part I, JBVFF, 
P. 113. 



11-217 



-m - 



nTT!ig!ON_gBjJAI LS IDL BiJ^ZI_gILI|INO KIDDLE CLASS 

There are only two kinds of people in our country, the rich and the poor. 
In our country those belonging to the middle class do not work. For this reason, 

the i 3 hilippi nes will never be able to overcome the present economic difficulty 

' ' 9 
unless they work in real earnost. 

If a planter with a thousand coconut trees works his own grove, he will 
.,.,j :G bigger profits from his copra sales. That is the first secret of making a 
living; the more work we do the greater our profit. It is imperative, of course, 
that we work. 

If our land is 3inall it is needless to hire laborers because we can do it 
ourselves; if our land i3 big, however, then it is the tino to call in hired help, 
tfe should strive to work, we should forget foolish pleasures, and stop wasting 
time m town fiestas. 

We should think seriously about our future economy when our free trade re- 
lations with the United States are terminated. Prayers won't help us because God 
is always busy in heaven. We are the ones who ought to help ourselves. The govern- 
ment cannot give us anything because the money of the government comes from us.' 

Whatever the government plans are, it is best that we first do things for 

ourselves bv stopping our habit of wasteful spending. If we don't do that, back 

11 

to bondage we shall go even if we attain independence. 

The might or strength of Japan does net come from her armies but fron her 
national industries. I was in Japan when a flood and an earthquake occurred - 
calamities which, had they happened here, would have made B'ilipinos believe that 
the end of the world had come. But the Japanese went on with their daily task, 

they did not stop working. 

There lies the strength of Japan. They love ,0* - a virtue which we must , 
acquire if we Filioinos want te preeerve and improve our national economy, let 
us place our hopes in our hone and brawn, in our individual industrioueness. Later 
we can pray for help from God and the government. 
HUEZOM CALLS = |0E_3P3EDV D.VBLOPm^OOTJ^ICMLSlS. 

"^nirrrr^ourco7.hioh are not hidden from our eyes, such as our forest 

m^rlT^r, Oriental Kisamis, August 26. 1938. W4» • 

W Speech at the Tayahaa provincial capital, hucena, Tayahas, Septemoer 20, 1958. 

Ibid. , p. 214. 
U/ Ibid. , p. 215. 



11-221 

- m - 

Every citizen is obligated to the nation's defense. All the individual and 

national resources may be used by the state in the interest of self-preservation. 

":o man has the inalienable right to enjoy the privilege and opportunities conferred 

upon him by f rae institutions unless he simultaneously acknowledges' his duty to 

defend with his life and with his property the government through which he acquires 

these opportunities and these privilegea. To deny this individual responsibility 

6 

is to reject the whole theory of democratic government. 
.■.■UriON READY TO DEFSffl) SELF COMMANDS WORLD'S RESPECT 



A nation of trained men ready to defend their country has the lasting res- 
ect of itself and of the world. A nation of helpless citizens can expect nothing 

7 

but slavery at home, and contempt abroad. 

HWBS3S PR OGRAM VJILL MAKE COfl'-ffJE dT TOO RI^Y^COST LY 

Our program of national defense must serve notice to the world that the 
citizens of these' Islands are not to be subjugated; that conquest of this nation 
cannot be accomplished short of its utter destruction, and that destruction would 
involve such staggering cost to an aggressor, both in blood and in gold, that even 
the boldest and the strongest will unerringly mark the folly of such an undertaking, 

3UE20N ENUMERATES ELEwElTTS OF i-iODERII ARMY 



A modern army is a complex organism, and its defensive power is not measured 
solely by the number of its soldiers, Suitable armament, proper organization, pro- 
fessional technique and skill, applicable tactical doctrine and, above all, trained 

9 

leadership are the very soul of an army's combat efficiency. 

Competent officers in adequate number, wholly devoted to the service of tk«ir 
country, constitute the most vitally essential element in modern warfare, and the 
only one that under no circumstances can be improvised. y 

An efficient and sufficient corps of officers means the difference between 
victory and defeat. The production and maintenance of an officer corps of tho 
highest efficiency and morale is a problem upon the satisfactory solution of whioh 
depends the success of our whole effort toward providing for the common security. 



6/ Ibid. . pp. 21-22. 
iJ Ibid. t pp. 22-23. 
$J I Did. . p. 23. 
3/ Ibid., p. 25. 

10/ Press statement on the administration of the Philippine Army Officer Corps, 
January 11, 1936. Q aggflB Messages. V ol. 2, Part I, JBVPF, p, 411. 



11-222 

- 38f> - 

T<iTT,B_OF_RIGHT DEPB1TOS_0N_EXISTENCE O F MIGHT 

I am well aware that many individuals, and even organized groups, oppose 

every type of preparation for the eventuality of war... Yet even the most sincere 

idealist should not be unmindful of the realities of life. All of us agree that 

nipht does not make right, yet none of us can fail to realize that the rule of 
- « 11 

right depends upon the existence of might. . 
;-u:!LF -PRESERVATION^ 

Self -preservation is the first law of life. Nations, like individuals, 
will, in the face of threatened extinction, resort to any device and employ any 
measure, no matter how desperate, in order to preserve their existence. So axio- 
matic is this statement that from this standpoint a nation may be defined as a 
political group motivated by a common determination to subordinate all conside- 
rations of individual welfare to the preservation of group integrity. This de- 
termination is the principal underlying influence, and without it no nation can 
12 

long endure. 

Under the provisions of Article VII, Title III, of the National Defense 
Act, preparatory military training will be given in all public and private schools. 

The chief of staff of the Philippine Army has prepared a course of ins- 
truction for male teachers which will be given between April 13 and May 9, 1936, . 
inclusive, at the provincial capital of each province. You will, therefore , cause 
the Director of Education and the Commissioner of Private Schools to send two 
male teachers from each elementary and high school or vocational school to^the 
training center for teachers not later than noon of April £u 13th next. 

' IIATIONAL DEFENSE 13 DUTY OF EVERY SEIF-RE3PECTI3G FILIPINO, 

Admitting that the Philippines cannot project herself with all our defense 
program and that sooner or later our country is destined to fall into the hands 
of a first-class military power, even then I would go ahead and spend the money ^ 
and time and energy we are now spending to give our youth military training. 

We fought Spain and we fought America for our national freedom. T .7e lost 
to America, but we won her respect and admiration; we established in doods writ 
in blood our right to independence. 

We are preparing ourselves against no one country in particular and against 
each and every country in general. That is our duty more than it is our right. That 

U/ = lddrnnnlational Defense at the University of the Philippines, February 

12, 1936. Ibid. . p. 33. 
rij Ibid. , pp. 32r-33. 

12/ Letter to the Secretary of Public Instruction on preparatory military training 
in all public and private schools, February 19, 1936. Ibid, , p. 43<*« 



11-225 

- 590 - 

14 

: ; .s the duty of every self -respecting and freedom- loving people. 
I S EXPENS IVE, FOO LISH, TRAGIC, UNJU ST, SAYS QUEZON 

War is expensive; it has reduced many nations to beggary. It is foolish; 

there is always a better way to settle any difficulty, provided that both sides 

are willing to substitute reason for hatred, prejudice and greed. It is tragic; 

invariably it creates suffering, privation and heart-break. Worst of all, it is 

mijust; the decision of the sword does not necessarily accord with the dictates 

15 

:>f conscience and of right. 

; „ J? OFFICERS LIABILITY TO STRONG NATIONAL DEFENSE 

Without personal integrity an army officer will not be trusted either by 
jis men or by his government; without intelligence and a sense of justice there 
•..•ill be nothing but dissatisfaction among his followers; without courage he will 
.•am only their contempt; and without the 3park of leadership he will never suc- 
ceed in welding his men into a dynamic unit that will follow him through the 

1 6 

maelstrom of modern battle. 

Modern wax-fare is a combination of art and science. Of all the arts and 

sciences, it is one of the most comprehensive and embracing, and is probably the 

17 \ 
r.iost difficult to master. \ 

NA^igNAL_DEFENSE_I3 A CO NSTI TUTIONAL MANDATE_ 

The problem of national defense has been given paramount consideration by 

the administration, not only because of the constitutional mandate that the defense 

of the State is the prime duty of the government hut also, because we are fully 

aware that the future safety of our beloved country depends upon an early and 

1 8 

technical planning of our defense mechanism. 

.The first and most important duty of our government, and of every one of y 
its citizens, is the defense of the State against foreign aggression, internal re- 
bellion, or domestic lawlessness. That is clearly stated in the declaration of 
principles, article 11, section 2, of our Constitution. That is a principle which 
every Filipino today, with very few and dishonorable exceptions, has well 

14/ Press statement on national defense plan, 1936, n.d.m. QP, I-iii#38, TNL. 

15/ Speech at the commencement exercises of the Reserve Officers' Service School, 
Baguio, September 18, 1936. Quezon messages. Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFF, p. 131. 

IS/ Ibid. . pp. 133-134. 
Ml Ibid. . QP, ER#38, TNL. 

,18/ Speech on the first anniversary of the Commonwealth, November 15, 1936. 
QP, MR#58, TNL. 



11-224 



- m - 



ingrained in his mind and in his heart, and in none more than in you, ROTC units, 

as evidence by the fact that you are receiving with enthusiasm your military 
training in preparation for the performance of your duty to defend your country 
if and when the necessity shall arise. 1 ^ 

tfo are peace loving. Our Constitution is the first modern constitution which 
condemns war as an instrument of national policy and adopts the generally accepted 
principles of international law as a part of the fundamental law of the land. We 
have no desire, therefore, now or ever in trie future, to use the armed forces of 
our country for . purposes of aggression, but only in defense of the national 
territory and for the maintenance of peace and order within o\ir borders. 20 

It is not a regular military force of tremendous size that we are building. 
It is a citizen amy - an army that in time of peace will be devoted exclusively 
to the arts of peace and agriculture, to industry and trade, to ..arts and sciences, 
to every activity that makes for progress, for harmony and goodwill, for human 
advancement and well-being. 21 

•jfePy. TO K ILL OH DIB IN DEFENSE OP HOKE AND COUNTRY 



If again we are ever to fight for our homes and our families and our bo- 
loved fatherland, we must fight not only with the willingness to die, but also the 
ability to kill. 22 

?55?i_§ILP-RESPECTING NATION MUST BIS ABLE TO DEPEND ITSELF 



A nation that yearns for freedom and independence 3hall first of all win 
the respect of the world. A nation that is not in a position to defend itself does 
not deserve and has not the respect of the world. 

And if we want to win the respect of the world we should give, as we are 
giving now, each and every able-bodied male citizen of this country capable of 
bearing arms the necessary training to defend tne integrity of our territory. 2 ^ y 

£Il-^iT,TgjPLE^W||H PEOPLE TRA I NED IN U SE OF G-UIT 

One can ride roughshod over an inert people not trained in the use of arms - 



13/ Address before ROTC units, University of the Philippines, January 18, 1937. 
Quezon Me ssages, Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, p. 13. 

20/ Ibid. , p. 14. 
21/ Jb,id. . p. 16. 
£2/ Ibid. , p. 24. 

£2/ Speech before the members of the Cabinet, the National Assembly, Provincial 
governors, and treasurers at Malacailan, January 20, 1937* QP» MR#39, TNL. 



11-225 

- m - 

but not over a people in which each citizen is trained in the use of a gun. 24 

;iI^^I ^I™ J^PS BETTER AND DISCIPLINED CTTTSTEWg 

Military training makes the nan who receives that training a better citi- 
,on in tine of peace. H G learns discipline. H 0 learns to recognize constituted 
authority. He learns to consider duty above personal convenience. 25 
f^mjDETOBRELIB S O il HIGH QUALITY CITIZEN ARMY 

We are organizing a citizen amy in the Philippines. We are defending upon 
i for the defense of this country from foreign aggression and for the task of 
gelling internal disturbances. We are depending for these things upon our citi- 
zen amy, and it is necessary that the regular force, which is training the citi- 
KOn ^ C ° nStitUted by » en of thG highest integrity and the greatest sense 

of responsibility. In other words, they , 1U st be the first law-abiding citizens 
of the land. co 

The Philippine Military Academy in Baguio is one of the brightest features 
ol the Philippine Amy. I n university circles it probably has no superior in the 
Philippines or in the Par East. Its discipline is excellent and it is fulfilling 
its great mission in a nost admirable manner. There is no apparent warrant for 
the sensational attack that has been made against it, and I unhesitatingly St,*, 
as uninvestigated and unsubstantiated the story written by a reporter of the 
Ma nila Daily Bull a* -in. d ' 

The first act of the Commonwealth government was to prepare for our na- 
tional defense. Our national defense is not based upon the size of a big amy 
that we are not in a position to establish, but upon the people. That is why we 
arc training everybody in military implements so that we may be prepared to defend 
our country any time in case an aggressor nation tries to subjugate us. The Fi- 
lipino people must be prepared now to defend themselves. The time has come when 
everybody must mutually cooperate so that right and justice may be accorded to ' 
• everybody, and especially the poor their rights, otherwise, they may use the guns, 
to kill us instead of our enemies. 28 



2.4/ Speech on social justice and national defense at a banquet for national 
.raVP°, 32 Canan ' January 20 ' 1937 ' Quezon mess ages. Vol. 3, Part I, 

W Speech at a press conference, November 3, 1937. QP, ISHj'Mo, TEL. 

^ess statement on conditions in the Philippine Military Academy, November 
Xl > - Ly - /7 * Quezon Massages, Vol. 3, Part I, J3VFF, p. 346. 

Speech on the second anniversary of the Commonwealth, November 15, 1937. 
~"i d ,t.> p. 177. 



SSMMaS^ 01 UNIFICA TION OF ALL EFFORTS ; , 

If eternal vigilance is the price of freedom, let us then be ceaselessly 
vigilant. Our defensive system requires no unusual sacrifice by any individual, 
but its success depends primarily and almost exclusively upon' a unification of « 
efforts of all toward this common and vital purpose... To this end let us see to 
it that every law we pass and every military measure we adopt shall reflect an 

unselfish and national purpose thnf -i+ a v^n • .... 

purpose, mat it shall impose injustice on none, and thai- 
it shall promote tho socuritv and dpfonrt +T,-. ^ o-u 

2q y a a ^ Icnd - peace, the possessions and the 

liberty of all. " 

g£OI2£MIllJ^Orl5_^g_NATION AL BEFENSB V /BBK ' 



I designate the period from Hay 4 to 1 3 as National Defense Neek, rnd call 
upon all citizens of the Philippines to devote themselves with special ze ? l rnd 
effort toward the success of this training and development and progress of our 
national defense forces. 

In the furtherance of this purpose all appropriate officials of the govern 
oent are directed to familiarise themselves immediately with every circumstance 
and condition affecting the designated persons in their respective areas, and to 
render every proper assistance both to the individual and to the military autho- 
rities in assuring a complete and prompt concentration of the units concerned. 

It is of special importance that officers and soldiers called upon to 
perform this public service be assured of protection against unnecessary or use- 
less sacrifice. 0 

I do hereby proclaim and ordain that all colleges and universities and 
similar institutions of learning having a total enrollment of one hundred students 
or more, upon proper receipt of notification from the Chief of Staff, Philippine 
Army, shall include a course of military instruction, commonly known as ROTC 
course, as a compulsory portion of their respective curricula, for all physically 
fit male citizens of undergraduate status, and shall faithfully conduct the course 
m accordance with the policies and regulations approved by tho President of tho 
Philippines. 51 

'ffj^ijf inos wil1 soon havG independence, tie cannot rely upon anyone 

32/ Message to the Second National Assembly, January 24, 1939. Quezon Messages. 
vol. 5, Part I, JBVFF, p. 249. — 

i2/ Proclamation No. 339, "Designating the period from Hay 4, to Hay 13, inclu- 
sive as national Defense Week", March 13, 1939. Ibid. , p. 543. 

2l/ Executive Order No. 207, "Requiring the Establishment of ROTC Units in all 
^oileges and Universities as a Requisite to Recognition by the Government . " 
June 15, 1939. Ibid. , p. 973. 



11-227 

- 354 - 

to defend our live s and all that is ours 6xcept upon ourselves alone. It is incum- 
bent upon every Filipino, th erefore, tc be prepared to defend his country in the 
interest of his r ace, even if it meant his death. That very feeling for the de- 
fense of our country should be inherent in all citizens who love their motherland. 
And for the poor to defend his country, it is necessary that he enjoy economic 
melioration which is the true reward for or result of his labor and sacrifice. 
It is also necessary that he understand and feel that he is being aided by the 
government in the protection of his rights and prerogatives; that his country is 
giving him happiness, and that ho does not exist as a mere slave. ^ 2 

PPJSSID5NT ORGANIZES QBE BI^DEP^ RTMEIjT OF HAT IONAL DEFENSE 

I do hereby order the organization of the Department of National Defense, 

which shall be charged with the duty of supervising the national defense program 

of the country, and shall have executive supervision over the Philippine Army, 

the Bureau of Aeronautics, the Bureau of Coast and Geodetic Survey, the Philippine 

Nautical School, and over the establishment and operation of all radio stations 

[receiving, transmitting or broadcasting] other than those maintained by the Bu- 
33 

reau of Post. 

Military training, which you are receiving, is given to you in order that 
you may be prepared to take your place in the Philippine Army as officers, if and 
•/hen the day comes when the Filipinos will have to defend their country from fo- 
reign invasion. Ue are doing this because it is our duty. The first duty of every 
: .:ovornr.ient and the first right as well, is to defend itself. So upon the establish- 
ment of the government of the Commonwealth, and in accordance with the mandate of 
our Constitution, the first act that the National Assembly passed was that act 
authorizing the organization of the national defense of the Islands. But while wo 
c.ro preparing you to be officers of the Philippine Army - of the Citizen Array of 
the Philippines - in case of need, we hope that you will never be called upon to 
perform that duty, and that our country will be spared the horrors of war. How- 
ever, your' time spent in preparing yourselves to be officers of the Philippine 
Amy, your time spent in receiving military instruction and training, is not lost 
ovon if you do not have to fight, for there are certain virtues which are developed 
in a man through military training and which are of great value to that man in 
the pursuit of whatever career he may choose to follow. Discipline, for instance. 
.ig _as valuable to a soldier as it is to a, civilian - national discipline and indi- 
vidu al discipline. Discipline moans not only the virtue of obeying the order of a 

22/ Speech in Cabana tuan, Nuova Ecija, July 16, 1939. Ibid. , p. 153. 

21/ Executive Order No. 230, "Organizing the Department of National Defense", 
October 31, 1939. Ibid. , pp. 1009-1010. 



11-228 

- - 

co nstituted authority, but also the virtue nf nW ing ±hp nf ^ ^ 

79. NATIONAL DISCIPLINE 

I want every Filipino to know tha t he can only call hinsolf a worthy citi- 
ze n of a worthy c ountry if he learns his duties before he demands his rights . 1 

Discipline, nati onal di scipline, that word that seems to hurt the B pr R nf 
s ome people, that is what we want in th» Philippine Islands - national r1i^ip1i.r rt f 
tlio spirit of sacrifice of every citizen in the interest of all. 2 

For the present, my advice to the people of the Philippines would be to 
have faith in themselves and in their future; to leave nothing undone for the 
preparation of their country for the responsibilities of independent nationhood; 
to seek the goodwill and friendship of all the nations of the world, and to win 
■■::nd respect their confidence through the exercise of national discipline and self- 
control; and above all, by establishing a government that will do justice not 
only to nationals but to foreigners as well. 5 

IgjjffARY TRAIHIKS PROI-IOTBS IIATIQlilL DISCIPLINE, PATRIOTISM 

Our preparation for national defense is not duo to our fear that any nation 
has untoward designs against our independence and territorial integrity, but ra- 
ther due to the fact that, in any event, it is the primary, function of every go- 
vornuent to insure its own protection, and that universal military training is 
vrholesome to the youth of the land, for it stimulates national discipline and 
patriotism amongst the trainees. ^ 

HjJPIHO vri^iia?E SSfl^STJB JiDCTBD TO EVEREST SCRUTI NY 

We, the Filipinos of today, are soft, easy-going. Our tendency is towards 
parasitism, vie are uninclined to sustain strenous effort. We lack earnestness. 
J'acQ-soving is the dominant note in the confused symphony of our existence. Our 
sense of righteousness is often dulled by the desire of personal gain, Our norm 

21/ Speech before ROTC units at the Atenoo auditorium, November 14, 1939. 
QP, Ml#43, TNL . 

l/ Speech at the Waldorf-Astoria, New York City, February 20, 1937. QP, MR#39, TNL . 

2/ Speech before the Foreign Policy Association, Hotel Astor, New York City, 
April 3, 1937. Quez on Messages. Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, p. 82. Also in QP, 
MR#40, TNL. 

lJ Christmas message to the Filipino people, December 24, 1937. QP, IiR#39, TNL . 

4/ Press statement on the alleged negotiation with the Japanese government for 
the neutralization of the Philippines, July 19, 1938. Quezon Messages. Vol. 4, 
Part I, JBVFF, p. 675. 



of conduct is generally prompted by expediency rather than by principle.. We show 

a failing in that superb courage which impels action because it is right even 

at the cost of self-sacrifice. Our greatest fear is not to do wrong, but that of 

5 

being caught doing wrong. We are frivolous in our view of life. 

What will happen to a person who is bent on lavishly spending money when 
ho does not have much money to squander? It is a fact that, ordinarily, most of 
as are able to live by means of debts alone. We often say, "Let things take caro 
of themselves," (bahala na). Our living condition will never prosper if we do not 
learn how to save. 

NO KAN IS EVER AJ-IMJ/ITKOUT SELF-DISCIPLINE - qUE^ON 

Discipline is one of the most essential things in life, and in the army 
you learn discipline. ITo man is ever a man until ho has learned to discipline 
hi mself. A man can only show his superiority by showing that he can conquer him - 
se lf and command himsel f. That is what discipline moans. So if you learn nothing 
' " 7 

but discipline in the training camp you will turn out to be a better man. 

Q&Linzm SOCIETY PREMISED ON SELF-RESTRAINT 

Organized society is predicated on the willingness of men to limit their 
freedom of action in the interest of the well-being of the entire community in 
which they live. There is no liberty without soci al .restr aint. It is only through 
n ecessary restraints upon individual liberty and the cultivation of self-restrain t 
to prevent abuse of that liberty that democratic governments can offer peace an d 
.se curity to the people who live under them. 8 

80. IT A T I 0 N A L E C 0 If 0 H Y 

Let us aim to obtain our economic manhood within the time allowed us in 
.jur new Organic ixct, for only in economic manhood may we fully enjoy the blessings, 
of our political emancipation. ^ 

?JfiZ0N GIVSS POINTER S ON ilOU TO SECURE SOCIO-jBCOHOHIC BqUILIBaiUH 

■ Protection to labor, especially to working woman and minors, just regula- 
tion of the relations between labor and capital in industry and agriculture, 

5/ Address before the faculties and student bodies of public and privat schools, 
colleges and universities, August 19, 1930. 'IP, MR/Ml, TNL. 

6/ Speech before the tenants of Cabana tuan, Nueva Ecija, April 30, 1939. 
OP, M-R//42, TNL. 

2/ Speech in Iloilo, October 7, 1939. QP, 1*3, TNL. 

8/ Speech before the U.P. Student Council, July 16, 1940. QP, MR#44» TNL. 
J7 Opening address in the Senate, July 16, 1934. QP, MH#56, TNL. 



solicitous regard on the part of the government for the well-being of the masses 

re the means to bring about the needed economic and social equilibrium between 

2 

the component elements of society. 

T'TTH IN GOViiRMENT'S ABILITY TO SECURE STiyBLB ECONOMIC STRUCTURE 

Our objective is clear and definite. Ve want to build up a reasonably stable 
economic structure capable of serving the financial and other needs of the nation, 
supplying the masses of the people with the basic social requirements and the 
,,3sentials in food, clothing, and shelter, and providing them with the opportu- 
nities to toil and earn a decent livelihood. With our abundant natural resources.. 
t have faith that this can be accomplished, if business willgive the govern- 
ment its confidence and the people their unswerving support. 

^cqrroH^icTni?X^iL^2=^=i^i^^=^=^^^= 

Economic activity must bo developed primarily to serve the interest of the 
.-, 0 i e nation, and should bo guided towards profitable, convenient, and stable 
channels where it can render the greatest good to the people at large. 
*3"aiDBHT FAVORS ECONOM IC VUmmTt* SECURE PEOPLE'S WELL-BEING.. 

I favor economic planning to the extent of providing the nation with the 
necessary leadership to balance and strengthen our economy, establish the proper 
relationship between our economic activities and our national needs,, correlate 
productive energy with labor, capital and credit facilities, and direct the wise 
utilization of our natural resources - all with the view of securing the well- 

5 

being of the people. 

CE T^F_^CUTIVE_AWOOTCBS = POnCY = OT = P^RE.^m = COJS^AT^ = 

Government administration is a practical question, and statesmanship con- 
sists in the Wise application of sound doctrines, bearing in mind the actual con- 
ditions that have to be met in each case. 

Even the most up-to-date progressive labor legislation, if not in keeping 
with -orevailing conditions here, may easily upset our existing industries, prevent 
the establishment of new ones, and retard the advance of agriculture. I, therefore, 
advocate's policy of progressive conservatism based upon the recognition of the 

6 

essential and fundamental rights of labor. 

~nlugar™d^nt the Legislative building, November 15, 1935. P^on 
Messages. Vol. I, 3p. Rev. M., JDVTV, p. 15. 

V Message to the First National Assembly on the creation of the National 
Economic Council, December 10, 1935. IbidL, p. 

fJ Ibid., p. 82. 

-5/ Ibid. . 0 

V Hessase to the tot National J^blg « ^""'V^" 
Juno 16, 1936. MSSSSS&a. y ol. 2, Part I, JBVPF, p. 165. 



:i-231 

J9ft 



jCOMOMIC P^05^?I2Mi§l_Mil4111=IIt^=H5=I='li£li=^i= 

It is a natural trait among the people of all enlightened countries to lorn 
nud to have a special regard for the things that they considor their own. Uoono- 
'.'..\ c -protectionism that is animated by a sane and sound spirit of nationalist! is r 
iversally accepted rule of national conduct. The observance of this spirit has 
"'an a potent factor in the devolopnont of many strong and .progressive nations. 



* * * 



In order to give encouragement and stimulus to domestic industries, the 
•ooople of this country should patronize Philippine products. 
' :ATI 0HAL PRODIS EXCHANGE DE SIGNED TO ELi nj ^TOMD^ Aj* 

The establishment of a well-regulated and properly organized produce ex- 
-,ange would bring an improvement in the present system of marketing our staple 
■^cultural products such as rice, sugar, hemp, copra, etc. It would enable pro- 
^cers to dispose of their products directly in the market without the necessity 
,r massing through local middlemen, and at the same time obtain the necessary 
credit facilities to finance their crops in advance of actual harvesting and 



8 

delivery. 



PO WER MP TASKS OP MANILA RAILROAD COMPANY EXPArlDED 

This measure is intended to amend the charter of the Manila Railroad Cor,- 
,any of the Philippine Islands by giving it the power, aside from those already 
panted by its articles of incorporation, to construct, "^"V^ 
conduct in connection with the operation of its railroads, toll vxa uc s brxd^s, 
,nd tunnels. This amendment will not. only facilitate the proper dis rxbutxon an. 
circulation of passenger and freight traffic of the railroad, but also creat, ; n ? 
additional source of income for the company, and improve its financial sxtuatxo,. 

,,, « M T3 TO KNOW HOW TO Wm^J& ^m^^^ 

We must educate our boys and girls to be good farmers, good manufacturers 
good producers. We have here a big and rich country. All that we need is to know 
how to make this country produce more. 

M y «^ lin^ <^ M ^ 1MB ^- 

Our national economy can never S ain stability and etrcn g th unless it U 

as 'Made-in-the-Philippines Products Jeek , august , PT> „, lu , a 
§/ Message to the Pirst National Assembly on the creation of the National Produce 

Exchange, October 27, 1936. Ibid., p. ;57. 
3/ Message to the Pirst National Assembly^ the —n o the charter 

Manila Railroad Company, October 24, 1936. Ibxcu., P- »i. 

t x. T„r,-, in Quezon Hesga geSj V ol. 4, ^arx x, 
J.py Speech in- Tacloban, Leyte, June 10, iivik^- 

JBVPP, p. 79. 



11-232 

- m - 

built permanently upon tho brain and brawn, the work and wealth of our own people, 

81 . NATIONAL IDE H Till 
f.'TT.IPINOS SHOULD BE ALLOWED TO 

The Filipinos are a people of Oriental habits and type3 of mind, raised in 

the tropics, and subject to their own conditions of life and industry. It seems 

to me that to expect then to emulate the United States in all particulars is a 

rross perversion of the teaching of human experience or of any sound political 

■ohilosophy. . . I think that thoughtful students of race development must feel 

that it is far better that a nation should evolve its own type of culture and of 

.: •ovornraont and should follow its own instincts in selecting a path toward the 

attainment of a higher civilisation than that it should be made a slavish imitator 

cf any other country or group of countries however elevated may bo the civiliza- 

1 

tion of the latter, 

li'lLm^JTOST^COT^FUL^^^^LM CTUAL = CR0SS-3RE|DINQ = 

The Filipinos are showing that they are capable of taking over and assi- 
milating the beneficial ideas of western nations, adapting them to their own use, 
fitting them to the needs of their peculiar situation and drawing intellectual 
sustenance therefrom. This has been the history of successful civilizations every- 
where . They have not advanced by a process of mental in-breeding, but by a pro- 
cess of crossing themselves inteiectually with tho best strains they could find 
the world over. It is not progress but just the reverse, if a nation be compelled 
to confine itself to imitation of another nation and if be debarred from selecting 

useful elements of civilization, education, social customs and government wherever 

2 

it can find them throughout the world. 

F ILIPINOS HA VE A NATIONAL SOUL, ASSSilTS ClUBZON__ ■ ■ 

Q. - Have the diverse peoples of the Islands, with their varied dialects, 
a recogni''./ a psychic homogeniety - a national soul? 

A. - Indisputably. This national soul already has crystalized in striking 
national decision 3 - for independence, for joining *merica in World War I, against 
huge estates, and against applying United States coastwise shipping laws to the 
Philippines. Our people are politically keen and peculiarly democratic. 

Q. - You say you are peculiarly democratic? 

A. - We are so because we are unencumbered by monarchic or oligarchic 
traditions or institutional inheritance. We have nothing of that sort to 

uT^P^cnrthTphilippine Chamber of Commerce, July 29, 1938. Ibid,., pp. 121" 
122. 

1/ Article, "Recent Progress in the Philippines," Tnnr.nl of Knee Development, 

January 1915. Rivera Collection, Vol. I, p. 331. 
2/ Ibid. 



ass 



11-233 

- 400 - 

destroy. Our ground upon which to orect a pure republic is clear. 5 
miPIN03_^IL^raOV B_THEIR MgTTLEJLIKg^ALL FRSS HEN - QUEZON 

Filipinos have nationalistic emotions and aspirations. They are intelli- 
gent and proud and amhitious. Independence they know would mean equality of op- 
portunity of Filipinos. Of a political or social caste depriving them of their 
liberties or otherwise wronging then they have no fear. Such reports they dism 
■-.3 contrary to their experience and knowledge. Have they not seen their humblest- 
neighbors rise to positions of dignity and influence in the country? Do they not 
know that nearly all their leaders have been and are of the people? 

Take myself, for example. Holding the premier elective position in the 

Philippines, I am a farmer's son, born poor and without influential friends, 

reared in one of the remotest villages in the Islands, compelled to climb over 

trackless mountains to come to college in lianila... 

It will bo mottle (that will count in a free Philippines - LBS), ju3t as 

4 

■ettlo in the United States and in every other country where men are free. 
F OLX MUSIC PROOF OF EXISTENCE OF FILIPINO SOUL, NATION 

No factor or agency is more effective for the portrayal of the soul of a 
;:,oople than music. The folk music, folic song 3 , and folk dances witnessed tonight 
demonstrate more effectively and more convincingly than I can in ny speech that 
there is a native soul striving to preserve itself in its beautiful, original 
typical self - a clear evidence that there is a Filipino nation. The existence 
of that soul and of that nation as depicted to you tonight by Filipino students 
will make you understand why we Filipinos desire independence. 

^^S^CJ^IBUTOO°_II L ^^Sii^=^^'™= 

If Spain had done nothing in the Philippines but the wielding of scattered 
and separate elements into a consummate structure of our nationality, which has 
not only enabled us to assimilate another civilisation such as brought te us by 
the United States but has also prevented the basic and distinctive elements of eur 
personality from being carried away by strange currents, thus bringing us to the 
triumph of our aspiration to be an independent nation; I repeat that if this had 
been the only work of Spain in the Philippines, it would in itself be suff.cxent 

+ o-f „nrivi r-,rr r, ra titudo to the memory 
to raise in every Filipino heart a monument of undym b .rati 

oi Spam. 

=================== , f the r.hir.r-.tra Da ilv News. 1925* 

2/ Exclusive interview with Jiduard mc*. ■ Clyde* H. Tavonner. 

In: The Philippine Rep ublic. D.C., by 

Rivera Collection, Vol. II, pp. 769-7 fU. 

i/ Ibi&u P. 770. Filipino students of the University 

5/ Speech at the "Philippine Night ^^^ZT. V, Ho. 2, March 15, 1928. 
of Pennsylvania, 1928. Tho_PhiJ^pe^^ 

Rivera Collection, Vol. II, P« 8U ?* -, nmnn + Tibaealorr 

wn^^-ino culture and development, laDecai^r.. 

U Speoch on Spain's *> '«* »' ^ 

building, January 11, iyP D « -^ U>J 

Also in CiP, HB#36, TNL. 



:i-254 

- 401 - 

82. NATIONAL LANGUAGE 

"HILIPPINjj S_HAS^TAj>Lj3_^ k^ ty DIRECTS 

The possibility of establishing in the Philippines a stable government 

f'ospite the existence of several dialects is not a natter of theory. The Filipino 

r iople have been governed by the Spaniards through the Spanish language for three 

' undred years, and they are today governed by the Americans through ;the English ■ 
1 

? anguago . 

;^SIDENT_LAUD5 "KILIG^YNQN^JI /.GAZINB ED PT0R_ 

Your magazine has a unique significance in that it is written in Hilignynon, 

one of the nost widely spoken dialects of the Philippines; and along with the 

ckissenination of news, both local and foreign, your paper has contributed in a 

2 

large measure to the development of this Visayan language group. 
''.'.•riGNAL LANGUAGE oTlliilNGTIIBNS FILIPINO Jj pMgAjHg Y 

While the existence of one national language is not absolutely necessary 
:Vor a people to have a strong national or racial consciousness, it is undeniably 
:rue that the community of language strengthens national solidarity. 

dhO NOT AGAINST SiN GLISH, BUT C0NSTITDTI0N MUST P3BVAIL 

. £J_s == ==—=====::== 

While it is my hope and conviction that the English language will remain 
one of the most generally spoken languages in the Philippines even after indepen- 
dence, nevertheless, we cannot ignore the injunction of the Constitution that we 
take steps toward the formation of a national language based on one of the exxstxng 

4 

native languages. 

LANGUAGE OHS OF STRONGEST TIES OF mOTg0j0™ilBL 
It is needless to elucidate the proposition that . peopie censtituting one 
tonality and ono state should possess a lavage spo.cn and unders ood by al . 
It constitute ono of strong ties tnat hind the people and foster the uni of 
national idoais, aspirations and sonants. In the past, »hon the Phal„ 

J? snnn becoming an independent nation, the 
under a foreign rule without assurance of soon become L * 

, th.+ foreign rule was strong enough to weld our people together 
very presence of that loreign ruxu c 

, ., -4-„ r,i+ since the inauguration of the ooamo 
and to maintain our national ^ alt0g9 ther onco 

wealth, this unifying foroo has hoon - ; 5 of 



at foreign ruxe wue. c."^= — <-> 

national solidarity. But since the insulation of the Coanoa- 
wealth, this unifyingforce has heon Zoning and eill disappear alto g e or r 

' , t „ therefore, advisable to strengthen the true ties 

" - " "! '7 ' „ . col ,,„n language haeed on one of the native 

notional solidarity, and in ny opinion a e 

M 0*00* in the o.S. donee ef Represen ta.ives^ ^ ^ m . 

H Message for the BO^^^Z^r. *- «*■ *< "»*> 
3/ Address at the opening ^ ^ p . m . 

V Ibid. . rfi»»«r.n Menaces i. Vol. ^ ™r , 



11-235 



ijnlects and used by all our people is one of these bonds.'.. I am, therefore, 

recommending the creation of an institute of national language which will study 
the Philippic dialects in general for the purpose of developing and adopting • 
common national language based on one of them. ^ ; 

The purpose of the Act creating the National Language Board is to find 
j.oans whereby there may bo created d native language for the Filipino people out 
,af the different main native languages spoken in the Philippines. 

Such a native language will not replace the teaching of English in the 
public schools, nor will (it) do away with the use of Spanish in the Philippine^' 

But the Filipinos' possession of one common language will doubtless serve . 
to foster national consciousness and solidarity - a most important possession for 

• 6 
spay people. 

miwa awn, cat'* «a» wmwt * ) Hg!}g ml ;,W m 

I want neither Spanish nor English ,.s the language of our government. The 
Philippines must have o language of her own, a language based on one of the vor- 
rloular tongues. (Applause.) I an speaging as President, as n Filipino, no as a 
Letran a.lu.nus... ..any of the diffieultiee or defects now ori sting hero are u 
to the faet that we have not a co m on language of our own. The daa.ro to mf fe 

...» without towing Whether that *<toati!«JU^ 

"oToT^dTir^o^ evil^tn thn 1l a,"renl national soui^atron^ 

tha t sign of inferiorit y^ 
' ™ OTT^ZON FELT BEING L mum^U^Si^SS, 

■>ain +ho lnck of a common national language is 
I never realized how terrible the lack oi a 

until Are:! President, i*^*^^ 1 *^^ 
representatives^ilioi^^ 

^SS&^ESHSSLSS^^f^^^^ 1 „ all right When 

hea r of anything Mo re. hmxluj^MJ^ - ~ ~ u thor0 in Tagalog. 

I go to the Tagalog provinees . hooause I ean spore. „ „„„ ntTO- t . ^ 

President of the_PJoilijBi^-^ Ji ~~ T „^ ™ interpreter who, in 

===== i.^, creation of an institute of 

5/ "l'iossage"t7the First National ^g^.^p. 355-356. 

national language, October — ^ ^ ^ National Language Board,. 

6/ Press statement on the purpos o of^the J""^ p> 3l2 . 

January 13, 1937- BUu Vo ^ 3 ' ^ 7 , . 1937 . Bttu PP' 166 " 

1/ Address at the San Juan do Letran College, 

167. 



£1-236 

- m - 



Hw majority of casop, says what he wants to say and not what I have said? 

. , 03Z qK RBADY_TO LEARN ILOCAflO JKl VTgAYAii T0 _HAVB NA TIOH/J ,_LLHCTAGE = 

Me nust have a connicn national language. The difficulty is that the Iloca- 
LWS want Ilocano to be the national language; the Tagalogs, Tagalog; the Visayans, 
Visayan. And yot, those sane Ilocanos who do not want Tagalog, accept English as 
the national language! Have you ever soon anything mors inconceivable? A Filipino • 
preferring a foreign language to a Philippine tongue? And at that only because 
Tlocano is not the tongue which has been nado the national language! 

t on a Tagalo g. If the :-ion faniliar with the ad van tages o f the several 

t.nn W1B8 wsre to tall no that the vernacu lar ton ^tha t we must ado j&r 
iVwangvan. I would hc.fjDrJlanj^^ tongue. Tagalog is_ 

"^^^1 -.nimaro in iay fanily. But I a^ ad^_toJL^rn Ilocano, Visayan_or, 
T ny other vernacul a r tongua so long as w e shaai_hjwe_a . language tha tjgn_bo__ 

Q 



9 

o-onkon bv all. 



mim im tarn r » wmm -jma. 

While the teadhlng of a foreign lan^e Bay U inposod upon a people, it 
never replace the native ton^e as a -M- * national expression aneng tee 
co,»on nasscs. «. U oeeause, - — — • ™ T l HH ^ 

roots in a — W* *** -» ' ^ "» ^ ^ ^ 

T~ ^Teorrow for a tine the « ot other peoples, hut ,-n t 
~ress a national leakage esoopt through the adoption, development and us. 
one of our own. 

^ to dorl with one another directly 

uains tne sea.o language. J* P ^ 

stron S nation. It „ill g ave rnspa a a » „ hav0 n9Tor learned to 

will aecord te our national* a ~~ » ^ _ «- I 

ei ,e Ml ana ^ ^^^^^^-3^^ i 

in those provinces o f the ^oi^-i^H- 

i s the language used. 

a^iceAL , .^--nmn w— «« U 

Today, »itn tne adopt ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ of 

of the Philippines, we have accoopj. 

8/ Ibid. , p. 167. 

2/ Ibid,,- pp. 168-169. adcagt ; from Malacanan, 

Hi/ Speech on the Filipino na "f l81 . 

Rizal Day, December 30, 195 (• i 

U/ Ibid. , p, 182. 



11-257 

- 49* 



tisal. 

Rizal, in his patriotic efforts to foster Philippine nationalism, put xn 
the nouth of Simon, addressing Basilio, the following words: 

"Spanish will never he the language generally spoken in the country, the 
l0 wi u never speak it, Each people has its own language, as it has its own 
of thinking. You are trying hard to divest yourselves of your own personality 
l!\ people; you forgot that as long as o H« ureses- it- 1^ * ^ i* rotai na, 
.■°token_pr.its liberty, .just as a man retains hi- freodon ns lory *» ho preserves, 
TT^r^rcnde nco of t hought. A language expresses the ideas and ideals of a 

iC0?le, Lco,-in deciding to adopt a national language culled frcn the different 
la „ spoken in the Philippines and nainly fron the Tagalog which was not 

ly t ; native ton., of Hi.al but also is the ,ost developed of all t e « ^ 
la ™ in our country, we are ncrely carrying into realisation one 

T J ****** - * — ° f c - iidatins and ~ tiDgour 



12 

maty. 



+ , A the rolo that a oosuaon langr-ag® plays 
Without giving undue xnpor tance to h. K ^ ^ 

in the life of a people, wo nay pent to * ^ plaC o in tho 

fanily of nations, is the only nation ttu.t hn- solidarity 
_y other nation which has attained the ^ ^ ^ _ ^ ^ i8 
,ncl powor, both on the American continent a.d xn *uoi . 
a nation that possesses a oomon national language. 

COMPOSITION OF IHSTITUTLOT^ffi^S^ 

— Con , 1onW3 alth Act No. 184 enacted for the 

By virtue of the provxs xon - in section three, 

purpose of carrying out the constxtutx. ^ ^ & langUage 

Article XIII, of the Constitution onjox Preaiden t of the Philippines, 

based upon one of the existing natx ^ oonstit ute the Institute of 

on January 12, 1937 appointed the 

national Language: vlBW n), ehairnnr, Santiago t. Fonnoier 

Jaine C. do Veyra (SaKar-Leyto f _ porfeoto ( Bi00l ), Poli* B. 

(Ileeano), Wl— Setto (Oehu (Horo) , aeabars! Ceeilie lope* 
Sales Rodrigue* (Penny Visayan), and h*P 
^egW^r^sseretexy. ^ ^ «L. 

.12/ Speeeh on Sisal Bay, Beeenber , ^ 1.82-183. 

W Bitto, aae^UiMagee. ».X. 5. *«* ^ of the Philippines 

n ilA "Proclaiuxng tno -» Ibid., p. °9 2 » 

1i/ Bxocutive Order XM, „ Decenbe r 30, 1937. ^ 

Based on the 'Tagaxob 



11-238 

" m ' 

qflKHPH LANGUAGE PROMOTES NATIONAL CO NSCIOUSNESS " ■■■>' ■ 

There is nothing more important for any people than to have consciousness 
c .f their onenass as a nation and as a people, and this wa will not have until 

V3 speak one cannon language. 

15 

No national language has been created in tv;enty-four hours. 

!ipiCuLOUS, HUMILIATING TO HAVE N O COMMON LANGUAGE 

As President of our country, I cannot find any language which everyone of 
vs can understand. Is not that ridiculous? It is not only ridiculous but also 
humiliating. Yes, humiliating is the word. 16 

IMPORTANT THING FOR FILIPINOS IS TO HAVE ONE TONGUE 



I would be in favor of making Spanish or English as a national language, 
-,ny language, I do not care which, if we could learn it as easily as wc could 
learn one of the native dialects. It i3 not ensential to have this or that parti- 
cul ar language. The important thing is to have one languag e. 

It is easier for the Filipinos to have one native language than using 
i-glish or Spanish. In fact, it would be easier for the Filipinos to learn Spanish 
than English, because Spanish is read and pronounced like Tagalog, like Visayan 
,r like Ilocano. English is not; and so when you get those poor teachers who 
hrvo learned very little English, each one pronouncing each word differently, the 
result is that the poor students from the different barrios all over the Philip-, 
oines will be speaking the language differently, that is, as they heard it froa. 

17 

their respective teachers I 

E3 6LI3B WILL NEVER BE OUR H AT™w.T. LANGUAGE. SAYS QUEZON 

English is an important language to know. It is the universal language of 
coerce today. But do not attest the impossible, do not attempt to nake it the 
national language in the Philippines because it will never be. I do not care how 
long it will take us to have a national language. I do not care 

, „ ,.v t ct-incerelv believe, will never do 
have to wait for one hundred years! toglish, I sincerely 

18 

our national language. 

83< NATIONAL UNITY 

PHILIPPINE ASSEMBLY TSFMgJg 

, strong argument against the accusations that 

The Philippine Assembly is a stron b „ tf & 

Filipinos lack consciousness of unity or nationality. hJL 
================= Rnd munici pal nayors at Malacanan, 

15/ Speech before the coconut Peters " n 
February 19, 1938. KH*41, TJL « 

16/ Ibid. 

177 Ibid, j JBVF3P, p. 35. Also in QP, 1*1, B* 

J 3/ Ibid. . Qii.^ann Massages,. Vol' l -> " ai 



11-259 

■.ember of that body for two yoars and in no single instance did I find any bill 
introduced that was discussed from a point of view other than that of nationalise 

The Filipino people are confronted with the paramount necessity of main- 
taining and fortifying national unity. Without it everything is lost. National 
unity moans our consciousness of oneness as a people with the same history, the 
Bene ideals, characteristics, costumes, aspirations, readiness to sacrifice for 
the sane goal. 

UNITY OF PURPOSE WILL FURTHER NATIONAL POLICIES 



When I speak of unity I mean unity of purpose, sentiment, ideals and aspi- 
rations. Every country, every people, has what might be termed national policies. 
Thus, the Filipino people should be united in furthering their national policies •. 
Disagreements may arise as to the best methods to be adopted for carrying out the 
national policies. But once the responsibility for executing those national poli- 
cies is placed in the hands of a given institution or group of individuals, their 

3 

decision should be accepted as final. 

KATIOl&L Ul-TI'IY DOES <®^^j± L J 1U * IJ0S mrs TSm: iJJU - 

When I speak of unity, I do not mean that we must all think alike, or that 
all must accept as gospel truth the opinions and ideas of the leader of the nation, 
or that everyone must follow blindly his advice. Freedom of thought, freedom of 
speech, and freedom of action are the most precious possessions of a free nan. Tnoy 
are divine gifts without which man would fall in the category of a brute. But t!v^> 
inalienable rights have been given to us not only for the promotion of our perso- 
nal welfare or the pursuit of our own happiness, but also for the welfare and 

4 

happiness of our fellow men. 

84. NATIONALISM 

PHILIPP ICS: 0K3 PE0PL 3 r OSS ttACtl 

i«,,h+ tint there is in the Philippines a 
I do not oeo how any « « * <~ non . 0hriotltJ , B all ,„lon, 

pooplo o f one e„,,on rnco. *- » - ^ 

to the ^ race. I ad,,it, o, ^\ ; v<o thst — of raM8 u not 

what wo call a "pooplo." It is also oemm *">°^y 
inconpatiblo with the idoa of being a i'=°P l0 - 

_ . , Q1? „ d.n. OP, !IHi?22, THL. 

xi^ s^** * ; t 91 ! m. 

2/ Proas statement on the aood for - £ ^ m . 

V Speech before the U.f. al,»aa .ia.ooiat..,., J a^JJo^o^. 

4/ Speech on hie 6, at birthday, ™^ 

Vol. 5, Part I, dBWF, p. 174. « (SJ#2 m> 

jib]/ Speech in the U.S. House of Iboprosentatxve, 1912, 



11-240 

- w ' - 

gTLTPI^__NATIONALI ^l IS REAL, TOITTEMJj nB LOOD - QUE ZON 

Nationalisa in the Philippines is no political catchword. It is roal. It 
wa s there when the Filipinos fought Spain; and it was there when they resisted., 
in a suicidal struggle, the inplantation of American sovereignty over their 
country. And instead of being checked, Philippine nationalisa has been fostered 
by the United States when you assured then, through President Taft, that the 
Philippic 03 is for the Filipinos and when Congress assured then that they would 

00 granted independence. 

What we cannot and will not of our own violation renounce is our God-givon 
right to set up and maintain a government of cur own. v/e ask no nore than what ,. 
ovory self-respecting Filipino wants. Pernit us to have our choice of the kind of 
government under which we shall live. Ho true American can find fault with this 
aspiration. They, of all peoples, will have a ready ear for such a plea. 

Any organization that nay be proposed will be strong only insofar as it 
receives the breath of life and the vigor of enthusiasm fron the national soul 
which, though quiescent in ordinary tines, yet reaches the fullness of life when . 
the national cause is at stake. It is to this undaunted spirit of our people that 

1 an now appealing in the confident hope that our nation will cone forward in 
support of the plan of action heroin presented. 

In this vast and noble undertaking the smallest task is a post of honor 
for every patriotic Filipino 'willing to do his duty. 
CO NSERVE YOUT H ' jij^GY j;0R_^T WiL^AU3| =s 3^| = 

What I wish to hrine out is that the enor CT of the youth of tho land should 
ho conserved for tho notion, and its intolli S onoo disciplined into an attitude 
of patriotic service to the nation. 



* * * 



bet every mother in our land bring up upright, courageous and patriotic 
asters, and we shall certainly have a citizenry consexous of xts dutxes, pr 
of its responsibilities, and intense in its civic spxrxt. 

RIZAI/S ^OLI" TUfiaS FILIPINOLffi^^ 

, T1 qBitc 0 f their bad government, did not 

Tho reason why the ailaPiaoa ^ ^ ^ tore tho ahusos 
revolt sooner is hooauao, dorms a - ^ ^ r mipln0 

and wron g s of tho Spanish dovcrnnent, thor,. ^ ^ 

dolphia, Hovor.bor 25, 19- J- --ff~rm. 

1928. Hivora Collection, fol. - t ^ ^ r£ ..^ 

1/ Message to Filipino people, 1929, n. .»■ _ > ^ ^ philipplnea , 

V Speech hoforc tho National Federation of »oaon 

1929, n.d.n. Ibid,._ 



- 40ft - 

nation. 

That absence of sentiment of nationality, or indifference to and tolerance 

of abuses, was due to lack of education. 

He (Kisal) wrote the one novel that, in my opinion, turned the Filipinos 
into a nation - Noli He T angero. T he nano neans, "Do not touch." 5 

jpiPmS^CM^I^^^TIgUL^J^IM} NATION 

It is within the province of the Filipino people to build a beautiful and 

Luting nation. - a nation in which there will be plenty for all and impoverishment 

g 

can be practically eliminated. 

F ILIPINOS HAVS ATTA I NED DIGNITY O F NATIONHOOD, SAYS qUBZON 

To :.ic, this distinction (Doctor of Laws, honoris causa ) which I an recei- 
ving from your hands means that in the estimation of Georgetown University, the 

Filipino people have attained, the dignity of nationhood and have deservedly won _ 

7 

their right to self-determination. 

-•■m /jtK QTffi NATION, WE WILL PIS A3 PE E i&TION^ qUiffiON 

Gentlemen, what is going on in Europe is a good lesson for us. Let' no one 
believe that I would allow any province in the Philippines, or any group of pro- 
vinces, the right of self-determination to be either independent or to belong 
to sone other country. I a-, not passing judgment upon the issues now before the 
great powers of Europe which threaten the world with war, but I an stating for us 
that the issue of separation of provinces has been settled in the American Civil 
War; and that issue has been settled for us too. There will be no nationalities 
here. We are one nation, and we will die as one nation. In order that we may live 
and die as one nation, we must put an end in the National assembly to that feeling 

8 

of responsibility to one district. 

QUEZON'S MANY "IFS" F0RJ1LI PIH0 HATIOH^TOJ UgVI^ 

* w ™m »«" 

— * t.„nii+v of rrn-iiini 4 -" ^ ^t^vestf if every . 

or liberx^ifwoj^the^^ ~ of 

U orifice for the mte rcst_of 

Filipin o know s, f eols ^nd^-s mJ^J^^- 11 - 1 " 9 

================ ,. 1 n'-n-i^-inos Into a Nation," 1931 > 

V Article, "How Real's }Js2^JSBBSXSL I*do .ilipinoo 1. 

n.d.m. qP, HR# 5 2, TNL. ^ m . 

6/ Report to the Congress of the United ^ ^ ^ msx ^^ by 

77 Speech unon being conferred the degree HossagoS-J- 

Georgetown University, Washington, D.C., -prii 

Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, p. 93. ^ Joae Yulo at Malacanan, 

8/ Speech at a banquet for Secretaries alpidi , ' ^ pp . 222 -223. 

. September 27, l^^^^ Philippines, 1938. n.d.m. • 

2/ Speech before the Civil Liberties Union of tnc Philipp 
QP, MR#41, TNL. 



11-242 



14LQ DlUJJS = DI^MCn^^™L^i^pM_^D. JUSTICE 

1C 

Nationalise is not an unalloyed truth or virtue, whereas .justice is both.' 
y.TTO NALISH IS A NOBLE, ELEVATING, BSMICIAL SEHTIfrEKT 

So long as the nationalistic sentinont is not fostered to the point whore 
o ricople forgets that it forms a part of the human family; that the good of nnn- 
vind should ho the ultimate aim of all and every nation; and that conflicting 
actional interests are only tenporary and that there is always a just formula for 
adjusting them, nationalism is a noble, elevating, and nost beneficial sentinont. 

'..UEZON ^CESJ|IH.TH OF NAT 10 NA LI SK _TO_RBNAI S5 AljC E_ 

Nationalism, as an emotional attachaent and conscious allegiance to one's 
country rather than to a dynasty, a nonarch or a ruler, is of comparatively re- 
cent development. Its seed was planted at the tine of the Renaissance and it has 

12 

reached its extreme expression; in the totalitarian states. 
if.'.TTONALIS M TREMEND OUS FORCE FOR GOOD, AmRMS. QUEZON. 

Rightly conceived, folt and practiced, nationalise is a tremendous force 
for *ooA. It strengthens and solidifies a nation, Community interest is. made ac- 
tive! It preserves the best traditions of the past and adds zest to the ambition 
nf erlrr.ing the inheritance of the people. It is, therefore, a dynamic urge for 
continuous self -improvement. In fine, it enriches the sum total of mankind's cul- 
tural, .oral, and material possessions through the individual and characterise 



i 13 

contribution of each people. 



QUEZON NATIONALISM SUBO MIJATBD T^Ih^S^ J^^ 

To. a natioL, and I have been one all my life. ^ 

. , x> „„^w>-ViHti'* Filipino, an d that unwn- 

linmoss to accept any ^Q ^iV^JBSSi^SJmiS^l. 

Ho sentient IsjJronssUS^JSai^Siap^ a0 t „ ^ 

- no „at— c — * « 

•r tt** "i o X - — — — - 

or above the interest ol tnax laxs- 

humanity. r , 
======================= . inof , conference on character building, 

10/ Speech at the first plenary sossxon of a 

1938. n.d.m. IP, ^41, T,L. noti ons, University of the 

11/ Speech on peace, social and ocononic^ocuri ^ ^^^^^33^ Vol. 5, 

Philippines, April 4, 195 J • 'i r ' " 

Part I, J3VFF, p. 39. 

12/ Ibid. .. . p UniV orsity of the Philippines, 

12/ Speech at the 2 9 th comme ncemont oxorcis ^ ^ ^ p> 69 . 
. April 4, 1939. i]ue£OiLJlSS^^ Rizal Manorial Stadium, 

14/ Extemporaneous speech at 1« colebrat^ ? , # ^ 
August 23, 1940. Rivera Collectio , 



11-243 

~ 4*0 ~ 

85. NEPOTISM / FAVORITISM 

oj^zoo^02ILliilL124--~^_^?I§M 



.or ; : 



"In the interest of an efficient administration and with a view to impro- 
ving the morale of the public service, I, Manuel L. Quezon, President of the 
?hilippi nOE3 > by virtue of the powers vested in no by the Constitution and by the 
laws of the Philippines, hereby promulgate the following prohibitions and res- 
trictions in the natter of appointnent of relatives: 

"1 . All appointments in the national, provincial and municipal governments 
or in any branch and instrumentality thereof, whether in the classified or un- 
classified service, made in favor of a relative of the appointing authority or of 
the persons exorcising immediate supervision over him are hereby prohibited. 

"2. When there are already two or more members of one family in an office 
or bureau, no other member of such family shall be eligible for appointment to 
any position therein. 

"As used in this Order, the word 'relative' and members of the family re- 
ferred to herein are those related within the third degree either of consangui- 
nity or of affinity. 

"The following are exempted from these rules: persons employed in a confi- 
dential capacity, teachers, physicians or members of the army; provided, however, 
that in each particular instance full report of such appointment shall be made to • 

, , -. . , .i. 1 (a) 
the t resident." 

86. NEUTRALITY 

rassip aifP qu E ZQ K affirms nbutPvALITy in Spain's civil jar, .:. 

That "Franco Hymn" should not have been played here. The Franco government 
is .till unrecognized. The United States Congress ha* enacted a neutrality law and 

4.- . lor 1n +h-H countrv. I would not have aaid what I 
it is my duty to enforce tnat lav, in tins county. 

^ „„f+ nr -if the Pranco rebellion were 3till 

have said, and would have ignored this matter, if the 

. * „ it -eons to bo winning, there is so much reason 

in its initial stage; but now that it ^nis ™ 

4. , ,,,^,1 ouch an act. Let no one say that i 
for protesting, as I now protest, against -uch -n - 

u . ,, v/w h-s happened has been a great ais- 
Vield when a cause is about to triumph, './h.-t h.o na iP 1 (b) : ■ 

n 4.i> President of the Philippines, 
toko and a lack of consideration lor the President 

* nnnt approve of tho Philippines being 

The government does not, an d ann , * ^ ^ ^ 

converted into a theatre of propa,-^ . • ^ ^ ^ ^ ny ( earlior ) address, 
in Spain in order to further their ^ onQ way or the other. Our 

we Filipinos have no reason to take shuj 

;rrrr===r ,= T ^ , Trohi biting and Restructuring th e Pr aetge of 
iLaV Executive Oruar Jo , 11 1, ^j^gg^ Vol. 3, Part 11, * 

Nepotism," August 30, 1937- — Novonber 7 , 1937. 1U 
i(bV Address at the San Juan do Letroa College, 

Part I, p. 158. 



11-244 



interest oust bo United to a desire to see peace re-established in Spain and to 
j r ve that country, with which wo are united by historical ties, once more engage 
in the pursuits of peace and progress and occupy its place in the concert of 
nations . 

P.I. PUBLI3a_BS_U.S_PRqCL^4ATIQN_q^ WAR 

I do give publicity to the- said Proclamation of Neutrality by the Presi- 
dent of the United States, .and enjoin the strict observance of its provisions 
upon all citizens of the Philippines, and other persons resident or being therein. 

87. N S U T It A L I Z A T ION 

y G , the Filipinos as well as those in this country (the U.S.) who are in' 
fovor of giving the Philippines freedom, have the idea of protecting the Islands 
*r an international agreenent of neutrality. This international agreement, to ay 
,dnd, will serve to create confidence among foreign capitalists to cone into the 
Islands for investnents therein. 
; ^ti TWSTST S Oi* IBjaJTRALI^ TION <g PHIL IPPINES, 

. ot Ph-m-vrine int^Dondenco seems to be the alleged 
The sole argument against Ihilippmo lautpwi 

volant. Ho one donioa tact tho Filipino pcopic are n» too .on* t U an ■ «~ 
nrninst ,o»i*. invasion. In iact, authoritative .on in *. 

attonpt auch action. ^ ' " ^rasaicn, tho neutralisation of tho 
C i protecting tho WSp» *»" ^ ^ouondance by international . 

Xaiania ana tho mention »a ^r c^ t i ^ ^ ^ „ i3 

treaty. Such a device to protect a 6^11 2(b) 
as effective as any device in international affairs can be. 



im PKILIPPII^ILL M1 l^ = lEl^™e=«= 

• , Cni.inns) have been advocating the noutralisa- 
It is true that many ox us * J QC independence, but we 

tion of the Island^ the means w ^ d0 Letran College, on 

^L^rt^rrnector J«» ^^'ooiliio/'^bor 10, 1937. JUA« 

Spanish Fascist propaganda m 

P- 305. .. „„ ltr ,iity Proclamation of the Pro- 

■■>/ v n hoi No 451 , "Publishing the ^tenbor 13, 1339. ^a- 

2/ Proclamation iio. « * ^tes, September 5, 1939 » 

sident of the United States, . ?> ^ 

lacanan. Ibid,., Vol. 5, Part -, Committee, U.S. House of 

17 Testimony at a hearing of " jr.^ Colloction, Vol. I, P- 91 . 

Representatives, February 21-25, Indopend .nce , " mS^mJ^' 



11-245 

- m - 

have never thought of making such nn»+-».nn„ 

to aucn neutralization a condition sine qua non of our 

independence. In other, words, our independence is not to depend solely upon a 
neutralization treaty, much less upon any protection from the United States. 

tfo understand that if we want independence we must assume its burdens. ¥e 
,ust take the risk and the responsibilities. V 0 are not the first people to have . 
taken the risk of being independent, and if wc really prize freedom, as we do, 
wo should be glad and courageous enough to face the consequences of the situation. 

We do not want any protection if we get independence. You would not want 
it, because it would be unfair and unjust to the United States; and we would 
not, because protecti on can never be afforded without inp airnent of the absolut e 
freedom of the protocted_stat G , and we are gore concerned about the substance of 
freedo m than about the word independence. If wc are going to have independence , 
we_w ant real independence and not nerelv noninal indep endence. 

OTJlilSTIOi'IS U.S. SOLON DIDN'T ANSUEft 

Mr. O'SHAUWSSSY: Has the gentleman got the confidence in the nations of 
the world to believe that you will be left alone after you are free and indepen- ■ 
riont without a strong amy and navy? 

Mr. OUKZON: The inquiry of the gentleman (from Rhode Island) implies the 

assertion that no small country should aspire to be independent, for it surely ' 

will be grabbed by a stronger power. If this theory be true, the mouth of every 

Irish patriot should be forever closed, since his noble ambition would simply 

riean a change of master. But that theory, fortunately for mankind, is unfounded 

and not supported by facts. Look, if you please, at Holland, Switzerland and other 

small countries, and tell me how long they have been independent. Does anyone 

4 

question that they will remain so for many years to cone. 
PggiSpSiiNT BELIBS IfejOTiULIZATION YARN; HOT HIS JOB, 113 ADDS 

On the occasion of my recent trip to Japan, one of the American press cor- 
respondents, gifted with a highly fantastic imagination, sent a dispatch to his 
newspaper in New York to the effect that I had made that trip for the purpose cf 
starting negotiations with the Japanese government looking ■ towards the neutra- 
lisation of the Philippines. The absurdity of the news should have been enough 
to discredit it, but unfortunately there are many people who fail to use a cri- 
tical judgment and accepted what they read as gospel truth. 

j , , „. , . na H+ ohnj ,id he borne in mind that the government of the 
United lUTs iTJ^ok It fi£ e control and supervision of the foreign 
affairs of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, and *^°J?J 1 a JJ v fg 
giving for its object the neutralisation of the Philippines will h f n % n \l^ OBSeBBiom 

---====:============== p„nnit tee on Territories find/ diile the Jones 

■J Testimony before the U.S Sena ^onnittc. n ^ q> ^ 

Bill was under consideration. In. ihe ampin' . 

January 1915. Rivera Collection, Vol. I, pp. 
i « • +1,-, n <3 House of Representatives, Hay 1, 

V Speech, "The Japanese Menace,"- m the U.S. House 

1916. Rivera Collection, Vol. I, PP« 357-3". 



H-246 

- m - 

conducted by the government of the United States with such powers as the United 
states day choose to invite to participate in that compact. 

In the second place, it is a natter of common knowledge that on several 
occasions spokesmen fron the Foreign Office of the Imperial Government of Japan 
hove lot it be known, after the enactment by the U.S. Congress of the Philippine 
T ndcpendonce Law which authorizes the President (of the United States - ABS)to 
n-'Totiato a treaty for the neutralization of the Philippines, that Japan was ready, 
-nd willing, if invited, to be one of the signatories to such a treaty of neut ra- 

Japanese statesmen seen unaniaous in their sympathy for the idea of neutra- 
lizing the Philippines. Why then should I go to Japan to learn of something about 
which I had no right to inquire, and which was no longer a secret to any one? In 
Edition, I nay state that I am not one of those who entertain any misgivings as . 
to the attitude of Japan towards the Philippines when we shall have become inde- 
pendent . ^ 

88. NO ACTING PRESIDE N T 

Under the Constitution, in the absence of the President of the Philippine, 
from the national territory, there can be no Acting President. Wherever he goes, 
the President carries with him the authority and powers of his office and ho can 
exercise them as fully as if he were in his office at the capital of the nation. 

There will, therefore, be no Acting President during my absence from h 
Philippines and the ,overnnent will continue to be run and its officii affix, 
transacted in the sane manner- as they are when I in the Philippines. 

* * * 

after writing ny name above his signature, iw ^ 
own signature, for and in behalf of the President 



TOOT CLARIFIES REPORT O^Ilgl^ 

+ . - in nn afternoon paper to the effect that 
The news item appearing yesterday i ^ ^ ^ Nati0 nal Assembly it 

at a conference held with members of the head » 0 f the government 

was agreed that Vice-President Osmena will bo the ™£ of the Cabinet 

in the absence of the President, and that a su. p 

virtually was sanctioned, is misleading. rf thQ AssonD iy 

Iho Prosidont did not consult tho^ ^ ^ ^ fron th0 

» t0 " h ° " 1U bS th ° ° - th tv dapnnoso gov.mn.nt for . 

the neutralization of the mum 

Vol. IV, p. ,8,0. ^ Collectlon , vol. HI, P. 1426. 

1/ Press stateoont, Decemtar 7, «w 



11-247 

~ 4U - 

Elands, nor did he seek their approval as to any supposed realignment of the Ca- . 
hinet. 

The selection of the members of his Cabinet is the President's constitu- 
tional prerogative and he need not have the approval of any one to constitute a 
Cabinet that in his opinion will best servo tho public interest... What the Presi- ' 
dent did in his speech yesterday, at tho luncheon which he gave tho Cabinet, was 

• orely to state that, although tho Vice-President, under the Constitution, cannot 
be acting President since the President will continue to .exorcise the powers and 
prerogatives of his office while abroad, however, ho being the ranking official 
in the government, will in the absence of tho President represent the President. 

89. NO FILIPINO QUISLING 

■fflBRg ARE NO QUISLIMG IN KIILIPPINES, qUBZON TELLS ILICARTKUR 

In reference to the men who have accepted positions in the Philippine Exe- 
cutive Conaission established by the Japanese, every one of -them wanted to come, 
to Corrcgidor, but you (llaciirthur) told no that there was no room for then here. 
They are not "quislings." The "quislings" are the non who betray their country to 
the eneny. These men did what they have been asked to do, while they were free 
under the protection of their government. 

Today they are virtually prisoners of tho enemy. I am sure they are tho 
victims of the adverse fortunes of war and I am sure they have no choice. Bosideo, 
it is most probable that they accepted their positions in order to safeguard the, 
'welfare of the civilian population in the occupied areas. I think, under tho cir- 
cumstances, America should look upon their situation sympathetically and undcr- 
1 

standably. 

LOYALTY TO AMERICA INCOMPATIBLE WITHOUT PROTECTION ,^_^j20N- 

My loyalty and tho loyalty of the Filipino people to America have been pro- 
ven beyond question. Now we are fighting by her side under your command despite 
overwhelming odds. But, i^eo^ne^ue^ ^ whether any government has the ,,, 
righ t to demand loya lty f roq_ltaj*tl £S ^^ ° r * hil±t * t0 

render actual prot ection. 

thi w o . never hositatod ior • 

This w-r is not of our maKing... Des pite ai-_uij£j _ 

2Tb") 

ffijaonent in our at and.. _ 

" 90." OPPOSITION // M I N 0 R I T T 

• MESSAGE TO OPPOSITION: omjmM^^^^^ 

= - idea Qf nerging Rll 

I hope there will be a strong minority party, 
==================== collection, Vol. Ill, p. 1452. 

2iaj/ Press statement, January 21, 1937. by tne Japanese 

\J Letter to General MacArthur co^ontin ,n ^ R . vera Collcction , 

of the Philippine Executive Gommi-iun 

Vol. V, p. 2367. broadcast from Tokyo on 

2(bV Letter to General MacArthur ^^^^i-^ent in the Philippines of the 
January 28, 1942, announcing tlK oat-o 
Philioeine Executive Commission, Ibid. 



11-248 

419 " 

opposition parties because they are all against me is terrible. The result would 
bo such that, if those opposition groups succeeded in defeating the majority, thoy 
would be unable to carry out any policy. It is one thing to destroy a building and 
another to construct one. You can destroy a building by calling people together 
paid telling them to go ahead and destroy it. But in the work of construction you 
nust have a plan and everybody working on that building oust work in accordance 
with that plan. The opposition nust not be maintained merely to defeat the majo- 
rity. They must formulate a platform that will give basis for their opposition; 

,-.,id in case they succeed in bringing down the majority, they must have one objec- 

1 

tive, one common purpose. 

ai BZ0M> I'i/jJQgITY_gIIlgi,_ T jII'T. l ING TO GIVE OPPOSITIO N FAIR CHANCE 

I have seen in the papers that leaders are calling together all tho oppo- 
sition groups 30 that they may merge for the purpose of defeating the majority. 
They should have a platform for their objective. If they have that, then they are 
all right. But it's already a defective organization from the very beginning. Do 
you think that it is possible for that opposition to grow? You don't expect me to 

use the power of my office to create an opposition here. I cannot create an oppo- 

2 

sition, but I shall give any opposition a chance at a fair fight. 
OPPOSITION ' 3_0NLY_JUSTIPICATI0N 

The only justification for people to disagree in politics should be a dif- 
ference of ideas and in fundamental principles c-f government. It is perfectly ridi- 
culous to be in the opposition simply because you much prefer to be in the oppo- 
sition and not in the majority. My choice of party should depend on whether I 
- roe or disagree with you. If you happen to be in the opposition and the majo- 
rity agrees with you, then there is no reason for the difference, and you must 

3 

oolong to the sane party. 

LOVE CAN p:AOD-acij_GOQD ^^jmj^^^^j^^^L 

, i rlivided amours t themselves, since they 

If the opposition starts by being aivium .*iuue 

are only 3 oinin' g together because of their hatred a B al„3t the « n- 

*** ™. nothing (! aoa far the S over,»»t can coao out of it. The only tro * 

can P roau=e B eod U the tie of love. AuJ |, t 1 1 «• "J****? 

i j ~„ t+ ^-m never build up d o cau se 

c,n produce good things. Hatrcd^n_ : ^^^ — ^ 

i u • T , . , 0 t > lfl t i s creative. 

ha tred is not nroative. it is.. dg^ tructH£^l^^ — 

.-.IGHT OF CRITICISM ENDS WHBHE JITD^^^ffl 

=_= =_= natter how insignificant 

The right of any member of the opposite parti , 
= ________ ^ Philippines, Halacanan, September 

1/ Conference with a delegation ox tne c 6 p> ^ 

29, 1937. aoozonJISSSaSSSi. Vo1 ' ; ' ' 
2/ Ibid. .. p. 134. 
y Ibid, , pp. 133-134. 
i/ Jbid. . p. 135. 



11-249 

4115 

ouch party nay be, t a ^rltlcl« L ^ ollol9a flM annAwM Qf ^ ^ ^ ^ • 
^g t bo conceded. The cxer cise^su c^ight , however, is subject to tho lirdta- 

ttaaaJaE2ag a *y the oie^te^j-ncipie. of ffljgmgg , nJ Lik0 free _ 

ay, of speech, it must no^^usadjo, the_gx tcnt of converting it into li- 
cense. The right to criticise ends wlinrejrttugerat ion begins. 5 
0?PJSmOg_Ig_KOT_Tl^ 

He (Dr. Bernabe Africa, chairman, department of political science,' Univer- 
sity of the Philippines - .J3S) said this: "If there is no opposition in the fern 
■•,f a minority party, who will perform the task of fiscalizing the party in power 
whenever its heads err, as all men do? TJho will check the party in power when it 
goes to extremes?" 

Well, I will take the liberty of answering these two questions right now. 
"If there is no opposition," Dr. Africa says, "who will perform the task of fis- 
calizing the party in power?" Everybody is doing it: La Vanguardia . Taliba. the 
Free Press, the Bulletin, every newspaper in the Philippines and almost every 
student of the state. 

How could anybody cone to the conclusion that the opposition party is the 
:::ly party that f iscalizes the actions of the party in power? I have been in poli- 
" ics and in the par ty i n power for 35 ye ars,_ I_ haTC_received n oro fiscalizing fron 
indi vidua ls^ than fron the opposition. And I a m not jo ki ng. It is a fact. 

OPPOSITION OKAY IN PAST: TODAY EVERYBODY IS PISCALIZING -_ML3__ 



Why, it is ridiculous; it is just repeating today what had been said a 
hundred years ago. Yes, in the old days when there were very few newspapers, when 
the people were perhaps not interested in public questions, an opposition party' 
night have had something to do, and that was to watch the party in power. 

But nowadays everybody is watching the party in power. Wei}.., do you think 
that we need an opposition party in the Philippines when you have the Civil Liber- 
ties Union? My goodness, the Civil Liberties Union had already protested against ' 
ay speech (stating that political parties are unnecessary in a democracy - ABS) 
while the opposition party was still asleep. 
KINWTTY twttttt.P!* QUEZON BXPULM3 CEBCX-A^ = BjJ^ C|^C^S == 

• 4 -„« a f n ovtremos? Ba3 tho minority 
Who will check tho party in power when xt goes to extru.es a 

n „ n -nf Of course, they can vote "No, but 

party boon able to check the party in power? Of course, y 

. . ,, ., , nwvt Check 1 Chock the party in power! 

that is all they can do. Check! uiock. ^ 

+ n on forgotten that under the system of government of the 
Have you, gentlemen, ior. 6 oz^u 

=--=========—======= ' .i-,i«-iatrativo investigation of 

5/ hotter to the Seerotory of ^ < "j^ 1 l£Srf**il., *>roh 9, 1959. 
Kiss Cajnen Plana., neater of ths ton cip 



Sj Speech at tho open fonrn of tho . am 
flivera Collection, Vol. V, pp. 

2/ Ibid. , p. 2242. 



11-250 

- m - 

-taitod States, the checking and balancing of governmental power is dond by each 
p0W or against the other? Don't you know the meaning of the systen of government 
by check and balance? 

Under our system of government, the Chief Executive cannot abuse his power 
for there is the National Assembly and there is the Supreme Court to check him. 
•1'iiO Legislature cannot abuse its power for there is the Supremo Court and there 
is the Chief Executive to check it. And the Supreme Court cannot abuse its power 
because there is the Assembly that can impeach members of the tribunal who abuse 
their power. 

What else are you looking for to do the checking? Your Constitution offers 
you all the checking you need - except the chocking of the opposition. 8 

CT^SITION_BiimaNG_i:T KgO gi_^^ gON_ALJ^S_^GP^ CTS PUBLIC 0PI1H0H 

I have been in public life long. I ought to know the effect on me of fis- 
calizing and checking. I want to tell you that as far as the "f iscalizing" of the 
opposition is concerned, it makes no mere effect on mo than a dog barking at the 
noon. 

But when I ho ar cri ticisms from indepen dent quarters; when my policies are 

iiscussed in friendly circles by friendly sources and between friendly sources; 

vlxon an impartial p ublic opinion expr es ses its e lf on my account, then I listen 

r.:i d take serious no ti ce of what h as been said. This will show you how much "f is-_ 

ca lizing" mean3 to a veteran politician. It is th e power of public opinion, of 

i ndependent public opinion tha t can check the abuse of power on the part of the 
9 

^:7o rnmcnt. 

91 . P A T R I 0 T I 8 M 

irILIPINO MOTHERS HOST RAISE PA TrJOTIC CITIZENS - %1BZ0H_ 

Whatever happens our women must always bear in mind that the first duty of 
womanhood is motherhood; chat her duty to the state is better performed by the per- 
formance of her duty to her home and to her family; that she can improve the body 
politic, mere especially by raising patriotic and dutiful children than by spen- • 

1 

■ing a lot of tine , in political campaign. 
OUR COUNTRY ?IRST. Q.UEZ0H TELLS CAVITEgOJDPPORT^S 

TZZ^Z^TZZ position to your votes .and for this I am very 
grateful. I owe a debt of gratitude to each and everyone of you which I can ne- 
ver repay. You have given me your confidence in a manner that is inspiring, 
acknowledge this and I wish to assure you I have it always in mind.. 

+ ■Fnrt that I am not merely your 

But I wish to call your attention to the fact t ^ ^ ^ of 

senator. I an also the head of the party, and on top oi 



Ibid. , pp. 2242-2243. 
■2/ Jbid t r p. 2243. ^ m"32 TNL 

l/ Speech on woman suffrage October 21, 1931. QP» ' ' 



11-251 



- 418 - 



the Filipino participation in the government. This places on ray shoulders a tre- 
mulous responsibility. I must consider national issues and lock at thorn fron a 
rational viewpoint. 

Much as I would like to please every leader of my party, much as I woulo. 
like to be of service to each and everyone of you, I nust say that sonotiaos I 
«n faced by the problem of either serving the interest of my party or serving the 
interest of ny country. In such cases, my choice is one only - I serve that which 
I think is ny country's best interests. 2 

I appeal particularly to the youth of the land to keep their hearts and 

ninds free from partisan bias during these days when we have sore need of tho olo- 

•5 

vatod patriotism and broad vision of every Filipino. ■';'< 
L3T "S_AC r f ^^^IJM^T^^^KlJ^lj-^^m^ 

I once .more appeal tc our people for united action and for real cooperation 
in the task that we have before us of building a new nation. 

Lot us forget the past and think only of the future. Lot us bear in nind 
that what we are doing will be cither to the happiness or unhappiness , froedom or 
slavery of cur children and their children's children, as we nay choose to act 

wisely and patriotically, or only as blind partisans who place their party over 

4 

a?id above the country. 

PATRIOTISM IS COmm PATRIMONY OF ALL - QUEZON 



The word "veteran" is not reserved only for those who distinguished then- 
solves in war, but also to those who have contributed to their country's great- 
ness in peace. 

For patriotism is not monopolized by anyone but is the common patrimony cf 

all. 

'.11 those' who served their country loyally and faithfully are alike en- 

. 5 • 
titled to our esteem, gratitude and respec. 

MLQ ASKS^LLJTOJDjUDIGaTE B^^0J^^MMM^SM= 

I appoaX to youT^tis, and ^ J**™**™* . • 

may, united in the common endeavor, ouce ma. ^. c 




, ' 6 

hour of service to my people. 

, ^t-iptis" nothing is more effective than to 

Tc foster national pride and patriotic ncT, 



mrs. February 1933- Rivera Collection, Vol. II 



ll Speech before his CavitoHo followers, 
V Message to the youth, 1934, n.d.u. QP, Htftf. THL. 

4/ Interview with a TEi^^x^pro.on^i^ , - ^ 

5/ Message for tho magazine Vejor^ *» on or ,^ ^ ^ 
§J Inaugural Address, Legislative Builds, 
Vol. I, Sp. Rev. lid., JBWF, p. 17- 



11-252 

- m - 

Participate actively in the process of maintaining the national defense. Hilitarv, 
training and service build up the spirit of duty and love of country.. They nur- ' ' 
tare patriotism, loyalty, courage, and discipline. 7 

HS=iI=I~==2!I?I2Ii Jill J|y|cE j;|opl^sj^atriotism 

People no longer long f or a country si , iply booau80 they were born there> 
They oust see and feel that in that country they enjoy a happy life, and that " ' 
thoy have every opportunity to improve their lot. 8 

ss I'jusT maks our youth rbal patriots, says jrazo;i 

We need to make our people, especially our youth, conscious of their one- 
ness, jealous of their nationality, lovers of the country, proud of thoir race and 
their democracy - so conscious of their oneness, so jealous of their nationality, 
so proud of their race and their democracy that they will die fighting for it. • 

By preparing cur youth to defend their country we are actually giving them . 
a fuller and more comprehensive training, vfe are training them in the arts of 

G 

yoaco and in the science of war. 
\m E&ST 3E READY TO DIE FOR CUR LIBERTY - KLQ 



I do not belittle the many other responsibilities of government. To es- 
tablish and maintain justice, to promote sanitation, to educate our youth, and to 
insure the development of communication, transportation, industry and agriculture - 
all of those are important functions of an enlightened government. _3ut t if inde-, 
pendence means anythin g to us, if wo hold on to the belief that freedom and li- 
berty a re the rightful heritage of a proud and self-respecting people, then as 
our first duty wo must be prepared to defend o u r freedom and even t? sacrifice • 
ourselves in the na me of liberty. Should necessity arise, wo will oppose force ■ 
w ith f orco"^ we will not supinely bo w our necks to the yoke of any invader . 

LOVE OF COUNTRY IS E t mNCED_BY_G00 D G0VEK8KBHT _ 

The love of country is not promoted or inspired by the beauty of its land- 
scape nor its wealth. It nay contain the riches of the world but if in such coun- 
try the people suffer injustice from the hands of the government and of a pnvi- 
leged class, the mass of the people would prefer that another power should come 
in and take over the responsibilities of government wherein their conditions uigh 
be improved, and under whom they would receive justice and more generous treatment. 

• , huert of c peonle if in that country they 

Love of country thrives m tne heait oi " 

f + '■>-■ ronercsity and sense of justice of the 
actually live happily because of tne gonercsn-> 

================== ,-,-,1-i-rril defense, November 25, 1935. 

ll Message to the First National assembly on national , 

— — ' P * 22 ' , lVn of th0 rational Federation of Women's 

10/ ^ ths Teachers' Convention in Ba^ie, AprU U*. JW» 



" w - 

government. ^ 

OWKSRSHIP OF_ H CTjEj L _LANp_ PROMOTES LOVE 0F gotthtoy ^ ' 

It is by owning land which Hves thon j 

Li i ™_E£GL L ho £ e_^nd_ su stenance that the nasses 

better realize that they have ? nmin+n- L " 

JLiiSH ^2HE£I_^lHuaj_lo ve and preserve. The owners hip 

: f hi s heme and f arm, more than anvth-in^ 0 i», • ~T *" 

1 — ■ "^niDfi else, giv es the people a sense of realit y 

t he abstract idea of a native 1.-,nri 1 2 ~ ' 

;iigZ pNlS„SUPP^ OJ L SpLONS BASED ON PATRIOTS r mtt.tet 

I want to say that you have no right to publish that telegram (in the news- 
paper Karilagan, September 5, 1937), and you have given me reason' to doubt whether 
I should support you in your campaign for reelection... My support of your re-.' 
election is not due to my special interest in your case, but a fulfillment cf the • 
promise I had made to all members of the National Assembly that I would, regard- 
loss of his loyalty to the party or to me, give my support to every member seeking 
reelection, who, judging from his records, has shown not only patriotism and abi- 
lity but also knowledge of the problems confronting the government and a determi- 
nation to contribute his part to carry out policies that will promote the general 

1 i 

■■•oll-boing of the- people. 

ONE'S COUNTRY IS VH2RE ONE 18 READY TO DIE POR IT 



To love a country you must, have more than beauty, you must have a country 
A'hero you can live happily and comfortably and freely. And that is, after all, 

14 

what makes men love the place wherein they live and be ready to fight for it. 
IT'S. Til-IE TO SHOW REAL PATRIOTISM BY DEEDS - OUEZON 



There are people who still think there is real patriotism in telling their 
followmen of their bravery, of the things that they could do. All that is mere 
talk and results in nothing. There are some who say that they are against the pre- 
sent government, and these persons were my companions in the Philippine Assembly 
and later in the Senate, where I observed that most of what they said they would 
do were not at all realized. 

This is the time for deeds and net words; and real patriotism, if we are to 
perform our duties to the country, lies in our collective efforts to bringabout 
the welfare of the country. In deeds alone oan real patriotism be shown. 



iiy = lpeeeh = before ^he members of the Cabinet, the ^^^^^ 
governors, and treasurers at Halaoanan, January .0, 1937. ^39, Ti.L. 

„/ „ , , , M . r „f U m from the United States, August 18, 1937. 

12/ Speech at a banquet upon his return iro... 

Ibid. \ , 

r omnoo of Davao on presidential support 
W better to Assemblyman Romualdo C. «iuin o oi ^ in7 „-, n Messaaos. Vol. 3, 
of the assemblymen's reelection, Septeubci 29, W( 

Part I, JBVPP, p. 291 . 
BJ 3,,o= n , t a pre. conform, 3, 1957. *. ™- 

15/ ^ at barrio Tit-. Tondo, Oct^r 17, 1958 * «' 

Part I, JBVFP, p. 226. 



11-254 



- m _ 



DYING_OF_HUIjGER_CAN' T BE EXPECTED TO LOVE HIS COUNTRY 



My countryuen, I know the situation of a laborer. I know that a person who 
•.counters difficulties in life thinks of nothing, and ho cannot think of anything 
else other than to be able to find some relief; and if, in his suffering, nothing- 
is done for his welfare, he cannot love his countrymen anynore because only his 
hurt fooling3 and his penury will reign in his heart and mind. Hence, our prin- 
cipal concern in the Philippines today is to discover means to remedy our social 

ills so as not to have persons suffering from poverty who can no longer think of 

16 

their duty to their native land. 

.di VERY FILIPIKO MUST BE B3UED W ITH HEROIC PATRIOTISM ..' 

We must imbue our whole citizenry with a spirit of heroic patriotism. For 
a country as small and with such limited wealth as the Philippines, ordinary pa- 
triotism is not enough to insure its security. Heroic patriotism is necessary - a 
patriotism that is devotion, loyalty, and courage that rises to the heights of 
self-sacrifice. Such kind of patriotism can only be felt by a people whose love . 
■ f country is not based merely on a natural attachment to the land of their- birth, 
bat on the fact that their country Rives them freedom, contentment, and economic 
security. 

WE 1IUST EDUCATE PEOPLE TO ESCHEW THEIR PAROCHIAL OUTLOOK 



It is our duty to educate the people to substitute for attachment to their 
village lovo of their country' at large. We must give them a national outlook on 
life and make them feol at hone in whatever corner of the Philippines they may 
i met thems 0 lve s . 

QUEZON GIVES TIP S OH HQWP E OTLB_CAg BE TAUGHT TO LOVE C0UHTRY_ 

If the citizens do not experience anything in their own country except po- 
verty, how can they love their land, and why should they defend and die for it in 
time of danger? To a poor man who is oppressed and denied happiness by his country- 
men, what does he care if his own country is conquered by another? 

The Filipinos love their country. If we desire every Filipino to defend his 
country, it is necessary that he enjoy some ease in his native land. We ought to 
sh,w and give him what he deserves, because if he receives aid in the interest of 
his existence and his rights are enforced and respected, ho will not only learn 
to love his country but also sacrifice his life, if need be, in defending the 

19 

honor, dignity, and freedom of his race. 

=== === = == =^r-.r,.^===== v h v 1939. nnw.nn Messages. Vol. 5, 

16/ Speoch in- oan Fernando, Pampanga, February i r , 

Part I, , :.WF, p. 27. excrcises of the University of the Philippines.. 

U/ Speech at the 29th commencement exercises 01 

April 4, 1959. ibidj., ?• 72. 
O/ Speech on social ccxest one iaoor Ration, 19». 

Part I, oBVFF, p. 154. 



11-255 



" 4JS - 

a,;.i fcure with confidence upon another year of iw+f i 

,. , A , yGar 01 fruitful existence, socure in tho 

assurance tnat the nrespit ^Ar,*****. . . 

present administration counts with the stout loyalty and pa- 
triotism of our countrymen who *■ 

m ^ h ° ually faC3 thG sorious aspects of life in far and 
strange shores. T 0 you who reside in v-i nB h» 
,. , T . _ 10 xn rf «iPaliu f as well as to those in other parts 

■i *awan, I extend E y meetings and sincere thanks for your efforts in fittingly 
-orifying the national life of our Commonwealth on a day that is replete with 

. istorical significance. Frw -a-r.-. ,, . 

. .ice. iev. are the years that separate the Philippines fron hor 

,,litical emancipation but let those years furnish you'with nore opportunities to 
improve your lot so that you will be prepared to answer the exigencies of national 
,orviee when the call of duty and responsibility demands your inndiato return 
to your country. 

■^ni_FILIPINOS BITJOIi'lED TO fttBSKCTB COUHTRY'S GOOD Ul.m 

Here than ever before, you must now conduct yourselves as befit law-abiding 
™ l ^-respecting citizens. You nnist preserve immaculate tho fair name of the 
Philippines and win for yourselves tho goodwill and respect of those amongst whom 
y.vu live. 

In the Philippines we are at this time engaged in the supremo task of 
SPe pray y conplotin ^ our nflt i°nal defense so that should the occasion arise - which 
we/ will not corao - we may, in cooperation with unerica, defend the territorial 
integrity of our fatherland and tho principles of justice and liberty which we 
profess and which tho United States is determined! to defend. 21 

Bataan as a military bulwark fell, but tho Filipino spirit of resistanco 
against the invader did not fall with it. The spirit that gave courage to our 
heroes in Bataan lives in every Filipino heart. It is for this reason that I on- ' 

join you to continue exerting your best efforts to help speed the day of our 

22 

victory. 

92. PEACE AMD 0 Ii D 2 R 
VjjjACE AND O RDER EQUALS HAP PINESS AHD P ROGRESS 

The first and most important duty of every government is to maintain peace 
;: -nd order, for peace and security in life and property is the sine qua non of ' 



20/ Message to Waipahu Filipino Community in Hawaii, October 17, 1939. 
^P, MR#43, THL. 

2J_/ Radio speech to Filipinos in Hawaii, November 17, 1941. 3P, I4R#45 , VSL. 

22/ Message to his fellow countrymen in the Pacific Northwest, April 9, 1943. 
Ibid/ 



11-256 

- 4*3 - 

happiness and progress. It is also the essence of liberty for there can be no free- 
ly for the individual so long as he does not feel protected in his individual and 
-,-iitical rights. 

My first mission as the Chief Executive cf this country is to maintain peace. 

order. And I will naintain peace and order if I have to order the killing of 

•, 4- a 2 (a) 
■ c'io people to dc so. ' 

93. PHILIPPINES 

... jZOK' S APOSTROPHE TO HIS M0TII3RLAHD 



On these islands - the Philippines - nature has bestowed with generous hand 
nnd in harmonious combination her riches and her. beauties. Millions of acres of 
a griculturo land capable of growing all kinds of tropical products; forest with 
excellent woods in largo quantity and variety; nines of gold and silver and rich 
deposits of lead, iron, and petroleum; glorious sunsets, moonlight and stormy 
nights, cascades, lakes, valleys, rivers, mountains, volcanoes, enchanting inland 
seas , and beautiful panoramas make this land the "Pearl of the Orient." 

This country was then, as it is now, the dwelling, the home, of a people 

I.o".ogenoous in race, one in religion - with the exception of a proportionately 

small number of non-Chri3tiaas - welded together into a common nationality and . 

Kb) 

united in a single overmastering ambition - to be free and independent. 
NO MAN CAN UTARVE TO DEATH IN PHILIPPINES! 



Perhaps you don't know that in the Philippine, Islands nobody can starve to 
'loath. If you are hungry and you have no work, or you don't want to work, and you 
have no money with which to buy your food, all you have to do is open your mouth 

2(b) 

and something comes in! 

We do not want in the Philippine Islands great fortunes. What we are inte- 
rested in is that everybody in the Philippines should have something, something 
with which to educate his children, with which to keep bodies and souls together. 

^^Mdr^lTSnponing of the National Assembly, June 16, 1936.' 
OP, HH#38, TNL. 

SkV Spoech delivered at a conference with the ^Sta^ST'S? 4, 

Pampanga, at San Fernando, Paupanga, June 1, lypo.. ijjfa 

Part I, J3VFF, p. 64. 
/ w „ -, • ■ v,-n in flic U.S. House of Representatives, 

1(b)/ Speech on the Philippine bill, in ™° 1 0 2 1 7-227. 

October 1, 1914. Rivera Collection, Vol. I, pp. 217 2*1. 

P-lbJ/ Speech before the Economic Club, USA,. November 25. 1*7. *.»*9. ™> 

U Speech at the Columbia University, USA, November 27, 1927. 



11-257 

- m - 

COUNTRY WI THOUT MILLIONAIR ES BUT HOBODY STARVES ' ' V ' •'• ■■ ^ : ^ r " - ; - - 

If we can make fortunes in the Philippic Islands, well and good, but wo 
do not want to make it at the expense of the majority of our people. 

Wo prefer a country with no millionaires, but where nobody is poor, than a 
country where there nay be a thousand millionaires and the rest starving. 4 

UOuDY JlORE INTBRBSTBD I N OUR COUgTRY TEAN OURSELVES 



tfc arc Filipinos. No one can love our country more than we do. • It is 
nly upon the assumption that we arc all selfish or cruel, that you can say that 
anyone whom you (the American government or people - ABS) send there is more 
interested in the welfare of our country than we are. 5 

SENATE PRESIDENT DEFINES HIS IDEA OP A COUNTRY 

My idea of a country is not one in which the few have the privilege of ■ 

having not only what they need but much more, while others have not enough for 

their daily needs. I think, however, that the Philippine Islands is a country 

vmich, if properly developed, can offer opportunity to those who have the genius 

g 

and the energy to accumulate groat fortunes, while leaving no one without. • 
r£lLp?INESt_PO-TEIITL'lLLY RICH COUN TRY ADD T-ARK BT 

The Philippines is a territory that is potentially a very rich country, and 
a potentially very rich country is a fine market for anybody who has something to 
sell. 7 

CSJiiTiCU THANK S GOD F OR BSEPI NG PHILIPPIC a aimai! of rsAcas. 

We should be thankful to Almighty God that here the firmament is blue, free 
from the clouds of either a menacing war from without or of a public disorder from 
within. Kan freely breathes the air of liberty, and his heart is full of hope, not 
of fear. Here we may go to bed at night and be sure that the following day the roar 
of guns or the tumult of sitdown strikes will not disturb our peace and the order- 

ly processes of industry. 

In order to foster private initiative and at the same time to protect our 
less fortunate citizens from the abuses and injustices of greed, we have here 
found the happy medium between the theory of laisses faire and the regulation by the 
State of the interplay of economic forces. 
^ONJ^ SIOH ^GMAT^NG^FO^Cp^^^^JB^i 

" WelhllTextend the blessings of education to every child of school age . 



4/ Ibid. 

5/ Ibid. , Tv ., 

r i , .* nT , nwn o prominent American, 1927, n.d.m. Ip^t , 

6/ Speech requested by Nr. Brown, a promin 

U Speech at the Waldorf-Astoria, New York City, February 20, 1937. QP. W#39. 

JJ bpeech bir thday, August 19, 1937. Quezon Messages, 

8/ Speech on the occasion of his Wtn di™ , 
Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, p. 102. 



11-258 



- m - 

in our country. We shall build road* tw , •-,■> * . 

. . . , ° ads that Wl11 facilitate the transportation of 

our products to market. We shkn k„<ta 

" „ ShAU build raore hospitals and leprosaria. We shall 

i-r.prove the sanitary condition* n-F • . , 

I „ , „ v nS ° f 0ur ^mcipalities by providing them with pure 

water. We shall break up the few remn-i «•,•«„ v ■. n , 

W remaining big. landed estates by acquiring them 
from their owners and seUing the „ to the tiUer8 of ^ 8oil _ fc ^ 

„etua to the development of Mindanao. We shall establish new industries. In other ~ 

words, we shall adopt and carrv ™,+ a i™, 

* <* «i carry out a long-range program of economic development 

as well as social service. It is my ambition that the Philippines become a coun- 
try where poverty is unknown, and where justice is the watchword, and democracy 
and freedom the motto. 

Hi = II|LIP|IWSS = BULWARK = OF = MjOCBACY_IH_ASlA - tilQ 

I am a certain that a free Philippines living in close association with 
America - economically and spiritually - will yet become the bulwark of democracy 
in the Far East, a worthy exponent of American principles of government, and fully 
capable to withstand the onslaught of social upheavals threatening the peace and 
tranquility of many parts of the world today. 10 

RESIDENT THAMKFUL FOR GOD'S BLESSIHGS ON PHILIPPI CS 

At no time in ancient or contemporary history has Almighty God showered His 
blessings upon our beloved country as generously as He has done during this year 
(1937) that is about to close. In a spirit of humility and thankfulness to Him, 
I come-' to report to you that the finances of the government are sounder than they hev- 
over been, that our foreign and internal trade has increased, that more school • 
houses and roads have been built and opened to the people, that public health is 
in good condition, and that peace and order prevail in every province, city, rauni- 
cipality, and barrio of the archipelago. 

ISDEK51SD3NT PHILIPPINES WILL STRIVE TO WIN WORLD'S RESPECT 



When we are independent, our fate will be entirely in our hands. We look ■ 
forward to the future with confidence and hope, knowing that it will be our policy 
to so conduct ourselves as to win the respect and goodwill of all the nations of 
the world. 12 

l£gp^0AL: TO MAKE PfllLrPPia^^OTJ^Y^jmOg^O^PlSOP^ 

Let us impart love, hope, and charity. It was in an effort to observe 
these Christian virtues that during the past three years of my administration, I 



2/ Ibid. , p. 103. 

10/ Ibid. . QP, MH#39i THL. 

U/ Message to the First national Assembly, October 18, 1927. Q , uezon Messages, 

Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFF, p. 211. 
12/ Press statement on alleged negotiations with the Japanese government for the 

neutralization of the Philippines, July 19, 1938. Quezon Messages , , , Vol. 4, 

Part I, JBVFF, p. 677. 



11-259 

- m - 

earnestly endeavored to achieve th* 

ve the soclal amelioration and material welfare of 

our needy masses. And as it haq 

nas been m tne past, so will my administration in the ; 

future be directed, with even ^Pitw ^+ • j_. 

even greater determination and courage, towards making 

our country the home of a happy and prosperous people. 13 

We find ourselves in a situation wherein the achievements of human progress 

r.nd culture might be destroyed during the next 10 years. The future of the human 

race is in jeopardy because of the scant respect of governments for their solemn 

obligations. I am ever alert over what is transpiring not only in our country but 

,1go around us, and I will not permit the Philippines to be on the list of countries 

which do not know how to honor their obligations. We are laying the foundations' 

for future Philippine nationhood, and one of the most important of these is the 

ability of our government to keep its obligations. We are not in the same situation 

..s those governments which can afford to disregard their obligations because they 

have sufficient strength to back up their acts. All the protection we can count • 

u : ;on is respect for the laws of those with whom we wish to deal. We must stand 

ruady to show that we know how to respect the rights of others if we wish others 
1 4 

to respect ours. 

,.0.°Jv AND MORE WORK SOLUTION TO HUKAE PROBLEMS - QUEZON 



If in every province of the Philippines the people were to work and livo as 

the people of I locos Norte work and live, I could be certain that the Philippines 

..ould be one of the greatest nations on this side of the world, vfork, and more 

'■rork, is the solution of all human problems, and it offers permanent safety and 

1 5 

security for all people. 

.FACTORS THAT CONTRIBUTE TO PROGRESS OP A NATION 



It is erroneous to suppose that the progress of a country depends upon what 

its President could do. A country that knows not how to impart justice, a country 

that does not protect its constituents nor seek the welfare of all; a nation that 

heeds the inducement of men who seek only their own welfare, and who even bring 

destruction by their acts, will attain not its well-being but unhappiness and 
1 6 

sacrifice. 

PHILIPPINES JILL COME OUT OF W AR GREATER, NOBLER 

I only live to see that day of victory come. My heart is aching to be back 



U/ Christmas message to the people of the Philippines, December 24, 1938. 
Ibid. . p. 742. 

14/ speech at the joint convention of coconut and abaca producers in Manila, 

February 22, 1939. W, ^#42, TNL. 
15/ Speech at the public plaza of Laoag, Ilocos Norte, April 26, 1939. Ifcifc. 
16/ Speech at the convention of the Palihan ng Bayan, Manila Opera House, 

August 20, 1939. Q^ssssJSSSSSBSSj Vo1 « 5 ' Part J0WF ' v ' 178 * 



II-260 

~ 417 - 

with you again. I give you my solemn word that, because of your gallantry, because 

of your loyalty to America, because of your faithfulness to your own government, 

our dead shall not have died in vain. And our country will come out of this trial 

-reater, nobler, and happier than ever before, with her peace, progress, and 

17 

liberty forever secure. 
OUR ROAD J*UHS JJAST^ 



Rapidly, we are approaching a crossroad in history. For us, Filipinos, our 

^■oad runs oast and west. And there in the east where the sun rises, we see alroady 

• t-3 ATiimmerings of dawn. Already the gloom of night is softening and. soon the 

° 18 
new day will break, flooding us all with the bright sun of liberty. 

94. POLICE 

j?IRS'T_STEP_T0tfARD_N^ 

With the passage of Commonwealth Act No. 88, approved on October 26, 1936, 
all duly constituted police forces in all the municipalities and other local poli- 
tical subdivisions, including chartered cities, and all provincial guard organi- 
sations in the provinces have been converted into what is now known as the State 
Police and placed under the immediate charge and direction of the Department of 
the Interior. 

As executive officer of the State Police said law created in the Depart- 
sant of the Interior the post of Commissioner of Public Safety with three Assis- 

tant Commissioners. 

There is necessity of setting aside funds from the national treasury to 
enable the national government to eemplete the nationalisation of the PoUwfo^- 
oes throughout the Philippines as authorised in Commonwealth Act Ho. 88. 

95. POLITICS 

MSIBMtWOg g "W> t sag MPS CSM. <* «B- 

A* I recall tbo»© fateful days of eleven years ago, I find myself again in 
„.*, ^rft chastened by the confidence reposed in me 
the panting of the ways. With a P X td» ^ ^ ^ ^ 

by our people when it chose me to bo the ope y 

- ° f «" • h ™ bl3i ^ e self once more to resist 

year refusal to accept my resignation I h ve ^ J x hnv o 

the pleading of my heart that gees out an sympathy with ( ^ 

UP, m#45, Tltt. ^ r ig42> ^ Mit#45. MO. 

Ifl/ Risal may speech * "j""^^, Octol()r 16 , 1937 . OP, MB#39, ML. 
llaV Message to the First National Assomb y, 
llbV Speech in the Senate, August 1, 1953. 



11-261 

- m - 

TOTE OF OOHFI DEaCB; V ICTORY 0? t.trtoa TiT c, n 

With a majority such as wo now have, acting in unison with the people's 
,ill, with a majority not at cross purposes but one in aims and ideals, with sus- 
picion and distrust replaced by understanding and goodwill, with a majority workin, 
harmoniously and in earnest, devoid of selfish motives and personal ambitions, I 
face the future with renewed, serene confidence. Yesterday, we won the people's 
battle for liberalism against the forces of reaction. Today I envision another 
victory - of greater significance and import to our country - the achievement of 
its independence and the assurance of its welfare. We shall not be deceived by a 
mirage that is presented to us as real. We shall not tarry until we keep faith 
with those who defined their patriotism not with words of eloquence, but with 
the eloquence of action. Despite misrepresentations, despite threats, despite 
falsehoods, we shall carry on until the goal is reached. 2 

In the United States, due to inefficiency and corruption in the govern- 
ment of some of the great cities, there has developed a strong demand for what is 
called city management, and, at times, for the nomination of candidates to city 
offices .by non-partisan leagues. This proves that, oven in America, a conviction 
in growing that in local governments partisan politics is abosolutely unjustified 
and not conducive to the public good. ^ 



•; ; WiON WISHES HP TO BE WORTHY OP ITS GLORIOUS HERITAGE 



I wish, and so expect, that every success that the Nacionalista Party at- 
tains in all the elections to come may be a renewal of the pledge inherited from 
the Coalesced Parties that it will be devoted only to the service of our people, 

for the perpetuation and glory of the Filipino nation, and for the welfare, hap- 

4 

piness and prosperity of its people. 

Why maintain these two independent political organizations (Pros and Antis) 
when there is at present nothing that can excuse, much less justify, their sepa- 
rate existence, when this existence, is a source of danger and ia a handicap to 
speedy action both in the executive and legislative fields of the government? 

* * * 

Now I am of the opinion that the fusion of these two parties should not 
be made dependent upon anything except the conviction and the wishes of those who 



i/ Ibid. 

2J' Speech at the inauguration of the City of Iloilo, August 25, 1935. 

Quezon Messages. Vol.. 3, Part I, JBVF3?, p. 117. 
4/ Speech at the convention of the Coalesced Parties, September 19, 1937. 

SP, HR#39, TNL. 



11-262 

- m- 

would join in one single party. 

* * * 

As an individual, I believe in every commitment contained in that platform, 

firm 

,v.nd as President I am pledged in good faith to carry it out, and it is my/ deter- 
mination to redeem my pledge, God helping me. 

* * * 

The object sought by the Coalition has been wholly accomplished, namely, 

to avoid the disintegration of the National Assembly during the formative period 

5 

of the Commonwealth as a result of extreme and blind partisanship. 
VriI.QIS^SS^R^TOg^ = IF_EBY PLA Y DI S HOH EST JOLITICS _ 

Gentlemen, I do not want politics in tho government. In the case of the 

provincial treasurers they can play politics but not too much. They can play 

politics by doing something for their friends ■which is neither illegal nor unjust 

to others. For if they favor their friends by an unjust or illegal act, I am 

6 

going to dismiss them. They can play politics, but only honest politics. 

I desire particularly to call your attention to the corrupting influence 
of political pressure and coercion, and the degrading taint of monetary conside- 
rations in the election of our public officials. The country must be assured of a 
fair and honest election of its constitutional representatives. 

To build up a citizenry imbued with the ideals of democracy, where each 
constituent is made conscious of his civic duty towards his government, it is of 
vital importance that the lavish expenditures of private funds in election cam- 
paigns be reduced to a minimum. The country has experienced many a time the dis- 
cing spectacle of election contests where, irrespective of personal fitness of 
the contending candidates, victory had to be given to the candidates most able to 
spend lavish sura upon his constituents. 

Such a state of affairs discourages the participation of able citizens not 
favorably circumstanced in wordly possessions, in the conduct of public affaxrs 
through the tenure of elective positions. .No question of poverty should stand bet- 
ween any person and a public office within the gift of the people. 

KllTliovors in, and lovers of, democracy, whether inside or outside 
the government, want to save democracy, they must unite in doing away with the 



^ , . . i 4. rPaau rors, Halacanan, February 22, 1938. 

6/ Speech before provincial 45 . 

..Quozon Messages,, Vol. 4, Part i, v pp. 364- 

!/ Message to tho First National Assembly, *prxl 30, 1938. Ib^ PP 



11-263 

- 4»- 

8 

evils of politics. 

I consider the business of government entirely independoni/^nd different • 
from the business of politics. L government has only one objective, and that is 
to serve the best interest of the people. On the other hand, politics is more 
-interested in the welfare of its organisation than in the good of the people. 

However, political parties have but one justification for their existence 
that they should choose the best within the party as candidates for public office 
in order that they may give the people what the people expect from their govern- 
ment . 

When political parties or the men whom they have helped to be elected to ■ 
office attempt to control the government, those parties become the enemies of the 

Q 

people, and in this case, the people should make every effort to defeat them. 
v,v..iig A POLITICAL PARTY BE COMES WKSSCSSI 0? P EOPLE'S COMglDBHCT 

The government is one thing, and political parties another, Political par- 
ties are constituted for the purpose of organizing men who have the same political 
ideals and of helping them secure positions. Political parties are mere instru- 
ments of the people with which to choose their officials. 

But after an election, the nan elected becomes the chosen official of the 
people, and not of his party, If a political party tries to use the men who belong 
to it and who occupy official positions to foster its aim and promote its interests, 
that party is unworthy of the confidence of the people. ^ 

:R ' : ' 3 ?_?0LIT^^ 

Since you arc elective officials, your first responsibility is to be the 
bead of your province. Your being local leaders of your party is only secondary. 
So do not put politics above every consideration, otherwise you will not get our 
fmipport. With very few exceptions - for there are always exceptions - our people 
usually vote for a governor who is a good man rather than a good politician. A nan 
,-iio believes he could be elected by pleasing a few party loaders is fooling himsolf . 
V.cu may play politics with some people, but you cannot play politic^ with every- 
body. Your best politics is justice and efficiency in the service. 
PA RTIES MUST B E BASED ON FUNDAMENTAL DIVPaRENCjg_pi.PRINCJPLBS = 

The theory that there can be no true democracy without political parties 
iT^n^^Hn the reorganization of the provincial and municipal police 
forces, August 3, 1933. Ibid.., p. 666. 

o/ , 4. onH tho au^r industry, Bacolod City, Occidental 

2/ Speech on government policy and the HUg.-r immo y , 

Nogros, October 19, 1938. Ibid.., p. 230. 
10/ Speech in Dumaguete, fi«ro. Oriental, November 3, 1938. Ibj^, pp. 244-245. 
11/ Speech on the new policy in handling provincial af fairs, l^lao^n 

January 19, 1939. M^n^IM^. Vol. 5, Part I, JBVli , pp. 



IS 



11-264 

~ 431 ~ 

and that the existence of such parties is essential in popular government, 

-i-oundless and finds no justification in sound principles of government. It is 
true that under a democratic system of government different and opposing politi- 
cal parties spring up sooner or later. Thi3 becomes an eventuality because there 
j. ;3 no stronger passion in the human heart than the love of power, and political 
-;.-irties are the means to attain power in a democracy; and, also, because peoplo 
do not always agree as to the best methods of solving the vital problems of state, 
'•it parties founded on the love of power alone are the worst evils of democracy; 
.-.id differences of opinion, in order to justify the organization of political 
- artios, .must arise from fundamental disagreements on political institutions, or 
on social or economic philosophies. In as much as at present there are no essen- 
tial differences of opinion on these matter S among our people, there seems to be 

12 

no reason for the existence of different political parties. 
I'JlTiaS^EXTRSKE PARTISANSHIP CAN WRECK NATION -JjUEZON 

There is an opinion that political parties in free countries are useful 
c.ecks upon the administration of the government, and servo to keep alive the 
spirit of liberty. This, within certain limits, is probably true; and in govern- 
ments of a monarchial cast patriotism may look with indulgence, if not with favor, 
upon the spirit of party. -But in those of a popular character, in governments 
purely elective, it is a spirit not to be encouraged. Prom their natural tendoncy 
it is certain there will always be enough of that spirit for every salutary pur- 
pose; and there being constant danger of excess, the effort ought to be by force 
of public opinion to mitigate and assuage it. A fire not to be quenched, it de- 
mands constant vigilance to prevent its bursting into/most destructive conflagra- 
tion. ^ 

It is party politics that causes delay in the execution of the needed 
reforms; it is party spirit that weakens the government and makes it incapable 
of facing difficult situations. 

96. POLL FRAUDS 

< • 1 strict shall not be represented in the Senate until 
The sixth senatorial district sx.au , , . . 

1 *■ .void of the incredible irregularities recently perpetrated in 
a new election, devoid 0. tn- incr ^ victoriou£} 

the last election, shall have been d - ^ ^ _ ^ 

as a result of the last electoral battlo were 

===================== '■ ^h-tgs on his 61st birthday, August 19, 




14/ Address at the J. P. Alumni 
TNL. 



11-265 



~ 4* - 

certificates in their hnnHa ^-p i 

:oy aoat a in tho V-J z ^ *°» «*" ^ >° - — 

The frauds emitted arc too stuporous aad phon0 „o„al as to dostroy all 
the confidence in the honostv of «, uu^roy t .i± 

° ty ° f the votors "ithin its jurisdiction. Therefore 

it is not proper for the* <^v,- + . x 

_ lnoo in , GnatC t0 PCmit the ""imdag- candidates to have any 

Mince in it, because then it , m „i^ ^ „ • 

.. , W ° Uld be an nct of injustice founded on the ignoble 

damnations of an irresponsible body of criminal voters. 

It is true that frauds are common in democratic countries, but when the. 
assume such grave proportions as evidenced by the ignominious conduct of the voter, 
ox the sixth senatorial district, then they can no longer be excusable on account 
ox human imperfections, and consequently their authors must be punished with all 
tne iorce of the law because they reflect the greatest dishonor, shame and dis- 
credit to the society in which they live, 2 ^ 

97. POVERTY 
^a)ICATJ_^ KRJY AS 3TIGHA OF IMHRIQRITY, JI KUS ajgZQH 

Every Filipino home should be blessed not necessarily with opulence and 
riches not attainable in any clime or in any country, but with tho expectation that 
nil the essentials of life should bo within the roach of all, and that poverty as 
a stigma of inferiority might forever be banished. 1 ^ 

Uhat I should like to say is that everybody, if possible, should live with 
tho comforts which tho middle class enjoys. That is not a criticism of them; it is 
a ylea that these comforts be extended to a larger population of our country, 2 ^ 

98. PRESIDE N C Y 

I am overwhelmed by the results of the election.. I am more than grateful 

to ny people for their generous support and confidence. Tho thought uppermost in 

my .mind now is the grave responsibility that this election entails. With God's 

l(c) 

nelp I hope I will not fail my country. 



.1 (a)/ Speech on election frauds delivered in tho Senate, November 2, 1916. 
Rivera Collection, Vol. I, p. 437. 

2(a)/ I bid. 

JlkV Campaign speech, 1935, n.d.ra. QP, MR#38, THL. 

l.(b}/ Statement at a press conference, October 27, 1937. QP, MR#40, TUL. 
lie]/ Press statement on his election to the presidency of the Philippines, 
September 17, 1935- QP» ITC#3B, TBI. 



11-266 

HtPgI^gg_Q UaZOH'S OATH OF QWJn.v. ■ - 

I, MANUEL L. QUEZON, of Baler, province of Tayabas> hav±ng been elected and 
proclaimed President of the Philippines, hereby solemly swear that Umjjfcijk- 
fu lly and conscientiously ful fill mv dut1tw as Presidfint nf ^ p hilim)ines . pre _ 
s erve and defend its Constitutio n , n^ cute it. laws, do j usjic e to every man and 
co nsecrate myself to the servic e of tha n.t-i.n ; and i here by declare that I recog- 
nize and accept the supreme authority of the United States of America in the Phi- 
lippines and will maintain true faith and allegiance thereto. 

So help me God. [Underscoring hereafter is supplied. - ABS] 

I am not the President of t he rich, and I am not the President of the poor ' 
either. I am the President of thr? Philippines, of the Fi lipino people, rich and 
poor alike. That means that it_is my duty to give /ju stice to all, w hether rich 
or poor, and th at I must perform my duties fearlessly, regar d less of whether in 
so doing I incur the displeasure of t he rich or the poor. ^ 

PRESIDENT MUST BJil IIIDBPEKuENT OF POLITICS - QUEZON 



I am absolutely against the movement to permit a re-election of the Presi- 

4 

dent,., because I want the President entirely independent of politics. 
PRESIDENCY TOO DEMANDING TO MAKE OCCUPANT EAPfT 



When I was being considered for the position of President of the Philippine 
I told some of the people who came to talk to he that I would rather be Resident 
Commissioner in the United States than President of the Philippines... Because 
really, I did not dislike the position of Resident Commissioner. I had some kind 
of suspicion that the position of President, although very attractive with its 
power and glamor - had something not altogether agreeable. 

Now, lot me tell you that it is the worst job that anybody can have. And if 
I were a quitter, I should quit now. For nan of my temperament, it is the worst 
job because I like my friends, and I love to be happy. Disagreeable things cut mo 
through, and I don't remember, from the day that I was first in Kalacanan to this 
moment, not having some disagreeable things to settle as President of the Philip- 
pines. So don't envy me, those of you who are aspiring to succeed me. Take your 

5 

time for it will come to you. 



m 



/ r^v, -jn+r, nffirp bv Chief Justice Ramon Avancena 

2/ Note: President Quezon was sworn into oil ice oy omei 

of the Supreme Court, November 15, 1935. . 
1/ Speech in Ilagan, Isabola, February 28, 1936. m m Messages , Vol. 2, 

Part I, JBVFF, p. 58. 
4/ Statement at prass aoafareaaa, -alaaanaa, May S, 1936. «, ■*». -L. 
57 Speaah bafare tha Rotary Olub.f taila, Jana 4, 1936. Qassaa Hasaagas , 

Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFF, pp. 106-107. 



- *3* - 

gpgOH PLEDGES TO KffiOTTfi ALT, LAIS IS 3TATOTIS 30OSS 



As Chief Executive, it is ny first and most important duty to execute tie 
laws. And I shall enforce every law regardless of the attitude of the public therett 
,.s long as they reaain in the statute hooks. I cannot admit that any private so- 
ciety will be sore interested than the Executive department of this govensneat in 
the enforcement of our laws, including the or.e for the protection of animals. ' 

The .fresia ent aoos not feel That he has ~o take into consideration eitner 
t he dictates of his Tarty, the attacks of the ot'upsiticn. or the passing whins cf 
the yeoole. no is remitted to sit in bis office an d, ohlivious of the noise that 
is going around hin, study every question that is presented for his consideration 
and action with the single view of doli ng »hat. in his opinion, is best for the 
country at large. 1 



The Chief Executive has been elected by the people at large, and knowing 
the condition of the whole country, when he prepares his budget, he is not in- 
fluenced by local considerations ; he is bound to lock after the interests of the 
natron as a whole. 

-J'jSC'I FRO?' WASHINGTON SB3D5 WIBg TO VABSA5 CI? TO iiSDO PLffl TCSTCiS 

Secretary Jorge B. Vargas, Itanila: 

M SHOOED TO HEAR OF TEE FSB II T0!S» (STOP) GST ME PEIHPPH3 
ABM AID ALL 'THE I'SAHS AT' THE CCE-IASD 0? IBB GOViHMffiff CQGFESU1B 
WITH CITT OF MMLA TO GIVE BELIEF IV THh PEOPLE (SKSP) E3SP HE 
IHFCHHBD PA3A (QUEZON). - Cablegram received from President Qoeson 
in Washington, 3.0., April 8, 1937. 
On Anril 9th, Vargas issued the following press statement: 

«Ey authority of His Excellency, the President, notice is hereby given 
that governaent officials and employees of the national government residing in 
Tonio, who, by reason of the fire which devastated a great portion of that dis- 
trict last Wednesday, April 7th, vera not able to cone to their respective offices 
the following day, April 8th, will not be considered as absent." 



<- / t jlj- + v S Paae chairman, board of directors, SPCA, on the coatati- 

^ p^ea" liss^tL S'soeW tor the Prevention of Cruelty to Anxaals, 
lovenber 10, 1936. Ibid. , p. 4ol. 

* , • - w Tnrl- Citv. February 20, 1937- ^utegpn 

7/ 3-oeech at the Waldorf Astoria, Jew lorL M.T*, *e & 

Passages. Vol. 3, Part I, J37FF, p. 4a. t ™,. . ., » 

5/ Speech before the U.S. Foreig, Policy Association, Astor W, USA, *P~1 
1937. QPf M#39, 5?IiL. 
/ .. +ko «naf for Tondo fire-sufferers, Aprxl 9, J»f- 

3/ Press statement on th e relief 523 . - 

Quezon Messages . Vol. 2 r » 



11-268 ■ 

- m - 

"I, MANUEL L. QUEZON, by virtue of the powers conferred upon me by section 
1 of Act No. 4164, entitled "An Act to prevent the excessive increase in the pri- 
ces of certain prime necessities of life on the occasion of a public calamity, 
penalizing the violation thereof, and for other purposes," having found that the 
recent fire which broke out in and devastated the district of Tondo, City of 
Manila, has brought havoc among the residents thereof and had made unduly diffi- 
cult their means of livelihood, do hereby proclaim that a public calamity exists 
in the City of Manila as a result of said fire and do hereby declare in full 
force and effect therein the provisions of Act No. 4164 which prohibits and pane- ■ 
lises the hoarding of the prime necessities of life and the holding of them for 
sale at prices twenty-five per cent or more than the prices which were current in 
in the different localities one month before the disaster. This proclamation 
shall apply to such commodities as rice, mongo, fish, native meat, and building 
or construction materials." ^ 

The duty to execute- all laws is vested in the President of the Philippines 
•just as it was vested in the American governors-general under legislation enacted 
by- the former American Commission. 

The Chief Executive of the Philippines always has had and has exercised 
control and supervision over all the provincial and municipal officials. 

In view of repeated cases reported in the press in which persons who have 
»,d conferences with the President had attributed statements and opinions as 
having come from him, the attention of those calling on the Chief Executive is 
directed to a rule which is recognized and in force everywhere - except up to 
tliis time in the Philippines - namely: 

That the head of the Government may not be quoted except by specific autho- 
risation. Only the President or his authorised spokesman may 

statements or —cations as coming from the head of the govern, , x 
ce ? t in those cases, any statement or opinion attributed to him should be taken 
as unauthorized and groundless _ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

Any person or persons violating tms 

, , 12 
to the President. 

A-oril 14. 1937. Ibid,. , p. 78o. 

-pnl 14, August (jud .), 1937. 

Vj Speech at the inauguration of tne uixy 

OP, MR#39, MLi Philippines in the press, 

12/ Press statement on quoting ^ ^V^. , f Part I, JBVTT, p. 330. 

September 17, 1937- ^mL^3S£^ 



11-269 

- 431 - 

Igjjlilil = SI£|^i = |i^ggNDgI2g_^^_g AgTC DICTAT ION ..... t . ....... ■ ' 

I shall belong, as an individual, to this party that yon are about to or- 
ganize. I believe in the platform which this party is going to adopt and upon 
which I have appeared before as candidate of the Coalition. As an individual I 
believe in every commitment contained in that platform and as President I am 
pledged in good faith to carry it out, and it is my firm determination to redeem 
my pledge, God helping me. 

A3 Pres i dent of the Philippines, I declare my independence from dictation _ 
b y this political organization that you are about to create and by any other or- 
ganization, and I publicly avow my loyalty to my office and to my country abov^' 
,-..y loyalty to this party, and I further publicly avow my interest in the public 
service over and above the political fortune of the party in general or the 
. m embers composing it in part i cular . ^ ^ 

In this new political organization (Partido Nacionalista) I desire to take 
.no active part. 'The President of the Philippines, in my opinion, sh ould not be 
at t he head of any partisan organization. By virtue of his election to the high 
office wherein the people have placed him, he is naturally the leader of the 
.-: rty which nominated him, as, indeed, he is the chosen leader of the nation for 
tho tern of his office. But there should be a very clear difference between tho 
work and responsibilities devolving upon the President of a political party, evon 
if.it be the majority party, and the President of the Philippines or the head of 
government . 

I am not afraid of any governor. That is why I am sorry that the provision 
(in the Election Law - ABS) prevented Wenceslao ft. Vinzons from becoming a can- 
didate. The fact remains that I could not veto the provision increasing the ago # 
of provincial officials to 30 years. As to your complaint that the Chief Executive 
will interfere with the work of a governor of the opposition party, I can say 
that I shall not be prejudiced against him. As a natter of fact, I do not care 
to what, party he belongs; provided he performs his duties well, I shall not in- 

tervene. , , 

I don't oare who tho governor of tho province is. I suspended the gover- 
nor of ilhay, who is oh another in tor, and another in Zanhaios .ft* 
I don't oaro to which part, the pernor holon g s. provided he does duties 

If ho does not do what ho shouid do, I will punish hi* irrespective of his 
PO^ioai ooior. I - ,oin g to excise tho executive power of tho government 
================= m*,esccd Parties, Rizal Memorial Stadium, 

* x ^r^r^i *. «*». 

14/ Ibj-d. 



11-270 



- Aft - 



mider the law, in accordance with the powers I have; and nobody can be in my way 

in the exercise of my function or in the performance of my duty. I know the limit 

1 5 

of my authority and the extent of my duties. 
KmJgPI^CTIEP EXE CUTIVE JI0^P0^IffUL_TH/JI U .S. PRE SID ENT 

In our Constitution, more extensive powers are vested in our Chief Execu- 
tive than arc granted by the American Constitution to the President of the United 
States. This is because the responsibility placed upon the Philippine Chief Exe- 
cutive to give life and effectiveness to the political philosophy underlying the 
Constitution, transcends the responsibility given to the President of the United 
States under the Constitution of that government. 

Upon the organization of the Government of the Commonwealth, the Constitu- 
tion, instead of providing for the continuance in office of the justices of the 
Supreme Court, judges of .the courts of first instance, and justices of the peace, 
gave the President of the Philippines the power and responsibility of appointing 

new justices and judges within a given period of time and virtually entrusted . 

1 6 

him with the duty of reorganizing the entire judiciary. 
m mSTJBA TRUE IN EVERYTHING WEJX) - ^SGH_ 

It is a principle of public and private morality that any people, nation . 
or individual, must under any and all circumstances follow the principle involved 
in an agreement, when one receives something with a certain understanding one 
must comply with one's part in the agreement or understanding. The most rudimen- 
tary principles of honesty, public and private, demand that we be true in every- 
1 7 

thing we do. 

Keeping faith with the spirit of the Constitution, as I understand it, I 
have acted as the leader of the nation rather than as the spokesman of a political 
party. I have eschewed narrow partisanship in the councils of government. I have 
scrupulously maintained religious freedom and the separation of church and state. 
I have safeguarded free thought, free expression, and the unabridgeable right of 
the people to work, and to possess and enjoy the fruits of their toil. Every pos- 
sible precaution has been taken to insure speedy and impartial justice, maintai- 
ning, in fact, the equality of all -non before the law. I have not tolerated cor- 
ruption, inefficiency, or injustice in public office and I pledge myself to per- 
severe in my efforts to sweep every nook and cranny of the government / clean 

15/ Conference with a delegation of the. Young Philippines, Halacanan, 
September 29, 1937. Ibid ., p. 132. 

,16/ Speech on principles of law and justice, University of Sto. Tomas, 
October 2, 1937. Ibid. .' pp. 142-143. 

V]J Speech before coconut planters and municipal mayors at Malacanan, 
February 19, 1938. £P, MR#41 , TNL. 



11-271 

cf every deleterious influence that might impair the vitality of the body poli- 
tic. I have kept the public finance in a sound condition and have succeeded ma- 
terially in introducing approved business practices in the management of the • 
people ' s money, 

I don't believe that the tenure of office will make any difference, as far 
" a th ° eovermont or the interest of our people is concerned. It is quite pos- 
sible that the President elected for six years without re-election may be a good 
president. J 

.J^gjJTSJjQR jD POWER YOU KAVii, MO RE POKER YQ TT fly.MTB 

Human nature is such that the more power you have, the more power you • .. 

create. 

PHggmgH^OW RESPONSIBLE TO GOD, CO USTRY, AM) HIS CO NSCIENCE 



I wish to remind you now that when I accepted this position which the 
People bestowed upon me, I swore that I would have the laws and the decisions of 
the courts obeyed and respected, and I would defend the rights of all. I am res- 

and to my conscience for the performance of what 
l_s uore to do. So I want you to know that I will order the arrest of anyone who 
will violate the law, disregard court decisions, ignore the rights of others, or 
get what does not lawfully belong to him, so that the court can mete out the 
appropriate punishment. 1 

P^ID jjKT_ALOSE y HOWEVER POWERFUL^ CAN'T DO EVSRYTHQG 

It is true that I an the President of our country, however, I am but an 
individual. While the powers vested in me by our Constitution and our laws are 
extensive, yet I cannot accomplish anything if I am the only one to work hard or 
exert efforts in promoting the welfare of our country. 22 

I want to say to you now that anything that the national government can 
do for you will be done, as long as it is within my power to do so. This is not • 
the promise of a politician. This is the promise of a man who holds a public of- 
fice today, but who will soon be out of it. It is the promise of a man who 

IS/ Address before the faculties and student bodies of public- and private schools, 
colleges and universities, August 19, 1938. Ibid. 

12/ Untitled speech, 1938, n.d.m. Ibid. 

■?£/ Ibid. 

il/ Speech at barrio Cruz-na-Daan, San Rafael, Bulacan, January 31 , 1939. 
Quezon Message, Vnl . 5, p ar t I, JBVFF, p. 12. 

22/ Speech before a gathering of laborers and tenants, San Fernando, Paapanga, 
February 14, 1939. QP, I-LR#42, TNL. 



11-272 

"*» " 

realizes that you deserve what ycu are asking for* and who feels the obligation 

of giving what you have asked because you deserve it. 

, ;LQ MORE INTERESTED III COUNT RY'S FUTUR E THAN INJH SJWN ACH lEVEH&NTS 

I an not interested in what I, myself, jay do now. I an not Interested in 
what the future might write about cie for what I had accomplished during ny tern 
of office. I an nore interested in the future of our country, and I will not 

sacrifice that future or subject it to any risk for whatever temporary victory - 

24 

J. &ay gin during my administration. 

xSSSIDENT CAN'T CATCH CROOKS UNLESS PEOPLE COOPERATE 



The public official in a democracy is the servant of the >people. To be a 
.servant of the people means that he occupies a position in the government in or- 
der that the interest of the people may be served. The first duty is to be honest. 
Public officials who receive bribes are not going to be tolerated under my admi- 
nistration. But I cannot catch these crooked officials unless the people the^- 
selves cooperate with me in finding out who they are. 

J~jMCITNCE_Ii? JUSTICES, DCjl ^T_C07ER UP C- JILTY_PA^-£ I^S , URGES QU EZON 

It is a mistake to believe that the government, has the power and authorit; 
to render service to the people unless the people themselves understand their ob- 
ligations as citizens and are willing to cooperate with the government in carryin. 
out its policies. Even in the administration of justice, it will be iapossible 
for the government to administer justice if the people will not denounce injusti- 
ces when injustices exist, or when the people themselves will cover up the men 

26 

who are guilty of committing injustices. 

SUl ffiOH 'S TWI II GOA LS: 30C_IAL_ JUSTICE J^_G^0D_G^V^Uijg2T 

In ths first place, I wanted the Filipino people to have a government that 

above everything else, would dispense justice to the poor and the. rich alike, to 

the influential as well as to the humble. A government that would show no favors, 

a government that would give to every man and woman his or her due. I think we 

have boon able to show this. The second objective that I had in mind was to prove 

to the world that under a Filipino government we would be able to maintain peace 

and order; that foreigners would, under our administration, be treated as well 

.27 

if not better than they have been treated under American administration. 
PRESIDENT C AN SERVE PEOPLE J^^^^^gR^JM^CLOTC^S 

liy beloved countrymen, you know that day and night I can only think of 



23_/ Speech at the public plaza of Laoag, Ilocos Norte, April 26, 1939. Ibid, 
2&J Ibid. Quezon Messages. Vol. 5, Part I, JBVFF, p. 130. 

25/ Speech at the cornerstone laying of Barrio Obrero, Tondo, June 28, 1939« 
OP, MR#42, TFL. 

26/ Speech at the public plasa of Tagbilaran, Bohol, July 1 , 1939. Mi* 
22/ Ibid. 



11-273 



_ 440 



you, of the day of your redenftion and my return to our beautiful islands. I 
wuld not be here (in the United States - ABS), I would not have left you for a 
moment, I would have been sharing with you your sufferings and your hardships, 
if I did not feel that I could only bo of service to you by being free from the 
clutches of the enemy. ° 

99. PRESIDE N HAL REELECTION 
m-iLgCTI0N_F0R ME; MY DAYS ARE NUMBERED, SAYS QUEZON 

No man can be President of any country for twelve years and do his duty 
■roll without succumbing physically to the weight of the burden. I have spent ny 
.hole life in the public service and the few remaining years that it may please 
*>d to give no, after the 31st of December 1941, when my term expires, I have 
tno right to enjoy in peace. 

But this is not the main consideration which might be called a selfish mo- 
•c:,ve. I,y definite refusal to consider another tern as President is due to the 
-act that UJUUBSLXu*^^ j 

.'^ch Jho. ^^^^ 

I have reached a point where, in the ordinary course of life, my days are " 
'-bored, and ItJBffllO^SLl^^ 

a*tfM*jtaL^^ So th0S ;~ friGnda 

o, mxne who want to see „ e succeed in my endeavor to give the common man a square 
deal should stop any movement looking toward the amendment of the Constitution 
m order to secure my re-election. 1 

VTOSZON SuYS ITOJjAM IS INDISPEiJSABLPi I^ptttt.tpvt^ 

^Js^^^mMse^a^ and if it were true that outside of Manuel L. 
taon there is no other man in our country who can be the Chief Executive of the 
Philippines, I would immediately start working for the enactment of a law by the 
Congress of the United States that will require the appointment of an American 
governor-general for the Philippines. 2 

nL&IDiuM R iiiSPuifelJjUi; yuit au-K^LK CTIOi-I CLAUSE II? COifo'JITOIQN 

'rhe_£lause_in the CgnstiJuMon,^ term for the Presidency 

Ql-the- ghilippines has been inserte d through mv own efforts, and this I did when 
amongst the members of the Constitutional Convention there was already the gene- 
ral^expecta tion tha t I would be the first President of the Commonwealth... I shall 
23/ ^ssage^to the^'ilipino people from Quezon in the United States, February 20, 

i/ Press statement on the movement for his reelection, October 19, 1937. 
■Quezon Messages, Vol. 3, Part I, JBVPP, p. 338. 

2/ Ibid. 



11-274 



- 441 _ 



certainly not stultify myself by giving my consent to any attempt to amend the 

Constitution to permit ny reelection. If we wor e to amend the Constitution in 
this respect, the o utside world would immedia te^ sav that we are following in 
tJa e ,, Philippines the same course that for years hag Wn followed hv aQm e of t>m 
Ija&Bu&agELpan republics and which hr^n .mainly re sponsible for nanv of the 
r evolutions in those ^linttiw, ^ 



There is no need for keeping me at the head of this government for the 
program of social justice to be realized. After having started the movement for 
the amelioration of the lot of the masses, as I have dor-, it will go on indefi- 
nitely on its own momentum. Let^^e^lJ^c If into believing that any majs 
or group of men ^ ^j^ss^^o^^^^^ oppose the pnward ^ ^ 

yjgCQg VOLUITOARILY RlfflOU NCIHS PQHBR in COUNTRY'S HSms gP 

Everybody likes power. It is the greatest urge of human nature - power. I 
I3J3^tfljaBBeifl g power. But, J^ause_my main consideration t a the mfa,™* m» ^ 
country, I am sto pp ing out of_offi ce when the ti.o for tlQ to do ,n . am 

when I an no longer in office, I will not want to be a boos; I do not want to bo 
; power behind the throne. 

I do not believe that anything could be more unworthy of us and greatly 
disastrous to our people than having somebody outside of the government attempting 
to direct the affairs of the country. Certainly, I would not be that ono. If I 
should fall under the temptation of wanting to continue in power, I would fight 
the whole country to retain it. Since you are offering me re-election, I could .juot 
aa well accept it and exercise the powers as Chief Magistrate of the nation in 
accordance with the Constitution and assume all the responsibility of that great 
office. 5 

A single thought has given me the greatest preoccupation in connection with 
the proposal to amend the Constitution so as to permit my re-election. It ia the 
d angerous j^c edejitJ;haX^ amending a consti tutional or 

.mLjir^vigi^n J^j^ctijig^jyer3pn in of fice, who, i s in a P osition to exer t Bnnq 
influence in securing tim .^-..■^n, : , en t and a llowing him to benefit by i, t. In the 
juture, some ambitious and unscrupulous politician might invoke such a preceden t 
JUL. order to perpetuate himself i n power. This would endanger the liberties of our 
■2/ .Ibid. 

V Ibid. , p. 339. 

5/ Speech at the farewell banquet for Majority Floor Leader ^uiritin Paredes, 
May 22, 1939. Quezon Messages. Vol. 5, Part I, J3VFF, p. 132. 



11-275 



. 442 _ 



peoplo, and I am horrified at the thought that I might in any way be the cause of 

tho destruction of those liberties for which I had fought and to which I have 
consecrated my life. ^ 

^l2L121JilIi^^i-J^^S_OTHER LEADERS TO TAKE OVER 



IlJjtJ?f_jdLtal -ipportanj^that .ar.iend^cnts to th o Constitution be c onsider ed 
upon., the high pjU a^jf^j^o^^ upon considerations of perso nal oha- 

Kl^ter*. ^nd in order that your action on the .proposed constitutional amendment re- 
;;:.u-ding the term of office cf tho President may not be influonced by the movement 
.,\>r ny. re-election, I desire to make my position clear on this natter. 

From the standpoint of demo cracy and liberty i n our country, the wh olesome 
M£e<?t of my retirement at_bhe_end of my Present term will far outweigh whatever 
bejggfJLts that might _bc_J^iv e_d . f rom my continuan ce in office beyond this term. 
fortunately, the affairs of our nation arc such as to justify confidence in the 
future stability of our government... What remains to bo done can well be per- 
formed under the leadership of other men who may bo elected to succeed me. 7 

j^j-g-^21^-2g-2 2H^ JZ^^TUE I&H5 HIS LOVE FOR POSTER 

One of the underlying causes why I decided not to run for re-election is 
that I do not wish to make you feel that power or position will affect our morals 
in our stand simply because we have the idea that our will is subjected to changes 
Tho fact is our hearts , throb with the love of countr y a bove the love for nower. 
for equality, for freedom, and for justice. 

100. PUBLIC DECORUM 

Q UEZON L A UDS S HAGE FOR SETTING HIGHEST EZAIIPLE OF PUBLIC JE.C0RUI1 



It seemed to ne then, as it seems to me now, that a person who declines a 
Jjost. wit h high honors and substa ntial compensation, solely because h e considers 
jJL_ i nc ompat ible wijth Jiis,_sijicer_o con victions, offe rs th e highest cz acrole of jaufe.- 
lie— decorum, integrity and indepe ndence, qualities which, necessary in the di,s - 

A 

charge of any government post, are more so in .judicial functions. 
I^mTrog_^G^yERITIljIIT REpPISCENT CF REPTILE REARED BY BIRD 

It is poor taste, to say the least, for a man (referring to Mr. Jose Hi- 
lario, deputy collector of internal revenue - ABS) who has been long in the en- 
ploy of the government, who has relied long on his government income for the 

6/ liessage to the Second National Assembly, August 16, 1939. Ibid. , p. 337. 
1/ Ibid. 

§/ Speech at the convention of the Palihan ng Sayan, Manila Grand Opera House, 
August 20, 1939. Ibid. . p. 178. 

X/ Letter to Judge Francisco Bnage on the latter' s declining an appointment to 
the Court of Appeals, February 5, 1936. Quezon Messages. Vol. 2, Part I. 
JBVFF, pp. 421-422. ™ ~ ~~~ " 



11-276 

- 443 - 

stipport of his family, and who, perhaps, owos that high public aateeia with which 

lie is regarded to the government itself, to strike at that government at tho mo- 
ment of leaving its service. We hate to call it ingratitude, but it snacks of the 

2 

story of a bird which reared a reptile in its neat. 

In view of the frequency in which controversies touching upon particular 
• -liases of governmental activity have been carried on through the public press by- 
contending officials of tho government, or between an office of the government on 
tho. one hand and a private individual on the other; and since this practice is 
unseemly, distasteful, and nay even, at times, bo definitely hamful to the ser- 
vice; and because, further, the publicising by two governuental officials of con- 
flicting opinions, or of real or fancied mutual griovancies cannot fail to give 
the impression that the government is devoid of order and organization, and that 
its Members are lacking in that sense of restraint and decorum so essential to 

the effective discharge of public duty; 

* ■* * 

... I do hereby direct the following rules to be followed: 

1 ) Controversies between officials or employees of the' government shall 
be submitted to the respective authorities empowered by law to take cognizanoo 
thereof, and tho decisions of such authorities shall be faithfully observed by tho 
contending parties; 

2) If and when news items or statements contrary to facts are published 
in the press, or when criticisms are nade, founded on false or incorrect infor- 
mation, the head of the department or his duly authorized representative may 
issue a statement giving the facts as they actually are and as supported by tho 
official files, but in no case, except with the express authority from the Office 
of the President of the Philippines, shall such statement contain argumentative 
■latter or controversial discussion. 

1 01 . PUBLIC SERVICE 
■ SUIT iJ'iD CHARACTER SOLE Q1J^piCm^^R = PUDLK_^IC| 

*b?±L™^JL£h?J2£^L . n .ll?il?. - 1 "I ha th 0 qualificatio n for, .of f ice or VIQUQ-. 
tio n. For the highe st . resr j on,3ible_j^st_3,_I .shall call, pn the ^st^^Sflble, faoneg.fr.t. 
a rid patriotic citi zens, regardless of poli tical affiliat ion or religious. ..belief ff*.- 

2/ Press statement on lir. Kilario's resignation and engagement of government 
officials in private activities, Karen 6, 1937. Que?, on ?.c»oageo« Vol. 3, 
Part I, .JBVFF, p. 310. 

2/ Administrative Order -?o. 46, "Prescribing Rules regarding the practice of 

officials and employees ef the government to discuss or clarify all differen- 
ces of opinion on public aattera in the press," September 15 , 1937* 
liessages. Vol. 3, Part II, JEWS', p. 1174. 

l/ Speech on accepting his no~i nation as President of the Philippines, July 20, 
1335. Quezon I-Iessages. Vol. 1, Sp. lev. M., JBVFF, p. 236, 



11-277 

- 444 - 



GIVIL_SgRVICE TO EMBRACE ALL BIUJTgIES_OF GOVLRNKBNT 

The present Civil Service Law as (unbodied in the Revised Administrative 
Code of 1917 insofar as it has been enforced to date, has built up an organiza- 
tion of civil servants worthy of the highest respect and consideration. It nust 
have been the example of this strong body of public servants that has inspired 
the Constitutional Convention to make a careful provision in our Constitution 
that the civil service nay embrace all branches and subdivisions of the govern- 



ment . ^ 



The true objective of a proper promotion system is not merely the aggran- 
disement of a few gifted individuals; it is the raising to a high level of the 
average efficiency of a whole corps. The problem is essentially collective and 
administrative rather than individualistic and personal. 
OFFICIALS HA VE NO RIGET_TO_BimiCK THEMSELVES IH OFFICE, 

The law prescribes the salary that every official of the government receive 
and whether that salary is big or small, the official wh 0 accepts a position has 
no right to expect more than the salary provided by law, and no right to take ad- 
vantage of his office either to get seme present, a "gratification," as we call 
it here, or some indirect advantage through which to enrich himself. 

and does not know hj^tjuipj^^ 

»-p+. n»t of the government. The sj^ er^tj^ ' 
u , .5 

,-.^0, hff rnndnrin g a groat and -patriotic se rvice. 

102. 0 U E ki 0 N AND CRITICS 

QUEZON ATTACK ED, LTHELD: .HEROES DON'T CRY 

I have been arraigned at your bar as a faithless public servant and you 
have belied my assailants. I have offered no reply to their charges. k fc. r ecord„cj 

staiidj^„seaj^^ 
.Ubeforj^^^ 

do not weep over their fate. They. dp_nel^rv_f^rJio3jB^_. 

2/ Message to the First National Assembly, December 16, 1935. & 3 .«™n 

Vol. I, Sp. Rev. Ed., JBVFF, p. 53. 
3/ Press statement on the administration of the Philippine Army Officer Corps, 

January 11, 1936. Ibid..., Vol. 2, Part I, JBVFI , p. 412. 
4/ Speech in Tuguegarao, Cagayan, February 20, 1936. Ibid., PP. 44-45. 
5/ Speech in Ilagan, Isabela, February 23, 1936. Ifciflj., P- 58. 
X/ Speech in the Senate, August 1, 1933- MB#54, 



11-278 

- 445 - 

The adaini stra t i fflLjElLJMfl.frl.ee cannot be expected to rise higher than the 
.goral and i nt ellec tual standards of tho non who dispense it. To bulwark tho for- 
tification of an orderly and just government, it shall be my task to appoint to 
the bench only ngn ojf. pro ven honesty, o.h^^.n V . l^rning, an d ability, so that 
every one nay feel when he appears before the courts of justice that ho will be 
protected in his rights, and that no. nan in this country from the Chief Executive 
to. the last citizen is above the law. 2 

As a natter of fact, the regular amy of the Philippines will contain only 
ten' thousand men - ten thousand! T *o is the dictator who can use ten thousand nen 
to whip sixteen, seventeen, eighteen million people, which is the population of 
the Philippines today, the majority of whom know how to use a rifle? 5 

B ut .. if they,,, ( Quo z jj^s_ crit ics - AB S ) refuse to c ooperate and instead ooj^ 
&J&!Li2lj&J&^ There is de nocracy here. In nations 

ff te e.. au to , c , racy grid despot ? s n rei«n. those who attack t he gove rnment are killed, . 

Here, where there is no person so conti nuousl y and gr avely attacked as I, 
no critic isj ^jgd.^jsjcm^^ is fro ad on and democracy h ere. ' 

MIL? CRITICS SAY AGAIHST qUBZOH IS ^L^BUT J0J)ga IS AR RESTED 

What the ^c^JJ^as._3jaM -about :.ie is awful, bu t nobody went to .jail f or 
that. I an not perf ^tj_Xl^'LJJiat_._JLt is .true that there are laws providing . 
£&3lLM£-£222™^^ co nrdtting a seditious act. 

but, t here is nothing that would pemit the co nviction of any nan, who__is_ gnly exo r- 
c ising his prerogatives as a citizen . ^ 

L^j-il2^_ gg^D__BY^PP03ITICIJ'S TKOUBLlO-IIAlGiRS 

If there is anybody among you whose ability, character, and integrity jus- 
tify his appointnent to an office, I have no objection to appointing him. But I 
at: not going to appoint a nan simply because ho is of the opposition party. There 
are people who believe that the way to attract attention is to attack tho go- 
vernment. I don't get scared - I an not scared. I have no objection to bringing 

2/ Inaugural Address, Hovenber 15, 1935. Quezon Message s. Vol. I, Sp. Rev. 13d., 
JBVFF, pp. 14-15. 

2/ Speech at tho Waldorf Astoria Hotel, Hew York City, February 20, 1937. 
Ibid. . Vol. 3, Part I; JBVFF , p. 50. 

4/ Speech on the results of his trip to the United States, Halacallan, 
August 16, 1937. Ibid. . p. 100. 

5/ Conference with a delegation of the Young Philippines, September 29, 1937. 
-'■bid. . p. 136. 



11-279 

- 446 - 

s ^^^£-Mjm^Sj^n^es L noise let hi-, 6 
'" c """ e ho criticises the .govornnent. 7 

(qU ° ZOn ' S ° ritlCS -- **> ^ the yacht fes^ Fomer govornoro . 

t 7 1 7"' ^ th8lr 7a ° htS - The ' 7 S60rl *° f ° rg0t *• of General 
ood, „ho ,,as the good friend of »y pr03 ent critics. 

Bo they want the President of the Philippines to ride en a casco? I . 
"1 IT f ° r « 1 - also reaodelli^alacanaa, 

and ! T T m T- *** 1 ^ "» • I « »- to Urtai * a 
nut and 1 can live in one. J 

1 - doing ny nest te g ive the SI .U :lm 0 8Qusre d=al , t0 havo ^ "^.f " 
ri^iits respected. Do -'v critics tr-n+ -, , * 

. ^ J critlc& u - nt to cnangc this policy? Do they want to 

0i,0V '" that the * c °P la ™t behind ae in ay actions? 10 

-===J1:1^^!! WG Sp0ak (sic) 0f saner thin ^ s - In the President of the ' 
-V iMls., f -iP, MH#40, TNL. 

8/ Speech at a press conference, KalacaHan, October 6, 1937 I bid . 

10/ ibid. 

•U/ Ibid.., p . 1592, 



jlI-280 

- 44? - 

Philippines is v@ sted the hoaor of tho country. I* X «o out with a flag ©a ay 

eutaaobile and a notoreyele ©seort prooodln« no, they (quesea'e teitiee - All) 
cry, "A King! w 

-fell, shall I rido in a oarrotala? lea mat yaaaatea* that when I Mae e^t. 
of. the country . 

Respect ^aajj io E ^ jla^t.<ff^^ 

■o5.no people-. 

rjMgQK SAYS HE WJLCOMB SJhjttaTOmCT'TVrc GRITXCiatI 
^orj^^^^ 

.jiolicios, carry the f;qCTi oJ^L<4jUMU^y^tiMi, 

What 1/ interested in, and very uueh ho indood, is to aveid making th§ 
schools political battlaf icldo , or plaeoa for the oxhibltien ef era§§ iffl§?«§§ 
(.■•n the part of the orator, or tho diaoouin&tion of subversive ideas meng fe§y§ 
and girls who, bocauso of their imaturity, nro not prepared t© di§at?irais&t§ in- 
telligently as between what is right and what in wrong, and what is Wi§§ and 
what is unwise. ^ 

PEOPLE ARB FRBiS 'JO CRITICIZE_AififBODY ItiJ}OTMmffl!,_ l£f$rWf$ ^ffiOM 

You ca , n cr ^t ic j^o ^ r^ b o^y.^,,.^, M^M^Mjffiii^ l MM£ f ffl 
iL-bitj what is irn.ortar.t to ae in your eesraltaneu with the ^ If, rent wanf ta 
neet. go on. and hold your neet in ^ , 

You can even say that you will spill bloed tat you nui^lfnginttate that 
you will cut the neck of a nan; you can also shout that yeu .-Will .kill, fettt kill 
only in words and not in deedo. ' 

You can lambast any official in the g©v^mmmi ©r @vm my ad/3ifii§i?ati@8J 
this would not matter to si®, What I particularly desire is that y©t4- will 
■enjoy iperaanent pease and that you will giirg the g&y§¥m&mi @uffi@i€fit H®§ i§ 
he able to intervene in jour foefealf aM t© study th©r©ugfeiy yw? sit«ati@fl» 
IggtlilBaiig qpEZOl JUi!3a3&3 'dJZ SSIfl.CS Off fAX 



1 Ma being '©laced for tfa® ®%i.&i&m@ ©f fcfce ©x©iis© ts% ©fi 0@<§©$ttt ©il> fettt 
critic© refuse to admit that the excise i&x @©ll®®tiem me $$img ¥§tum§& i§ 



12/ ItoM. 

JL2/ letter to 3r, Satariel 1, J£«*iuaS«<s , ■mM@3r§esjr@t*s t :y ©f j»feli© i--8S$m&$i&&f 
c©B3]cermij^g: Atty» Tamw^'s ©ai3©@il^ti®jj ©f &sg§$S8eesit; s<§ ®fiffl»Sffl®Sffl#©# 
speaker .??.* ^xell&aa® EijSs ^1}©©I, A^sll £?, Wsss^ms, 4/ 



11-281 

- 448 - 

the Philippines for us to spend in the development of our country. 1 ^ 
jgg_gOgJgERSE TO CRITICISM. A^^NCE^T^FACE^LU CRITICS 

. I am not averse to criticism. I am here, I have come tonight, to hear cri- 
ticism. I enjoy hearing them, as a matter of fact. And I will reveal to you that 
I had originally refused to accept the invitation of the Civil Liberties Union to 
be their guest of honor, because in the different banquets which I had attended 
I heard only speeches praising me, and I have grown tired of hearing them. (Laugh- 
ter). That is why I am here. 16 

gilgg-^^ ^^^^gAP^J^jg^gY^^PPY IN U .F. DISAGREES WITH HIM! 

I was very pleased to see the reaction of the university constituency to 
my speech (stating that democracy can exist without political parties - ABS), and 
I mean what I am saying. 

It shows at least two things: first, that everybody in the University of 
the Philippines was interested in what I said - which is something; second, that 
everybody in the university felt that he is free to disagree with the President 

i 

of the Philippines. 

If I can do nothing better than to show the world that thi3 "totalitarian 
ruler" (Quezon - ABS) is known enough in the government university, known well 
e nough in fact for everybody to feel that he can disagree with him and neither 
lose his .job nor go to .jail, that is enough for me. 

QUEZON FLAYS CLU FOR HA^ERING^DEFENSB PREPARA TI ONS 

If our people die here, unprotected, by the bombs, those men (referring to 

the members of the Civil Liberties Union, who had opposed the grant of emergency 

powers to Quezon - ABS) who have stopped me from doing what I should have done 

18 

ought to be hanged - every one of them on the lamp post. 

103. QUEZON AND CUEVO-BARREDO CASE 
x'ILQ SAYS SUPREME COURT IS FREE TO DECIDE ON BARREDO^CASE^ 

Although I have already given out a statement that when I expressed pub- 
licly my opinion on the Cuevo-Barredo case I had not been informed that it was 
pending before the Supreme Court for adjudication, my writing you (Chief Justice 
Ramon Avancena - ABS), directly on the subject will perhaps serve a good purpose. 

* * * 

15/ Speech at the inauguration of the Quezon National Park, Atimonan, Tayabas, 
July 23, 1939. Quezon Messages. Vol. 5, Part I, JBVFF, p. 163. 

16/ Speech at the CLU-sponsored inter-university oratorical contest, Ateneo 
auditorium, December 9, 1939. Rivera Collection, supra, p. 2191 . 

12/ Speech at the open forum of the U.P. Alumni Association, August 1, 1940, 
Ibid ., p, 2241 . 

18/ Speech at the University of the Philippines on National Heroes Day, 
November 28, 1941 . Ibid. . Vol. V, pp. 2337-2340. 



11-282 

- 44* - 

I take it, knowing you and every member of the Court - and ao I feel 
tain thereof - that cither -the Court collectively or its membera individually, in 
arriving at a conclusion on the Cuevo-Barrodo case, will in no way be influenced 
by either what I have said or by what the people may think of their deeisien. I 
am confident, too, that you and your associates will, on your part, feel aa cer- 
tain that I would expect you to ignore entirely what 1 have said on the subtest, ! 
^mAL^_MIS QUOTES_PRESIDEIlT ON CUEVO-BATORno CASE 

Ihe PfrUippine 3 Hera-M, in^its issue of September 22nd (1937), attributes 
to the President a statement as/made"! n b his conference with the press in oonn@eti©i.: 
with the case recently decided by the courts denying' the petitioner the right to 
be indemnified for the death of a laborer who was drowned in the Pasig river in 
obedience to the order of an employer of the Barredo & Co., that "if we have more 
decisions of that nature, I shall ask the National Assembly to suppress the judi- 
ciary in the Philippines," and to emphasize the news, the article wheroin it ap- 
pears carries this headline: "Decision on Laborer's Case Brings Threat of Court 
Abolition." 

On its face, the statement attributed to the President is absurd, for the 
least informed individual knows that the National Assembly has no power to aboliih 
the judiciary in the Philippines as this branch of the government is not a orea- 
ture of an act of the Legislature but of the Constitution itself. The absurdity 
of the statement is so apparent that it should not be necessary to deny it. Thia 
denial is, however, made so as to serve as public notice that newspapers attribu- 
ting to the President statements that he has not made or could not have mad© by 
the very nature of the statements themselves, will not bo permitted to send repre- 
sentatives to the weekly conference of the President. 

The Vanguardia of the same date carries a substantially correct version of 
2 

the conference. 

To my critics, to those who would assert that the Chief Executive may not 
publicly express his condemnation of a court's decision that he considers unjust 
because that is an encroachment upon the independence of the judiciary, my aneWO* 
is that jf my said critics are right in their theory - which 1 know thav are not - 
j.f „they were right. I sav. then. I would not want to be Chi e f Executive because 
the presidency woul d be too high a price to pay for a man to be 



\J Letter to Chief Justice Ramon Avancena on the Cuevo-Barrodo Case, September 
23, 1937. Quezon Messages. Vol. 3, Part I, JBVFP, p, 288. 

2/ Press statement on the Herald's misquoting the President on the Cuevo-Barredo 
case, September 23, 1937. Ibid. , p. 332. 



11-283 

- 450 - 

->f outra ? -r„ fl injustice 

To those who believe that I have violated the duties of my office when I 
criticized the decision of the Court of Manila and the confirming decision of tb. 
Court of Appeals (Second Division) on the Cuavo-Barfedo case, my advice is that 
they go and impeach me before the National Assembly. And if the A^„.V - 

s hould condemn m P> T wn , ad t]wt Y ^ if . f „ a th e eyT , ro ,,,, 1on nf thfl gi1i?<n ^ 

p eople's concept ion r ^rding th e a„t. i*g of the C h ief E x ecutive. In mich ft CM « , 
. I would say without hesitation that I Ac, not VSSL t to be the President of a peon y 
X hggs conception of the duties of the head of gov e rnment is to nit hv ^ 
?; eep quiet when other branches of the, mmm»^, j n hj 3 opinion, are doing wro a- 

* * * 

The following sent messages of congratulation to the President re his cri- 
ticisa of the Cuevo-Barredo case decision: 

1. Pedro Abad Santos, San Fernando, Paapanga, dated September 26, 1937$ 

2. Silvino Isla, Koncada, Tarlac, September 26, 1937; 

3. Francisco Ponce, Baliwag, Bulacan, September 26, 1937; and 

4. Ignacio Cabatuando, pangulong p&nlalawigan mg Saaahang "ihak," 
Gapan, Ifueva Ecija, September 27, 1937. 

CQE?3SD PgriSiDgfflp's S?A3) CS cgaVD-BAaK BDC CAS3 

Letters from several parts of the country commending and praising the Pre- 
sident's stand on the Cuevo-Barred© case continue to pour in at tee Office of 
the President, close on the heels of telegrams which came in earlier. The writers 
of these letters range f roc humble far* hands and low-salaried employees to pro- 
fessionals and. businessmen, but they are all unanimous in their expression of 

unconditional support of the President and effusive in their praise of his COOT*-* 
4 

geous stand. 

* * * 

Among those who praised the President's stand: 

1 . Keliton L. Lejamo, a lawyer and businessman; 

2. Ansad© ft. Sanchez , who had sided with Itfuiezom only qrriP^ — in the Hsu?©— 
lawes-Cmtting contiwersyj 

3. Bishop Isabel© de l©s ifeyes, «0ir.„ ©f the Philippine Independent GtamsSh 
4- Jose P. Baquis. 

Jfeay presidents of the "nited States - Jfeffers©a, MmcoM, Stooseveli - 
criticised the courts when the latter ceaita&tted blmanders in their decisions. 
J Lasa the ©mly man elected by the igeople off the whele c©mntry (the Fhilippimeg)^ 

Press stateaeemt on the (Chief S5zeeutiv©''s criticism of the Ctoevo-Baarredo c&3@ 
decisiom, September 25, 1937. Zweztm Eessages. Tel. 3, Part 1, JMM, 
pp. 333— 334. 

J-/ Press statement ©m letters off c©mgrafalatic>m re 
Septtamber 2©, 1937. Ibid. . pp. 335-336. 



11-284 . 



- 451 - 



an d the people have the right to demand that I see justice done. I am the first 
se rvant of the people. I am going to fight. If it in within the rights of the 
Ex ecutive Department, I wi ll fi ght. What will the people a „v if thev see me fln W 
nothing in this regard? I cannot be placed in th at position. If that is the pri o 
o f the presidency. I don't want to be president. ^ 

PRESIDENT'S RIGHT AND DUTY TO DISAGREE WITH WRONG COURT DECISIONS 



In the choice of the judges whom I have appointed to the Supreme Court and 

to the other inferior courts, I can say with a clear conscience that I have select 

• id the best men that I could find... But even the wisest and most virtuous o f .p..-" 

m ay make mistakes. No matter how lofty his ideals of .justice, no matter how pur ,.; 

and unsullen his motives, or how noble his heart, it is not im possible that a, 

.j udge may commit a grievous error. In such a case, it is not only the right but 

c 

al so the duty of the Chief Exec utive t o disagree with him publicly. 
CHIEE _SXECUTIVE CITE S HIS DUTY TO "DO JUSTICE TO EVERY HAN" 

Even assuming that, under the theory of separation of powers and bhe pos- 
tulate of judicial independence, the Chief Executive may in no case utter a word 
in connection with the acts of the other branches of the government, I would stiT 
i nterpret my oath to "do .jus tic e to every man" a s imposing upon me the duty not 
o nly to do .justice in cases where the decis ion rests with the Executive, but p-1 fio 

t o see that other branches of the government do not commit acts of injustice t o 
7 

any man. 

IILQ EXPRESSES J?AITH Iff INTEGRITY OF SUPKEK E COURT 

It has been said that with my criticism of the decision in the Cuevo-Bar'A'. 
case, I have embarrassed the members of the Supreme Court, for if they should re- 
verse the decision of the lower courts, they would be considered as mere "append! 
of the Chief Executive; and if they should uphold the former decisions, thay 
would be accused of favoring the rich as, against the poor. 

I have already stated that when I was led to speak on the subject through 
a question propounded by a press representative, I was unaware of the fact that 
the case was still sub .judice. so I need not repeat the statement now. But I havo 
no hesitancy in saying that, while I wish I had not expressed any opinion on th< 
matter, yet having done so, I am not in the least fearful that the Supreme Couri 
will not render the decision it would have rendered had I kept my peace on the 
subject. ^ 



j>/ Conference with a delegation of the Young Philippines, Ilalacaftan, September 
29, 1937. Quezon Messages . Vol. 3, Part I, JBvfF, pp. 137-138. 

6/ Speech on the principles of law and justice, at the University of Sto. Tomas, 
October 2, 1937. Ibid. , p. 144. 

2/ Ibid ., p. 149. 

8/ Ibid. , p. 150. 



11-285 

- 452 - 

"Congratulations, my dear Sir," writes T Tilliam E. Johnson, president of the 
Cincinnati Ball Club, Cincinnati, Ohio, "for the manner and the courage you dis- 
played in behalf of the man who was drowned. They are men like you who live long 
in the memories of your countrymen." 

"I, who am neither a laborer nor a Filipino, but a Puerto Rican," writes 
Guillermo Bososa, residing in Kenrnore, New York, "believe it my duty to address 
you these simple lines, motivated solely by the innate desire to express to you 
ay complete admiration of your civic gallantry and honesty. 9 

104. Q U E Z 0 N AND INDEPENDENCE 

The lesson of your history - the most brilliant history of all the nations 
of the world - ia inconsistent with any other motive in your dealings with the 
Filipinos than that of making them free... 

We firmly believe and sincerely trust that the day will come soon when this 
(U.S.) Congress, composed of the representatives of a God-fearing people, will 
generously give to us the blessings of that freedom which has made you so happy, 
so prosperous and so great, and which is after all the- keynote of the happiness 
and prosperity of every people. When that time comes - and let us hope that it 
may happen tomorrow - the day when the ever-glorious Stars and Stripes was raised 
in the Philippines will eternally be the best-celebrated day of our national life. 

IS "DECLARATION OF DE )EPSHDBNCE" AGAINST AMERICA?, QUEZON ASICS 

There is no state document so well or 30 extensively known as the Declara- 
tion of Independence, nor is there another more important to humanity. The reason 
is that it was written for the benefit of all mankind, of all nations and of all 
races. . . 

Since the Declaration of Independence, because of the overwhelming influ- 
ence of its doctrines, republics have been founded on the ruins of despotism, 
constitutional governments have been born in both hemispheres, oven in those 
countries where absolutism seemed to have most firmly rooted, flay, even in the 
Philippines where the people's clamor to be free is so deeply felt because the 
desire to breathe the wholesome air of freedom is innate in the human heart, we 
argue in the very words of that immortal document. 

In truth, we maintain that the American occupation of the Philippines is 
incompatible with the Declaration of Independence. 

One hundred years ago this proposition would not get a single dissenting 

°J Press statement on letters from abroad commending the President's stand on 
the Cuevo-Barredo case, October 21, 1937. Quezon Messages. Vol. 3, Part I, 
JBVFF, p. 340. 

lJ Maiden speech, "The Hope of the Filipinos," before the U.S. Congress, May 14, 
1910. Rivera Collection, v ol. I, p. 87. 



11-286 

_ 453 _ 

vote in this "land of the free." 2 

FREEDOM AL ONE IS SOLUTIO W TO PHILIPPINE D5CERTAI3IT 

The most pressing need of the Philippines is their freedom, fflne presem* &sm 
ditions of affairs there are discouraging. Hobody knows what the limited States ±m 
^oing to do with us. It can give us away, keep us forever, change the goTOiraffssat 
we have now and make it more autocratic. We have no rights of amy Mud, " hecaese 
rights which are given through the voluntary concession of a legislative tody - 
in which body the people who are given those rights are not represented, accor- 
ding to your celebrated statesmen here - are not rights at all for the simple 
reason that they can be taken away. J 

PM RJjffj^PRE^ RATHra THAI! RI CH BUT 5U5J5C TS 

If to be free we gust keep the Philippines undeveloped, if to te free we 
m ust refuse to admit foreign capital into the Islands, if to "be free we mist he 
po or and remain poor, we will unanimously and unhesitatingly prefer to he poor 
b ut free rather than to be rich but subjects 1 

aDITOa QUEZON EXP L AINS T RIPLE OBJECT IVES CF P30PASAZID& JtHStML 

To promote the great cause of. Philippine independence, to clear away cur- 
rent misconceptions respecting the character of the Filipino people and their ca- 
pacity for self-government , to show the practicability and desirability of setting' 
up an independent Republic in the archipelago — these are the objectives of The 

Filipino People. Wo deem the time propitious for Brassing this sacred cause — so 

5 

dear to the hearts of the Filipinos - in the forum of public opinion. 
i;.l!Z0i: ASSERTS inDEPEIIDEiJCE, L T OT STATEHOOD, FCR PHILIPPIaBS _ 

American policy regarding the Philippines must be based upon the theory tha. 
the United States by its traditions, by its history and institutions, and by the 
principles which cons ti tuts, the very foundation of its national life, cannot con- 
sistently hold colonies against the avowed will of the inhabitants thereof. There- 
fore, that policy to be truly Anerican must contemplate as a final outcome either 
statehood or independence. 

Statehood for the Philippines is not desirable, either from the standpoint 
of the American or from that of the Filipino people. Differences in race, custocs. 

2/ Speech, "The Declaration of Independence," at Tammany Hall, I-ew York City, 

July 4, 1911. Ibid. , p. 88. 
2/ Testimony at the hearing of the Insular Affairs Committee, U.S. House of 

Representatives, February 21-25, 1912. Ibid. . p. 91. 

y Speech in the U.S. House of Representatives, Kay 1, 1912. Ibidj., p. 92. 

5/ Foreword in the maiden issue of The Filipino People. Vol. I, No. 1 , 

September 1912, a monthly journal edited by Resident Commissioner Manuel L. 
Quezon in Washington, D.C. Ibid. . p. 95. 



11-287 ' s 

~ 454 - 

interests, and the thousands of milos of water which separate both countries, are 
insurmountable obstacles to Philippine statehood... The idea of statehood does 
not appeal to the Filipinos. 

There remains only the other solution of the problem, which is independonc, 
for the Philippines... Independence, to be a truly Amorican policy, should be re- 
cognized at once or within a reasonable time; certainly within the lifetime of 
those who are responsible for the control of the Islands by the United States. 
3uch is the only course that will relieve this country (U.S.) from the charge 
of having assumed permanent control of the Philippines. 6 

Now, gentlemen, out of wisdom and fairness, you will have to agree with us 
that between the Philippine oligarchy and American oligarchy we prefer the Phi- 
lippine oligarchy; and it is more likely that the i hilippine oligarchy will be 
s. better government than Anerican oligarchy for the Filipinos because the Phi- 
lippine oligarchy, being flesh of our flesh and bone of our bone, will at all 
events have more sympathy for and know better our people. 7 

E^^^§JI^^I^^l£l£|gA T ^ggJ J ^ICA, ASSERTS QUEZON 

All government whose basis is force, and not the consent of the governed, 
is condemned as unjust by the Declaration of Independence . It is a matter of his- 
tory that the Filipino people is not willingly under American control - in fact 
if they could help it, they would never be for one moment held in subjection by 
any foreign country. They revolted against the sovereignty of Spain because they 
were longing for liberty. They won in their struggle and declared the independence 
of the Philippines just as Americans declared the independence of the thirteen 
colonics. 

They organized a government which formally refiasod to acknowledge American 
sovereignty over the archipelago and, supported by the whole nation, offored 
armed resistance to the extension of American control over the Islands, until 
their troops were completely annihilated by the enormous superiority of the 
American army. 

And today,' after peace has been restored, and the government of the Phi- 
lippines i3 in American hands, whenever a Filipino is asked what does he want 

o 

from the United States, he invariably answers: "The FREEDOM of my country." 
ONLY FILIPINO GOVERlffiEiJT WILL SUIT FILIPINOS BEST 



From these facts you will readily see that I know my people as intimately 



6/ Article, "The Right of the Philippines to Independence, " The Filipino People, 
Vol. I, Ho. 2, October 1912. Ibid. , pp. 101-102. 

if Speech in the U.S. House of Representative-, , 191 2, n.d.m. QP, MR#22, TNL. 

8/ Article, "The Declaration of Independence: An Analysis, " The Filipino People. 
Vol. I, No. 5, January 1913. Rivera Collection, Vol. I, p. 116. 



11-288 

- 455 - 

as it is possible for anybody to know then. And ,' speaking from my experience, I 
say to you, solemnly and sincerely: 

First: That the Filipinos are unanimous in their desire to govern their 
country. 

Second: That they are capable of governing their country, though they may 

not be able to establish precisely such government as may suit my friend, Mr. Egan, 

but surely a government that will suit them best, better than any other kind of 

government that you or any other people may institute for then. 

If, therefore, the wish of the Filipinos is to be considered in the final 

settlement of the policy of the United States with regard to the Islands, there 

should be but one policy to be adopted, to wit: to grant independence to -the 
9 

Philippines. 

We can be friends anly if we are not your subjects. There can be no friend- 
ship between the ruler and the ruled. There can be no friendship unless there is 
mutual respect. And you cannot respect us while we are treated as your wards. 
These are no perfunctory words. Every American familiar with the conditions in 
the Philippine Islands knows with what hardly concealed contempt the natives are 
treated by the Americans there. The attitude of superiority, which is natural in 
an Anglo-Saxon, is augmented by the feeling of political mastery which necessarily 
is felt by colonial administrators. And this is, of course, offensive to the Fi- 
lipinos, and it is an offense that reaches the innermost of a nan's soul. This 
evil can only be remedied by the recognition of the right of the Filipinos to be 
free from all foreign rule. ^ 

'■fcAT^^GW FILIPjflGS_ 

That which is good government for one people might not be good for another. 
That is a good government which best secures the happiness and prosperity of the 
people whom it governs. To accomplish this, a government must know the needs of 
the country and must not only feel its responsibility to the country but must 
love it as well. 

V/e give the Americans credit for trying to do their best in the Islands to 

make the Filipinos happy and prosperous, but the wisest American will never know 

.much as 

himself, and the most altruistic American can never love the Philippines as/ the 
Filipinos love their country. It is, therefore, manifestly impossible for an 
American government in the Philippines to be as successful as a Philippine inde- 
pendent government will be. "No man is good enough to govern another without 

3/ Address, "How Filipinos Feel About Independence," before the Economic Club 
at Worcester, Mass'. , April 22, 1913. In: The Fjlird no People. Vol. I, No. 9, 
May 1913. Ibid. , pp. 150-152. 

10/ Speech > "Freedom Delayed Makes Filipinos Discontented," before the Philippine 
Society in New York City, June 10, 1913. Ibid. , pp. 157-159. 



11-289 

- 456 - 

that other' s consent f " said Lincoln. 11 

"I would rather starve a free nan than be fed a mere thing." These are not* 
ry words, but I cordially endorse them. Neither are they the words of an ignorant 
ran, but of a great president of a famous university. Indeed, they are not the 
words of an irresponsible demagogue, but of a man now holding the highest public 
office in the greatest republic of modern times. "I would rather starve a free 
man than be fed a mere thing," says President Woodrow Wilson, in his article, 
"The New Freedom. » These words express the sentiment of every man, no matter un- 
der what sky he is born, if he has the right kind of stuff in him, if he has the 
proper sense of man's dignity. 

Moreover, these words express the sentiment of every people the world 
around who are conscious of their own nationality. Surely, those words express the 
•sentiment of every na n, indeed of the whole people of the Philippine Islands, and 
in the true meaning of those words you will find the explanation of the discontent 
of the Filipinos with their present political status. And until this fact is fully 
realized, but not until then shall we have found the key that will open the era 
of better understanding between the Filipinos and the Americans who are interes- 
ted in Philippine affairs. 12 

im ^Em^s_ myjMGjJWj^vm filipino gratitude, loyal jsupport 

There is one point concerning the advantage to the United States of grant- 
ing the independence of my people on which I wish to touch... With the political 
and international situation as it is in the Orient today, it might well be a 
natter of no little moment to America to be at once relieved of the expense of 
maintaining her sovereignty in the Philippine Islands and at the same time be as- 
sured of the loyal support and assistance of the entire Filipino people in the 
case of those eventualities which ought not to, but which sometimes do, occur. 

Is it too much, then, to hope that today, though a century and a third 
have rolled by, American ears and hearts are still open to the cry of a weaker 
and distant people, whose foremost desire is to breathe that same air of freedom 
in which the United States and its people have grown so great and so strong? 1 

FILIPINO S WILL BL : iiSS_TKE DAY DEWEY CAME TO PHILIPPINES 

If you give the Filipinos their liberty, there will be nothing that they 
will not gladly concede to you. You will have not only their trade but their 

ll/ Article "Good Government for One People Hay Not Be Good for Another," 1913. 
Rivera .Collection, Vol. I, pp. 160-161. 

12/ .address before the Philippine Society, supra. Ibid. . pp. 165-166. 

12/ Article, "The Philippines - What They are and What They would Be , " The 
Filipino People , Vol. 2, No. 3, November 1913. Rivera Collection, Vol, I, 
pp. 177-180. 



11-290 

- 457 - 

gratitude, and you will not only benefit yourselves and the:., but you will have 
given the last touch to the work for the liberation of mankind you began in 1776. 
America's flag may then cease to fly over our public buildings, but her influence 
Tvill be our inspiration and we and our children will bless the day Dewey entered 
the Bay of Manila. 14 

UMMMML?2kM-^^J®l^ INDEPENDENCE 



To those who believe in the idea of so If -government there is, therefore, 
nothing in the proposed (Filipinization) policy which calls for apology or defens- 
■I an American administrator (referring to Governor-General Harrison - ABS) has 
been putting the plan into effect while maintaining the efficiency of the govern- 
ment, ho is doing well and wisely; he is gratifying the inhabitants in their as- 
pirations for self-government ; he is carrying out the declared policy of the Uni- 
ted States; and he is securing the approval of those students of the Philippine 
question who have held to the belief that there must be absolute sympathy between 
the inhabitants of the Philippines and their American rulers if successful and 
undisturbed government is to be insured. 1 ^ 

^TLJPINOSjn LL NOT STOP U???I L TII5Y GST THE IS. IimaPirnraiJOlii - QUEZON 



No matter how much of individual liberty or of self-gover.nj.ient in domestic 
affairs a people may have, that people if subject to another, not by reason of 
their own will but by sheer power of the latter... are not free in fact or in 
theory. 

The progress toward freedom never stops when once begun until it reaches 
its culmination. The Filipino people will never be satisfied with any concession 
from the United States short of their complete freedom as a people. Such being 
the case, they will not be satisfied until you shall have placed in their own hauds 
the decision whether or not they shall be politically independent from the United 
States. ^ 

m UATION CAIT SUCCESSF ULLY DIPaSCT AII0TK3R UATION' S KW3K>PI-a!;aT 

I question most seriously the statement that any nation can successfully 
direct the course of development that must bo followed by another. The education 
of the individual is most successful vrhen it affords the best vehicle for self- 
expression; the education of the nation or the race proceeds most naturally as 

1 7 

a matter of internal evolution. 



\AJ Speech, "The Now Regime in the Philippines," before the Cleveland Chamber 

of Industry, Cleveland, Ohio, April 15, 1914. In: T he Filipino People. Vol. 2, 
No.- 8, April 1914. Ibid. . pp. 183-183. 

Comments on the filipinization of the insular service in the Philippines. In: 
The Filipino P fi npl«, Vol. 3, No. 1, September 1914. Ibid. , pp. 205-206. 

16/ Speech at the Lake Hohauk Conference, October 15, 1914. Ibid. . pp. 321-322. 

12/ Article, "Recent Progress in the Philippines," Journal of Race Development . 
January 1915. Rivera Collection, Vol. I, p. 331. ~ ----- 



11-291 • 

- m - 

The granting of independence would in itself create m strong a mfcfcMet 
ox gratxtude on the part of the Filipino p . 30ple towaM tli@ ^ 
you would have created in the heart of the Pacific a nation true in its allsgJL^ 
■• nd friendship to you both in peace and in war. As to the prestige of the Wl~ 
can flag, what better prestige can you have than that which will ceoe to y<m as 
cno result of an act of international justice and generosity! 18 

gllBMAI^IS JBi^Jggi^D PROFITABLE POLICY 

That the only right, wise and profitable policy for the United States to 
pursue is promptly to grant the Philippics their independence is, m ^ 
unquestionable . 

It is right because the Filipino people, according to ^erican political 
and noral tenets, have, like every other people, the God-given rigfet to e-cy 
tiioxr own independent existence. It is wise because it decreases the possibility 
of international complications that nay involve the United States in VST . It is 
profitable because it will save the Tnited States treasury hundreds of aillicns 
of dollars, with no compensating naterial returns, that would have to be expen- 
ded in fortifying the Islands and in giving then an ar*v and navy co^easurate 
with the tremendous difficulties of their defense if they were to be retained. 19 
g^AL WITH OUR BLOOD OUR LCVS FC3 LlDIfflTY - 

The Philippines wants to take part in the struggle (referring to the First 
"iorld "Jar - ABS). It nust take part in the fight. Let us not lose this opporteii- 
TS offered to us to seal with our blood our love for liberty. And now I know that 
the dauntless sons of :r.y native land are ready to accept that sacrifice. We are 
given an opportunity to shew that we are a nation, to assert our legal interna- 
tional personality, to show that wc are not a group of savages but a people, 
lovers of liberty, and ready to die for it. 

If we adopt a passive and indifferent attitude in the present war, with 
what face shall we appear before Acerica and the tribunal of nations after the 
straggle when right shall have conquered night? But if we take advantage of this 
opportunity, with what pride shall we appear before the tribunal of nations, bear- 
ing not only liberty bonds but also mourning for the loss of thousands of our 
brothers who have struggled and died not for America, but because urierica has 
declared that she is fighting for huaanity, for the liberty and protection of 
weak and small nations! &cw can Aaorica then refuse to grant what we want of 

18/ Remarks at the opening of the Philippine Exhibit at San Francisco, Califor- 
nia, February 26, 1915. Ibid. , p. 339. 

12/ Article "Philippine Independence and the Preparedness Prograa,'' The Filipino 
People, Vol. 3, So, 12, April 1916. Ibid. , pp. 354-355. 



A 



11-292 

- 499 - 

her? 20 

INSISTS OH PHILIPPINE I irogPgKDBi!Cl!l IN W^L.TEVER ?QEK 

The great statesman of x^merica say that the- United States has a mission to 
porfomin the Pacific. S'or her own benefit, disregarding entirely the benefits 
that we should derive, the first stop necessary for her to take is to concede cure 
independence with her protection and in return we give her cilitary and naval ba- 
ses. It will be easier for her to realize her nission in the Pacific if this is 
done as it would then have a point of vantage - a place from which it can watch 
the course and development of events. 

But if it does not wish to extend protection, we will not insist upon it. 
ill we ask is that she conply with her promise, for her national honor is in- 
volved, in it. tfe want her to redeem that promise. VJ G want our independence in 
whatever form - protectorate, absolute independence, or independence guaranteed 
by a formal agreement by the nations. I repeat, we want independence in whatever 
form we can get it. 2 ^ 

COM PLETE LlJD ABSOLUTS imZPZSDE KCB - Wfm -flTHOUT P30TBCTI0H 

Let the Americans in the Philippines and those in the United States know 
-•.hat the people of the Philippine Islands covet their freedom, their liberty, 
their political emancipation so much that they will not hesitate to receive fros 
the Congress of the- United States complete and absolute independence - indepen- 
dence without protection. 

I am convinced that the Filipinos will never renounce their d esire for 
independence . Let the world knew that our love for our sacred ideal is deep- 
seated in us and that no power en earth nor any consideration, no natter how 
tempting it may be, will over erase it from our hearts . 22 

50 PROPOSITION POLICY 3SST FCR Ii?COmC?IBLE^£^ IgLa-g_ 

!flien I was Resident Com; dssioner in the united States and when I was chair- 
orai of the Philippine Independence Mission, I adopted the policy of net making 
a concrete proposition in regard to Philippine independence, knowing well that no 
preposition would satisfy our opponents as none satisfied then now. 

If we came out with a petition for absolute independence, they would coh- 
bat it with, the objection that we could invite external aggression and be sub- 
ject to internal dissensions and revolutions, and so that kind of independence 

20/ Speech, "Seal With our 31ood cur Love for Liberty," in the Senate, November 
6, 1917. *ivera Collection, Vol. I, p. 442, In: Isabelo P. Caballero 

and 51. de Gracia Concopcion, Quezon: The Story of a Nation and Its Foremost 
Statesman^ lianila: She International Publishers, 1955. p. 180. 

2l/ Speech in the Senate, January 18, 1321. Ibid. . Vol. II, p. 544. 

22/ Speech, "For Complete and Absolute Independence Without Protection," in 
the Senate, January 18, 1921. Ibid. , p. 544. 



11-293 



- 460 - 



woiild not be desirable. 

If we asked for independence with protection, such as I suggested, they 
would turn around and argue the other way and say that if they granted indepen- 
dence at all it would take the form of complete and absolute independence. They 

say, "If you want independence, go ahead and be welcome to it, but you look out 
for you own protection." 

And where do wo Filipinos stand? Nowhere. In view of these considerations, 
I have always thought as the best policy to let the form of our independence 
be deferred to the last. 2 ^ 

When the Wood-Forbes Mission came (to the Philippines in 1921 - AES), an 
old nan of Taytay (ilizal province) was asked by Mr. William Cameron F 0 rbes what 
kind of independence he wanted and what he neant by independence, and the old 
nan of Taytay replied: "What I understand by independence is that you Americans 
chculd get out of the Philippines and leave us alone I" ^ 

^ZOIf JKPjJ LOto IDENCE GRANT 

Imagine what a glorious tiling it would be for the reputation of the United 
States throughout the world to voluntarily relinquish her possession of the Phi- 
lippine Islands. It will be a dec-d incomparable in the history of the human race '- 
n. nation so strong and' so powerful, giving up ncrely because it wills to do so, 
the sovereignty over a foreign people so that thoy, too, nay have an equal sta- 
tion with her among the independent nations of the earth! What a contribution to 
the cause of just dealings between peoples this stop would be. It would servo as 

r. great moral example to other world powers and greatly promote the cause of poace 

25 

throughout the globe. 

•umsaoN cit es effect of Phili ppine iiroggES DENCE o n other colonies 

Q. - What would be the repercussion of Philippine emancipation in British, 
French and Dutch possessions in Asia? 

A. - Naturally, every vindication of the rights of man stimulates all who 
are struggling for independence. People do not like to be "possessed". They 
long to be free. Freedom in this archipelago, I have no doubt, would be welcomed 
by, and would give encouragement to, all Asiatics and others under alien rule. 
I should not be surprised if Britain, France and Holland would be pleased to 

21/ Ibid. . p. 548. 

24_/ Extemporaneous speech at the Kanila Grand Opera House, September 23, 1923, 
in answer to attacks by Judge Juan Sumulong against inherent defects of 
the Jones Law. Ibid. . p. 730. 

25y Radio address from ->Washinlon, B.C., on "Philippine Night" program, 
September 20, 1924. Ibid. , p. 764. 



i 



11-294 ' . "\< 



- 461 - 



'4. 



see the American flag continue flying over these Islands in perpetuity. But to 
^ose nations I will say a word in all friendship. It is this: What their sublet 
copies ultimately do will be determined by arfthing which happens in the Philippine 

What do I mean? I msan that when the millions of the Indies, of Japan, of 
omatra, and of China are ripe for freedom they will take freedom regardless of 
■■■■vit the muse of history shall have meted out to the Philippines. If America 
elects to hold the Philippines she can hold them for all time, so far as we can 

because we Filipinos are numerically weak. But look at India! Four hundred 
: allien people! Forty millions in the Dutch islands - more than in unconquerable 
• ■ranee! And China - her people are countless! When those peoples become nationally 
self-conscious, when they are unified and organized, no power on earth will be 
able to dominate them or retain so much as a toehold on their territory against 
their will. ° 

Q. - It is argued that America's title to the Philippines is of triple 
validity, resting upon conquest, purchase, and formal cession. What do you say? 

A. - Our reply is, first, that conquest is no moral justification for the 
seizure of a country and the deprivation of its inhabitants of liberty; and, se- 
condly, that purchase is not valid when the seller (Spain) has no right to sell 
it; and cession not valid when the power enacting it is ceding what belongs to 
others. 

Q. - It is declared that no Malay people, of all the millions of Malays, 
ever created a nation. 

A. - That is not true, About the thirteenth century there existed a Malay 
empire, But, not troubling to question the sweeping dictum concerning the politi- 
cal ineptitude of the Malay race, I should not regard this point as worthy of 
serious notice. If no Malay people in all these centuries yet has built up a free 
civilization of its own, I think it is high time one were given a chance to try. 2 ^ 

Q. - What would happen in the Islands if the Congress of the United States 
declared the Philippines a permanent American territory? 

A. - Our people would be profoundly disappointed and depressed. They also 
would be unutterably surprised. I do not think there would be an uprising, but 
the Philippine question would not be settled. It would live on as an embarrassment 
to Americans and Filipinos alike. 

You have promised us freedom, Our people are being educated for freedom. 
Tfe Filipino leaders have assured the Filipino people that, if they bore themselves 



26/ Exclusive interview with Edward Price Bell for the Chicago PfrjUY jjgffgj 1925. 

In: The Philippine Republic , published monthly in Washington, B.C., and edited 
by Clyde H. Tavenner. Rivera Collection, Vol. II, pp. 765-772. 

•£2/ Ibid. , p. 771. 



