April 19, 1948 



MEMBERS OF THE GRADUATING GLASS, 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN: 

I consider it an honor to have been invited 
to be your guest soeaker in this occasion and I wish 
to thank your president for the courtesy which has 
afforded me the opportunity of being with you today. 

I recall quite vividly my thoughts, and emotions on 
a similar occasion thirty-two years ago. Allow me to 
extend to you all my sincerest congratulations for 
having successfully completed this important course 
of instruction. This diploma which you will now re- 
ceive constitutes the reward of your efforts. It is the 
passport of efficiency which will accompany you to the 
next step -- the struggle for existence, 

I wish you all success. Success, however, will 
not come to you unless you try to attain it. Success 
can not be inherited; success is personal and must be 
attained through sacrifice and perseverance. Your suc- 
cess of tomorrow depends upon how successful you are 
today. Try to carry on your work always with enthusiasm 
and with honesty to yourselves. Bear in mind that there 
exists between you and the opthalmologists an important 



page 2 



professional relationship. They will deoend very much 
on the manner in which you follow their prescriptions 
for eye glasses. God was kind when He decreed labor as 
the law of life. A good percentage of the wealthiest 
men in the United States have risen from the laboring 
class. The wealth that stays is gained through industry 
and rational economy. Many sons of rich men do not feel 
the need of strict economy, and they are not impelled 
to be industrious to secure a livelihood. The result is, 
they become soendthrif ts and acquire baneful habits. 

They soon squander their patrimony and take their place 
among the poor from which conditions they can not rise. 
The poor, on the contrary, who tasted the difficulties 
of poverty, work hard and economize to better their con- 
ditions. Through constant thrift and perseverance in 
their work they acquire wealth and power. Out from in- 
dustry grow all the rights of property and conditions 
for the develooment of the sentiments of humanity. 
Nothing exposes men to such moral perils as indolence. 
They who are unemployed' because of idleness constitute 
the most dangerous stratum of society, and forced in- 
dolence is sure to exnose you to a thousand temptations 
and is likely to weaken the fibers of the moral life. 



page 3 



You have chosen Optometry as your line of en- 
deavor* Your definite aim now should be to gain skill 
in it. Do not oermit yourselves to go through life 
without gaining all the skill that is possible to achieve 
in your chosen profession. Thoroughness is the secret 
of success. Success is intensive rather than extensive. 

You have stood the test of all these years of 
study. You have achieved this through patience and 
perseverance. When you go into the world, I urge you 
to be oreoared to face life courageously. You are now 
being admitted into the fraternity of useful and en- 
lightened citizens who will be exoected to maintain a 
well informed public ooinion, disciollned democracy, 
and that social solidarity so necessary during this 
trying period of unrest and distrust. In the consi- 
deration of important national programs please keep 
your heads serene and study them with dlsoassionate 
and unorejudlced mln#d$ Give our elected leaders your 
loyal support and cooperation so that they may be able 
to carry on their difficult tasks to a successful com- 
pletion. 

Before I close, I want to advise you, my friends, 
that in your quest for knowledge, for truth; in your 
zeal to acquire the technique of your calling, and in 



page 4 



your desire to serve our country, do not forget your 
religion and your church, for when you are confronted 
with questions for which there are no answers, when the 
whence and whither of life prove to be uncertain, and 
when you are distressed and forsaken you can seek re= 
fuge in religion. You will find solace there, for 
Divine Provindence never fails. Religion is a vital 
force in life and the individual who does not have a 
firm religious belief is truly handicapped. The evils 
of communism which are causing so much fear and unrest 
in the world today, are the result of Atheism. Keep 
the torch of spiritual goodness and faith burning in 
your hearts, lest you be left on the highways of life 
begging for a morsel of moral satisfaction. 

My best wishes are with you all. 



