TEN MONTHS OF 

PRESIDENT 

OSMENA’S 

ADMINISTRATION 

★ A Review of Work 

★ Done Under Unpre- 

1 ★ cedented Difficulties 

4999 




CONTENTS 



Page 

I. Philippine-American Collaboration 11 

The Bell Bill 11 

The Tydings Bill 12 

To Solve Housing Problem 14 

Osmena Given ^ull Honors in U. S 14 

Rehabilitation Goes into Full Speed 15 

Additional Millions Promised 15 

Secures U. S. Technical Aid 15 

To Expand Port, Harbor Facilities 16 

To Construct, Repair Highways 16 

Demand Reparations from Japan 17 

Fair Share of Reparations Promised 18* 

Administration Consults Businessmen 18 

List Machinery, Equipment, Finished Articles 18 

II. International Commitments; Foreign Relations 19 

P. I. Recognized a‘s Independent Nation 19 

New P. I. Status Explained by President Roosevelt 19 

Sits on Pacific War Council 20 

The United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administra- 
tion (UNRRA) 20 

Becomes a Member of the United Nations Organization 

(UNO) : 20 

President Osmena on UNO Charter’s Significance 21 

Bretton Woods Agreements 21 

• Takes Part in International Conferences 21 It x 

Office of Foreign Relations Created 22 

Sends Envoys to Other World Conferences 23 

Inaugurates Long-Range Cultural Program 23 

Foreign Service Pensionados Sent Abroad 25 

P. I. Represented in Far Eastern Commission 25 

Three Philippine Delegates Sent to UNO 25 

Participates in Fashioning World Peace 26 

III. Reestablishment of Local Governments 27 

PCAU Reconstitutes Civil Government 27 

1940 Elective Officials Retained Whenever Possible 27 

Peace and Order Problem 6eing Solved with Care 28 

PA MP Operational Command Under U. S. Army 28^ 

IV. Efforts Towards Financial Recovery * 30 

Commonwealth Accounts Reconstructed 30 

1*44,404,000 Released for Vital Projects : 30 

The Budget Office at Work 31 

Instrumental in Gratuity Payment ...j 32 

Assists President’s Financial Expert 33 

Prepares Drafts of Bills, Executive Orders 33 

Acts on Applications for Retirement .. 34 

Helps Allocate Positions Properly 34 

Bureau of Printing FiHs 4,750 Work Orders :... 35 

Gratuities to Local Government Officials and Employees .. 36 

* 3 




4 



Page 

All Proving, Municipal Treasuries Functioning 36 

§*17,347,000 Released to Aid Local Governments 37 

Small-Salaried Employees Given Raises 38 

Boards of Tax Appeals Reconstituted 38 

Sweepstakes to be Resumed Soon 39 

Bureau of Banking Reestablished 39 

Government Offers First Bank Facilities 40 

Banks, 10 Branches, 40 Agencies Licensed 41 

Philippine National Bank Functioning Again 42 

Private Banks Get Rehabilitation Aid 43 

Clearing House Association Resumes Operations 43 

Rehabilitation of Building and Loan Associations 43 

Tangible Benefits from Reopening of Banks 44 

Work at the Treasury Resumed 44 

Mutilated Bills Redeemed; Coins Disbursed 46 

Fidelity Fund Now Operating 46 

Insurance Business Back to Normalcy 46 

Other Inspection Division Activities 46 

Mutual Benefit Societies Granted License - 47 

Government Service Insurance System Reopens 47 

Government Decides to Do Justice by Members 48 

§*4,000,000 Appropriated to Revive Policies 48 

Insurance Claims, Obligations Paid * 48 

1*1,370,000 Paid in Retirement Gratuities 49 

Purchase and Supply Division Reorganized 60 

1*5,000,000 in Supplies Qrdered 60 

Nine Ports of Entry Open to World Trade 61 

Foreign Trade Fast Returning to Normal 61 

To Reconstruct Port Works, Facilities 52 

Reuters Reports Import Trade Boom 52 

Most Shipments Come from U. S., Canada 63 

Internal Revenue Collection Resumed 53 

§*8,835,000 in Internal Revenue Taxes 54 

457 Manufacturing Firms Taxed 64 

V. The Administration of Justice ~~ 65 

Setting up the Judicial Branch - 66 

PSC and SEC Help in Reestablishing Normalcy 66 

Acting Appointments Are Justified - • 56 

Independence of Judiciary Not Impaired 66 

VI. Promotion of Agriculture and Commerce 68 

Commerce Bureau Lists Achievements - 68 

To Establish Agencies Abroad 68 

Promoting the Cooperative Movement 59 

Activities of the National Cooperatives Administration .... 59 

Promotion of Plant and Animal Industries 60 

Experiment Stations Proposed 60 

To Establish Regional Seed Farms 60 

. Meat Inspection Service Reestablished 61 

To Purchase Breeding Animals ~ 61 

Conservation of Agricultural and Forest Resources 61 

Administration of Public Lands 63 

To Repair Irrigation Systems 63 



B 

5 

Page 

Commercial Fishing Encouraged * — 63 

To Take Over Deep-Sea -Fishing from Japanese 64 

VII. NDC and Other Government Firms Resume Activities 65 

Airline, Sugar Industries Financed ~ 65 

Textile Goods Sold to Public 65 

To Increase Textile Mills' Capacity 65 

Sabani Estate to be Subdivided, Sold .. 66 

Footwear Corporation Resumes Operations 66 

Food Products Corporation Functioning 66 

Machinery, Equipment Salvaged 67 

Sugar Refinery to Start Operating Soon 67 

Naric Seeks Quota of 1*490,000 Tons of Rice 68 

Cement Plant Producing 6,000 Bags Daily 70 

VIII. Reconstructing Public Works and Communications 71 

Public Works Suffered Greatest Damage 71 

Ten-Year Reconstruction Program Planned .. 71 

Most Post Offices Reopened . 72 

Mail and Money Order Service . 72 

Radio-Telegraph Facilities to be Set Up 72 

Postal Savings Bank Reopens Shortly 73 

PEPCA Kills Gasoline Black Market 73 

IX. Putting Our Children Back in School 74 

More Children in Schools Now than in 1941 74 

More Secondary Schools Open 74 

Four Hundred Seventy Private Schools, Colleges Licensed 75 

Two Thousand Students Back at State University 75 

Eight Colleges, Three Schools Opened 76 

Serum-Vaccine Laboratories Functioning 76 

To Transfer to Quezon City in 1948 77 

Reconstructing and Rehabilitating the National Library.. 77 

X. Social Justice for the Working Man 79 

Labor Department Reconstituted 79 

The Department's Accomplishments 79 

Plans to Improve the Laborer’s Lot 80 

To Enact Progressive Labor Laws .. 81 

To Broaden Compensation Act's Scope 82 

XI. The Filipino Soldier and National Defense 83 

Guerrilleros Incorporated Into Arrfiy 83 

Military Police Command Created .’. .. 83 

How the Philippine Army is Organized 85 

Operations in Conjunction with U. S. Army 86 

To Correct Irregularities, Anomalies 88 

Army Ready to Face All Tasks 89 

Civilian Aviation ~ 89 

Air Transport Firms Resume Operations 89 

Plan to Construct Central Air Port .. 90 

Coast and Geodetic Survey Work Resumed 90 

What the Bureau Plans to Do 91 

Philippine Nautical School Reopened «... 93 

To Establish 2 Additional Departments 1 93 



I 

6 

Page 

XII. Health and Public Welfare Activities 94 

Relief Supplies Distributed 1 - 94 

Every Fourth Manilan Given Relief 94 

The Facts on the ECA’s Activities 94 

1,327,000 Served Daily by ECA Stores 95 

What the PRRA Plans to Do 97 

Other Public Welfare Activities 98 

Safeguarding the People’s Health 98 

Health Conditions Generally Satisfactory 98 

233 Puericulture Centers Being Set Up 99 

Lepers Who Absconded Are Rounded Up . 99 

Practically All Hospitals Reopened . : 100 

Tuberculosis Work Resumed 100 

Quezon Institute to be Expanded 103 

XIII. Legislation to Promote the People’s Welfare 102 

PNB Rehabilitation 102 

Salaries and Allowances for Deceased P. I. Fighting Men 102 

Tacloban Made Port of Entry 102 

Anti-Tuberculosis Work 102 

VD Control 103 

People’s Court 103 

Foreign Relations Office .. + 103 

Three Months’ Advance Pay 103 

Three-Month Bonus 103 

Gratuity to All Employees 103 

Catanduanes Made a Separate Province 104 

Pegging of House Rentals 104 

Free Distribution of Land :....: 104 

Farm Machinery and Tools ; *. 104 

Development of Hydraulic Powers 104 

Protection of Infancy, Maternity and Child Health 105 

Land Tax Remission 105 

Municipal Maternity and Charity Clinics 105 

Aid to Philippine* Hospitals : 100 

Government Insurance System 100 

Manila Railroad Rehabilitation 100 

Pensions and Retirement Gratuities 1QG 

Land Settlement i 107 

Radio and Telegraph Reconstruction 107 

Cooperative Associations 107 

Bonus, for Teachers and Low-Salaried Employees 107 

Reparations Commission 108 

Philippine Army Budget 108 

Agricultural Rehabilitation 108 

Cadastral Survey 109 

Animals for Breeding Purposes 109 

Exchange Standard Fund 109 

XIV. Other Activities .. 110 

The Land Planning Office 110 



IN less than one year the 
Commonwealth of the Philip- 
pines has sprung to the task of 
reconstruction in spite of the 
many heart-breaking difficul- 
ties that confronted it after 
the liberation. Some of these 
difficulties have been over- 
come. Many if not most of 
them still remain. But they 
have not discouraged us. We 
are moving forward, and 
within our limited resources 
we are accomplishing our most 
urgent tasks. 

The following facts speak 
f or themselves. They are sub- 
mitted to the people that they 
may know what has been done 
and accomplished so far. 

January, 1946 



9 



PHILIPPINE-AMERICAN COLLABORATION 

Possibly the greatest service President Osmena has done for 
his people is his efforts to maintain friendly and cooperative 
relations between the American and Philippine peoples and their 
governments. He saw that such amicable relations would be 
mutually beneficial and would especially be necessary if the 
Philippines were to rise from the economic prostration resulting 
from the war. 

Accordingly, the President worked to keep the friendship and 
good opinion of the American people and their leaders while 
he headed the government-in-exile in Washington, and he kept 
up this work following his return to the Philippines. 

Shortly after he had entered liberated Manila, confronted by 
the immense reconstruction and rehabilitation work that had 
to be done. President Osmena said: 

“Let us do what we can now, within our limited resources, 
to alleviate the sufferings of our people. As for the other prob- 
lems — let us but keep the friendship of America, let us do 
nothing to impair the spirit of helpfulness and cooperation 
between our two peoples, and I assure you that the many, intri- 
cate and difficult problems which now confront us will be 
solved — quite easily.” 

These sentiments he expressed over and over again — to foreign 
correspondents, to the local press, to his countrymen and their 
representatives who came to see him. Events have shown that 
he was right, for it is now generally admitted that reconstruc- 
tion and rehabilitation may take a hundred years without Amer- 
ican assistance but would be comparatively easy with such help. 

THE BELL BILL 

One of the most important results of President Osmena’s 
efforts to foster Philippine-American collaboration, is the Bell 
Trade Bill, which has been aptly called the keystone of Philip- 
pine rehabilitation. President Truman, High Commissioner 
McNutt and other American leaders, as well as the Philippine 
representative in Washington, General Romulo, have urged the 
American Congress to give this bill right of way. On January 
25, 1946, the Associated Press reported that the Bill had been 
referred to the House Ways and Means Committee, from which 
it was expected to go to the House floor, for discussion and 
action. The Bill has already passed the United States Senate. 



11 



12 



As redrafted, according to the Associated Press, the measure 
contains a number of improvements proposed by President Os- 
rnena’s administration. It provides for a period of eight years 
during which Philippine products can enter the American 
market free of duty followed by a gradually ascending scale 
of duties for 25 years. The Philippines, therefore, gets a total 
period of 33 years to adjust its economy so it can stand open 
competition in the world markets. 

Salient points in the new draft, as reported by the Associated 
Press: 

1. Following the expiration of the eight-year free trade period 
ending December 31, 1954, a duty of four per cent will be levied 
on Philippine products entering the United States and a similar 
tax imposed on American goods entering the Philippines. 

■ 2. Such rates of duty shall be progressively increased by an 
additional four per cent on each succeeding January 1 thereafter. 

3. No United States duty shall be levied on any Philippine 
articles during the period commencing with the enactment of 
the act and ending July 3, 1946, except as provided for in section 
30 of the Tariff Act of 1930 as amended. 

The bill provides a quota for each of the major products 
entering the American market. Sugar is allowed a quota not 
exceeding 850,000 long tons, cordage, 6,000,000 pounds, coconut 
oil, 200,000 long tons, and cigars, 200,000,000 pounds. 

THE TYDINGS BILL 

Also approved by the United States Senate and awaiting ac- 
tion by the U. S. House of Representatives is the 1*900,000,000 
Tydings war damage bill. 

As announced recently by Commissioner McNutt prompt pro- 
cessing of “all legitimate claims” for war damage will follow the 
signing of the measure by President Truman. The War Dam- 
age Commission would also be set up, the High Commissioner 
promised. On the significance of the Tydings Bill, Commissioner 
McNutt, an unprejudiced, non-political observer, says: 

“Money thus flowing into Philippine hands will then be avail- 
able — and will be used — for the gigantic work of reconstruction 
in the Islands, the rehabilitation of Philippine industries, homes, 
plantations, and farms which were destroyed and impoverished 
during the war * * *. 

“Passage of the war damage bill will give us a mighty tool 
with which to attack on many fronts the problem of Philippine 
economic recovery. 



13 



“I wish to repeat and to emphasize my own desire — which is 
the desire of the United States Government — that the machin- 
ery and the funds which are to be made available when the act 
is finally approved give every consideration to the small busi- 
nessman and farmer, affording him every opportunity to take 
his place in the national economy.” 




The President and United States High Commissioner Paul V. McNutt 

The war damage bill, Mr. McNutt emphasized, “is the keystone 
in the arch of Philippine economic recovery” and the Filipino 
people “will rejoice at the recognition by the U. S. Senate of 
the emergency needs of insular economy.” 



Previous reports had indicated that the Tydings rehabilitation 
measure : 

1. Appropriates 1*660,000,000 for payment of war damages. 
Of this amount, 1*10,000,000 would be earmarked for damages 
to churches. 

2. Provides that 1*240,000,000 would be allocated from time to 
time by President Truman “as a manifestation of good will to 
the Philippine people.” 

3. Provides that 1*60,000,000 worth of surplus U. S. property 
be transferred to the Commonwealth Government free, to aid 
in repairing damage caused by the war. 

TO SOLVE HOUSING PROBLEM 

On January 16, 1946, the news services reported that a three- 
man federal housing commission would leave the United States 
shortly to aid in solving the housing problem in the Philippines. 
Both the Associated Press and the United Press said High Com- 
missioner Paul V. McNutt confirmed that the housing mission 
had been requested by President Osmena and that details had 
been worked out between Louis J. Croft, the President’s special 
adviser on land planning, and the High Commissioner’s office. 

The housing commission, which is expected to arrive in mid- 
February, will cooperate with Philippine housing authorities in 
an effort to get private and public housing projects started. 
The commission will attempt to have large amounts of wartime 
materials placed at its disposal. It also hopes to take over many 
service-constructed buildings in the Islands for emergency quar- 
ters. 

The mission will be headed by Earl Gouger, director of the 
program division of the Federal Housing Administration. He 
will be assisted by John Tierney, also of the U. S. housing au- 
thority, and a third member yet unnamed. 

The City of Manila has helped to relieve the housing shortage 
in the city by procuring thousands of tents from the U. S. Army 
for distribution to homeless refugees and for sale at cost to the 
poor people of Manila. 

OSMENA GIVEN FULL HONORS IN U. S. 

The Bell Trade Bill, the Tydings War Damage Bill and other 
measures to aid the Philippines received the enthusiastic sup- 
port of Capitol Hill and the White House as a result of the Pres- 
ident’s personal sponsorship of these measures during his mis- 
sion to the United States in September, October, and November, 
last year. 



15 



Arriving in Washington on September 30, he was met, ac- 
cording to the United Press , by an impressive military ceremo- 
nial. A large detachment of troops stood at present arms as 
guns boomed 19 times in honor of the Commonwealth President. 
He was met and warmly embraced by United States officials. 
Later he reviewed a guard of honor provided by the United 
States Army. In deference to Mr. Osmena’s position, he was 
made a guest at Blair House, where the United States Govern- 
ment plays host to visiting heads of state, royalty, and other 
distinguished guests. 

The Commonwealth President spent his visit in Washington 
conferring with President Truman and his cabinet and leading 
figures in the American Congress. So well did he do his wprk 
that upon his return to Manila on November 21, our President 
was able to report to his people : 

REHABILITATION GOES INTO FULL SPEED 

“Our rehabilitation program, from this day forth, goes into 
full speed * * *. 

“I can report to you now that my mission has enabled me to 
assist in the formulation of a program for Philippine reconstruc- 
tion and rehabilitation, now and after independence, along de- 
finite lines. This program, in human terms, stands for food, 
clothing, shelter, employment, health and education. It stands 
for prospering trade, economic security and social welfare.” 

ADDITIONAL MILLIONS PROMISED 

In the Tydings Bill, the way was left open for the appropria- 
tion of additional millions by the U. S. government later by a 
clause saying, “and such additional sums as may be necessary” 
to repair roads, bridges, harbors, port facilities and other fa- 
cilities and services necessary for self-defense and rehabilitation. 

This clause is considered important because it makes avail- 
able additional aid later without specifying the amount of such 
aid. 

SECURES U. S. TECHNICAL AID 

The groundwork for United States aid in the reconstruction 
of ports and highways of the Philippines was laid by President 
Osmena in a previous trip to the United States. The Manila 
Post reported in its issue of September 16, 1945: 

“The technical skill of American engineers has been secured 
to lay out plans for the reconstruction as well as expansion of 
port and harbor facilities, roads and bridges in the Philippines, 
President Sergio Osmena announced yesterday. 



16 



“President Harry S. Truman has instructed the War and Na- 
vy Departments and the Federal Works Agency to detail en- 
gineers to study the requirements for these reconstruction and 
expansion projects from the standpoint both of national defense 
and future commercial development, according to the Common- 
wealth President. 

“He said this assistance has been secured from President Tru- 
man upon representations made by Senator Carl Hayden, mem- 
ber of the Senate Committee on Insular Affairs, with whom 
the Commonwealth chief executive held conferences while in the 
United States. In a radiogram to Senator Hayden, the Pres- 
ident expressed his appreciation of the former's interest in the 
welfare of the Filipino people * * *. 

“The President's press statement follows : 

TO EXPAND PORT, HARBOR FACILITIES 

“ ‘While I was in the United States I confered with Senator 
Carl Hayden, a member of the Senate committee on insular af- 
fairs, concerning these matters. Commissioner Romulo has con- 
tinued these conferences and I have just received a radiogram 
from him announcing that, as a result of the senator's represent- 
ations, President Truman has instructed the Secretary of War 
to send United States Army engineers to the Philippines in order 
to study our requirements for rehabilitation and expansion of 
port and harbor facilities here. 

“ ‘A corps of engineers will prepare a report on this essen- 
tial matter, and submit general plans and estimates of the cost 
of such additional works as may be needed in this post-war 
period, from the standpoint both of national defense and of our 
future commercial development. 

TO CONSTRUCT, REPAIR HIGHWAYS 

“‘President Truman has also instructed Maj. Gen. Philip 
Fleming, administrator of the United States Federal Works 
Agency, to have the Public Roads Administration make a study 
of the requirements for construction, reconstruction and repair 
of highways, secondary roads, and essential streets, including 
bridges. This report will be coordinated with the report of the 
corps of engineers ordered by Secretary Stimson. 

“ ‘Commissioner Romulo also informs me that President Tru- 
man has instructed the Secretary of the Navy to detail such 
naval officers as had served in the pre-war personnel of the 
Public Roads Administration to prepare a plan for the construe- 





tion, reconstruction and repair of highways and streets, including 
bridges, which are deemed essential to the Philippines. 

“ 'Colonel C. L. Hall is already on his way to Manila, together 
with his staff, and we shall of course render him all the co- 
operation we can muster’.” 

DEMAND REPARATIONS FROM JAPAN 

Upon landing at Hamilton Field, California, on September 29, 
1945, on his last mission to the United States, President Osrnena 
told the American people, through the press, that "the Philip- 
pines will demand large-scale reparations from Japan, including 
the transfer of certain entire industries.” 

"We are only asking for simple justice,” the United Press 
quoted him as saying. "We are not begging for what you 
Americans call a handout. Our suffering has been caused by 
Japan. It is up to her to pay for her crimes.” 





18 



FAIR SHARE OF REPARATIONS PROMISED 

Evidently the President’s plea was heard by America because 
Edwin Pauley, President Truman’s special reparations envoy, 
said on December 10, 1945, on his arrival in Manila from Japan, 
that the Philippines will have “a fair share of reparations.” 

The United Press said in a report on Pauley’s mission : 

“A United Press correspondent who covered the Pauley mis^ 
sion’s activities in Tokyo said it was his opinion that the claims 
of the Philippines against Japan would receive a very high 
priority. He believed that the Commonwealth will receive many 
Japanese industrial plants. 

ADMINISTRATION CONSULTS BUSINESSMEN 

“With regard to procedure in determining what Japanese 
plants the Philippines may demand as reparations, the corre- 
spondent said it was his personal opinion that the Common- 
wealth Government will consult Philippine businessmen and 
make known their suggestions to Ambassador Pauley. Should 
a Philippine business firm, for example, want to obtain a Jap- 
anese machine tool factory, the possible procedure would be to 
submit facts and figures designed to support the firm’s position 
to the Philippine Government, which in turn would pass the 
request on to Ambassador Pauley through the High Commis- 
sioner’s office * * *. 

LIST MACHINERY, EQUIPMENT, FINISHED ARTICLES 

The basis of discussions in a conference at the High Commis- 
sioner’s office, between representatives of the Commonwealth 
and those of Ambassador Pauley’s mission, according to the 
United Press , were “two memoranda submitted by the office of 
the President to Fritz Worcester, adviser of the U. S. repara- 
tions group, which listed the machinery, equipment and finished 
articles believed to be obtainable in Japan and acceptable to the 
Commonwealth.” 



s. . „ . ^ — »«r w • ,! • ■ - h j -Ti lfaM r i frrnif • 



INTERNATIONAL COMMITMENTS; FOREIGN RELATIONS 

P. I. RECOGNIZED AS INDEPENDENT NATION 
The gradual emergence of the Philippines as a virtually in- 
dependent nation dates back to the transfer of the Common- 
wealth Government to Washington during the period of * the 
Japanese occupation. 

The virtual recognition of the Philippine Government as that 
of an independent nation subsequently found expression in the 
words of the then U. S. Secretary of State Cordell Hull who, on 
June 9, 1943, wrote the Commonwealth Government-in-exile, 
apropos of an agreement for the establishment of a United 
Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration. Mr. Hull 
said that “his Government” had been engaged in a formal discus- 
sion with the British and Soviet Governments on the draft which 
would be brought to the attention of all the United Nations and 
the nations associated with them, the Philippines included. The 
use of the phrase “his government ,, clearly showed that the 
United States meant to treat the Commonwealth of the Philip- 
pines on a basis of equal partnership in the United Nations. 

Upon the conclusion of the UNRRA Agreement, the Philip- 
pines signed as a distinct and separate entity. 

NEW P. I. STATUS EXPLAINED BY PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT 
Earlier, on August 13, 1943, in an address to the Filipino 
people, President Roosevelt elaborated on the new international 
status of the Commonwealth of the Philippines. Said the Pres- 
ident : < 

“That is why the United States, in practice, regards your lawful 
government as having the same status as the government of oilier 
independent nations. That is why I have looked upon President 
Quezon and Vice-President Osmeiia, not only as old friends, but also 
as trusted collaborators in our united task of destroying our common 
enemies in the east as well as in the west. 

“The Philippine Government is a signatory of the declaration by 
the United Nations, along with the thirty-one other nations. President 
Quezon and Vice-President Osmeiia attend the meetings of the Pacific 
War Council, where the war in the Pacific is charted and planned. 
Your government has participated fully and equally in the United 
Nations Conference on Food and Agriculture, and a Philippine rep- 
resentative is a member of the Interim Commission created by that 
Conference. And, of course, the Philippine Government will have its 
rightful place in the conference which will follow the defeat of Japan. 

“These are the attributes of complete and respected nationhood for 
the Philippines, not a promise but a fact 

“As President Quezon himself has told you, *The only thing lacking 
is the formal establishment of the Philippine Republic.’ These words 
of your President were uttered to you with my prior knowledge and 
approval. I now repeat them to you myself.” 



19 



20 



SITS ON PACIFIC WAR COUNCIL 

The Pacific War Council was formed early in the war, on 
the. initiative of President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Chur- 
chill, to direct the Pacific strategy of the Allied powers. Rep- 
resented in the Council were the United States, Great Britain, 
China, Canada, the Netherlands, the Philippines, France, Aus- 
tralia, and New Zealand. President Osmena used to sit on this 
Council in representation of the Philippines. In his capacity ; 
as member of that Council, President Osmena helped hasten the 
liberation of the Philippines from the enemy. 

THE UNITED NATIONS RELIEF AND REHABILITATION 
ADMINISTRATION (UNRRA) 

* I 

The United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration j 
was established to provide for the relief and rehabilitation of | 
United Nations territories liberated from the enemy. Its func- ; 
tions and activities are global in scope. Through this organ- ] 
ization, the Philippines has been able to secure several millions j 
worth of clothing and foodstuffs, medicines and other essential 
commodities, which have already been brought to the Philip- , 
pines for the much needed relief and rehabilitation of our people, j 
This relief work is still going on. President Osmena has 1 
presented to the UNRRA a program involving 1*200,000,000 of J 
relief for the Philippines. 

BECOMES A MEMBER OF THE UNITED NATIONS 
ORGANIZATION (UNO) 

The United Nations Organization was conceived on January* j 
1, 1942, with the signing, by 26 nations, of the United Nations 
Declaration, and born on June 25, 1945, with the promulgation j 
of the United Nations Charter by the United Nations Conference j 
on International Organization at San Francisco. The Philip- .1 
pines was the twenty-eighth signatory to the United Nations I 
Declaration and one of the fifty-one nations that drew up the 
United Nations Charter. Head of the Philippine delegation to 
the San Francisco Conference was Resident Commissioner Car- 
los P. Romulo and the members were Maximo M. Kalaw, Carlos 
P. Garcia, Pedro Lopez, Francisco A. Delgado, Urbano A. Zafra, 1 
Alejandro Melchor, and Vicente G. Sinco. . • 1 

The Philippine delegation to San Francisco signed the Charter j 
adopted at the conference. That Charter was subsequently ! 
ratified by the Senate of the Philippines and the instrument of j 



21 



ratification was deposited with the U. S. Department of State 
on October 11, 1945. 

As a member of the United Nations, the Philippines has a per- 
manent seat in the General Assembly. As such she has the 
right to choose or to be chosen a member of the Security Council. 
She has a vote in the selection of the members of the Social and 
Economic Council and the Trusteeship Council, and of the jurists 
who shall sit in the International Court of Justice. 

PRESIDENT OSMENA ON UNO CHARTER’S SIGNIFICANCE 

The Charter drawn up at the conference was the outgrowth 
of the proposal adopted at Dumbarton Oaks, and while it does 
not claim to be perfect, it does set up practical methods for re- 
moving the causes of international conflict. “Above all,” as 
President Osmena has said, “it holds up the hope and assurance 
of political self-government and independence to all peoples 

who . . . are still living in a state of dependence and tutelage.” 
% 

BRETTON WOODS AGREEMENTS 

* 

These agreements were reached at Bretton Woods about the 
middle of 1944. They provide for the International Monetary 
Fund and International Bank for Reconstruction and Develop- 
ment. As a member of the International Monetary Fund the 
Philippines is assured of a stable foreign exchange rate which 
will stabilize its currency and international trade with those of 
the other participating nations. Membership in the Bank like- 
wise affords the Philippines the right to secure long-term loans 
which are necessary for the reconstruction of our devastated 
financial, industrial, and commercial structures and the develop- 
ment of our resources. 

On December 5, 1945, President Osmena designated -Resident 
Commissioner Carlos P. Romulo as his representative to accept 
membership for the "Commonwealth in the International Mone- 
tary Fund and in the International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development. These two bodies were conceived in the 
Bretton Woods Agreements, which the Philippines signed on 
December 27, 1945. 

TAKES PART IN INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES 

• The manner in which the Philippines has been treated since, 
as a nation possessing the attributes of independence, is best 
exemplified by its participation in various international con- 
ferences and conventions. 



22 




At the United Nations Civil Aviation Conference held in' 
Chicago from November 1 to December 7, 1944, President Os- 
rneha sent Secretary of Finance Jaime Hernandez, Urbano Zafra 
and Jesus Villamor, as Philippine delegates. A result of that 
conference which took up proposed international air routes is 
the negotiation now going on between the Philippines, France, 
China, Great Britain, and The Netherlands regarding the es- 
tablishment of air routes between the Philippines and the ter- 
ritories of the other countries. 

President Osmeiia appointed Francisco A. Delgado to rep- I 
resent the Philippines in the meeting of the Jurists Committee. ; 
of the United Nations which met in Washington, D. C., April 
9 to 20, 1945. The committee prepared a draft of the statute 
for the future International Court of Justice contemplated in 
the Dumbarton Oaks proposal. The Philippines and 44 other 
countries signed the’ instrument of the committee which provided. ! 
that a national group of each country nominate candidates to* j 
be elected by the General Assembly for the position of judges ! 
in the International Court of Justice. To compose the Filipino I 
national group, President Osmena appointed Francisco A. Del- J 
gado, Mariano H. de Joya and Vicente G. Sinco. The group has j 
since forwarded to the United Nations Organization its nom- 



inees to the Court. Those nominated are Francisco A. Delgado, 
Mariano H. de Joya, Manley 0. Hudson, and Hsu Mo. 



OFFICE OF FOREIGN RELATIONS CREATED 

To enable the Philippines, as a member of the United Nations J 
Organization, to contribute its share in the maintenance of world t 
peace and security, President Osmena created on September 23, I 
1945, the Office of Foreign Relations. The Act organizing the ; 
office provides that “the Office of Foreign Relations shall take 
charge of all matters affecting the relations of the Government 
of the Philippines with the United States and foreign nations, i 
and such other matters relating to international relations as 
the President of the Philippines may consider proper to be 
placed under its charge.” Section 6 of the same Act stipulates 
that “The President shall, with the consent of the Commission 
on Appointments appoint two delegates to represent the Philip- 
pines in the United Nations . . .” 

The law envisages the automatic transformation of the Office*! 
of Foreign Relations into the Department of Foreign Affairs 
of the Republic of the Philippines, with a Department Secretary 
at its head. Appointed Commissioner of Foreign Relations is 



Vicente G. Sinco, who has the rank of a department undersec- 
retary, as provided in Section 2 of the Act, 

President Osmena issued on December 3, 1945, Executive 
Order No. 76, which prescribes rules on the organization and 
functions of the Office of Foreign Relations. 

International affairs affecting the Philippines are now handled 
by the Office of Foreign Relations and all tasks pertinent to the 
participation of the Philippines in international conferences and 
conventions are entrusted to it. 

SENDS ENVOYS TO OTHER WORLD CONFERENCES 

When the Food and Agriculture Conference was called in 
Quebec in October, 1945, President Osmena designated Maximo 
M. Kalaw as Philippine delegate. Subsequently Kalaw, with 
Solomon V. Arnaldo as technical adviser, was asked by the 
President to represent the Philippines in the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific, Cultural Organization conference held in 
Washington on November 1, 2 and 4, 1945. The conference was 
. called for the purpose of advancing, through improved educa- 
tional, scientific and cultural relations among the peoples of the 
world, the objectives of international peace and the common 
welfare of mankind for which the United Nations Organization 
was established. 

In the Conference of Veterinary Representatives of Far East- 
ern Member Governments of the United Nations Relief and 
Rehabilitation Administration and of Military Commands con- 
vened in Sydney, Australia, December 14, 15 and 17, 1945, 
I. President Osmena sent Dr. Vicente Ferriols and Dr. Pedro 
S. Sales as the Philippines’ representatives. 

To the Preparatory Commission of the United Nations Or- 
ganization, meeting in London from November 25 to December 
15, 1945, President Osmena sent Pedrp Lopez with Amando 
Dalisay as technical adviser. The Commission, among other 
things, decided on an interim arrangement whereby an inquiry 
can be conducted into the trusteeship problems pending the 
creation of the regular trusteeship council of the United Na- 
tions Organization. _ , 

INAUGURATES LONG-RANGE CULTURAL PROGRAM 

In the meantime, the Office of Foreign Relations has focussed 
its attention on a long-range cultural rehabilitation program 
for the Commonwealth to be financed with funds to be raised 
by public subscription in the United States. The fund campaign 
starting next April -will be directed by the Philippine Founda- 




tion of Amei'ica. While the Foundation is under the Office 
of Foreign Relations, it has been placed, for purposes of ef- 
fective direction, under the Office of the Philippine Resident 
Commissioner in Washington, D. C. 



U. S. High Commissioner McNutt and Brigadier General Carlos P. 

Romulo, Philippine Resident Commissioner at Washington 

In the Philippines, the planning for cultural rehabilitation 
has been entrusted to the Commission for Cultural Rehabilita- 
tion. Through its various Sub-Committees' on Libraries, Uni- 
versities, Monuments and Memorials, Museums, Art Center, 
and Resistance Records, the Commission is gathering all nec- 
essary data to assist the Philippine Foundation of America in 
its campaign for funds. 

The cultural program includes a plan to make the proposed 
Joseph Ralston Hayden Memorial Library a vital unit of the 
University of the Philippines library system. The John Price 
Jones Foundation has also expressed its* willingness to use the 
Philippine Foundation of America as a legal entity through 
which its cultural rehabilitation campaign will be conducted. 

Along similar lines, the Philippine Commonwealth has ac- 
cepted the offer of the U. S. State Department to participate in 
the latter's cultural cooperation program. Under this pro- 



25 



gram, the Philippines has been invited to send specialists in 
the educational and scientific fields for scholai'ships and fellow- 
ships in the United States at the expense of the State Department. 

FOREIGN SERVICE PENSI6NADOS SENT ABROAD 

President Osmena’s administration has decided to send pen- 
sionados to the State Department for training in foreign serv- 
ice. These trainees will eventually constitute the personnel 
of the diplomatic and consular service of the Philippine Republic. 
The first batch of five trainees detailed by the President to the 
State Department have finished their basic training and have 
been assigned to the United States embassies in Moscow and 
Mexico City and to the consulates in Saigon and Singapore. 
The State Department is ready to admit 15 trainees for the 
second class. 

P. I. REPRESENTED IN FAR EASTERN COMMISSION 

To represent the Philippines in the Far Eastern Commission, 
in charge of formulating policies for the occupation of Japan, 
President Osmena appointed Tomas Confesor on December 19, 
1945. The main task of the Commission is “to formulate po- 
licies, principles and standards in conformity with which the 
fulfillment by Japan of its obligations under the terms of sur- 
render may be accomplished.” 

In a recent communication addressed to President Osmena, 
Delegate Confesor urged the sending to Japan of Filipino tech- 
nicians who will survey Japanese industrial plants that may be 
earmarked for the Philippines as reparations in kind. 

THREE PHILIPPINE DELEGATES SENT TO UNO 

President Osmena has named as Philippine delegates to the 
conference of the General Assembly of the United Nations Or- 
ganization, Pedro Lopez, Tomas Cabili and Manuel Gallego. 

As the deliberative body of the UNO, the General Assembly 
“may consider the general principles of cooperation in the main- 
tenance of international peace and security, including the prin- 
ciples governing disarmament and the regulation of armaments, 
and may make recommendations with regard to such principles 
to the Members or to the Security Council or to both.” 

The General Assembly is empowered to make recommenda- 
tions with respect to the maintenance of international peace and 
security, to elect the non-permanent members of the Security 
Council, the members of the Economic and Social Council, and 
the members of the Trusteeship Council. 



26 



PARTICIPATES IN FASHIONING WORLD PEACE 

The Philippines was elected to the Assembly’s Committee on 
Credentials, while Delegate Pedro Lopez was named Vice-Pres- 
ident of the important Economic and Financial Committee. 

As a member of the United Nations Organization, the Phil- 
ippines has full capacity to act as an independent state separate 
and distinct from the United States. It has thus become an 
active participant in the fashioning of a durable peace for man- 
kind in this perilous age of the atom. 



REESTABLISHMENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS 

Immediately after the landing of the American Forces in 
Leyte on October 20, 1944, the Commonwealth Government was 
reestablished and began to function with its capital temporarily 
at Tacloban. The provincial government of Leyte was simul- 
taneously reconstituted. On February 27, 1945, the capital of 
the Commonwealth was reestablished in Manila, with the city 
completely recovered from the enemy. The reconstitution of 
the governments of the various provinces, cities, municipalities 
and municipal districts, followed closely on the heels of the 
forces of liberation as these advanced ip free and occupy the 
localities concerned. 

PCAU RECONSTITUTES CIVIL GOVERNMENT 

Arrangements were made with the U. £. Army authorities 
that immediately upon occupation of a particular municipality, 
municipal district, city or province, the Philippine Civil Affairs^ 
Unit (PCAU) of the Army would reconstitute civil govern- 
ment by appointing civil officials. The salaries of these officials 
were to be paid by the PCAU but eventually charged to the Com- 
monwealth Government. Thus local civil government was set 
up notwithstanding the fact that no local government funds 
were available for sometime after the liberation. Expenditures 
for other than salaries and wages were provided by newly ap- 
pointed civil authorities as funds became available. In certain 
instances, it was not the PCAU that undertook this work of 
government reconstitution but other U. S. Army- or guerilla 
units duly authorized to do so. 

As fast as pertinent data could be secured, provincial, city 
and municipal officials were appointed by the President to take 
the places of those previously appointed by the military au- 
thorities. Civil service personnel were recalled to duty in com- 
pliance with the policy set by the Administration to reinstate 
government personnel in the. service, although they might have 
rendered service in the government established during the enemy 
occupation, provided they were willing to serve and were not 
otherwise disqualified. 

1940 ELECTIVE OFFICIALS RETAINEP WHENEVER POSSIBLE 

Until the appointment by the President of civilian officials, 
those appointed by the local military authorities acted and were 
considered for all intents and purposes as duly constituted local 
civil government officials. The transitioif from the provisional 

27 



28 



civil government as organized by the PCAU to the regular civil 
government was, therefore, hardly noticeable. There was not 
even this change in the cases of many 1940 elective officials 
who happened to be the ones placed in office by the PCAU, the 
Administration having adopted the policy of retaining them in ' 
their former positions whenever possible. , 1 

As of January 1, 1946, all provinces, cities, municipalities 
and municipal districts had been turned over by the proper 
military authorities to the Commonwealth Government for ad- 
ministration purposes. By that date practically all local officials 
had been appointed. * 

PEACE AND ORDER PROBLEM BEING SOLVED WITH CARE 

The maintenance of peace and order in the Philippines is one 
of the most serious* problems that has confronted the Com- 
monwealth Government. It is a problem that requires careful 
“’handling, lest injustice be done to large sections of our po- 
pulation. 

It must be remembered that a large but undetermined num- 
ber of firearms of all makes fell into the hands of the people 
after the outbreak of the war, during the enemy occupation 
and in the course of the liberation. Many of these arms have 
not been surrendered, and some of them are in the hands of 
lawless, recalcitrant or irresponsible elements, who use them 
to intimidate peaceful and law-abiding citizens. 

On the other hand, the organization by the civil government 
of its police forces has been greatly handicapped by the lack 
of firearms and ammunition. Months ago the Commonwealth 
negotiated with the U. S. Army for the purchase or loan of 
10,000 carbines for use by jail guards and policemen, but car- 
bines apparently were not available. Instead the Common- 
wealth was given 5,000 submachine guns. Efforts are being 
made to secure firearms of any type. The police are now being 
given training in the use of the submachine guns. 

PA MP OPERATIONAL COMMAND UNDER U. S. ARMY 

Fully cognizant of the situation, the U. S. military high 
command assumed the responsibility of maintaining peace and 
order immediately upon liberation. For this purpose the U. S. J 
Army has maintained an adequate military police force. Un- 
der existing arrangements, the responsibility for the main- 
tenance of peace and^order in a particular province continues 
to be assumed by the U. S. Army until the province is formally 



29 



turned over to the civil government. In preparation for re- 
ceiving such responsibility from the U. S. Army, the Govern- 
ment has organized the Military Police Command as a section 
of the Philippine Army, with a Provost Marshal General at 
the head. These military policemen are members of the Phil- 
ippine Army who have undergone a period of training in mi- 
litary police schools established by the U. S. Army in various 
places in the Philippines. 

However, the operational command over the MP, Philippine 
Army, continues to be exercised by the U. S. Army, which re- 
mains responsible for peace and order in the country. 

So far, the U. S. Army has turned over to the Government 
the responsibility for the maintenance of peace and order in 
35 provinces. Preparations to receive this responsibility with 
respect to th£ other provinces are sunder way. 

A campaign is now underway to persuade possessors or own- 
ers of all illegal firearms to surrender them to- the Government. 
Provincial governors have shown ability and resourcefulness 
in collecting firearms. The work is still going on notwithstand- 
ing the expiration of the time limit of one month originally 
fixed for the surrender of firearms. This is because the lack 
of communication and transportation facilities has prevented 
the constituted authorities from reaching all elements concerned. 



6 



EFFORTS TOWARDS FINANCIAL RECOVERY 

COMMONWEALTH ACCOUNTS RECONSTRUCTED 

In accordance with President Osmena’s avowed intention to 
reestablish democratic processes in the Philippines, the General 
Auditing Office was among the first to be reconstituted, imme- 
diately after the liberation of Manila. Soon after its reorgan- 
ization, the office started assigning representatives to various 
bureaus and offices as fast as they were reconstituted. 

One of the first tasks to be undertaken was the reconstruction 
of the pre-Occupation accounts of the Commonwealth, with a 
view to determining the existing assets which could be taken 
up in the new books. The cash in the hands of the accountable 
officers was examined and verified. Japanese military notes 
were burned and genuine currency was accounted for. Govern- 
ment property was salvaged, placed in condition and physically 
inventoried. Efforts in this direction are still being carried on 
with vigor. 

The Office has been performing its function of auditing, 
examining and settling all government receipts and expenditures. 
In the exercise of this function, it is called upon to determine 
the legality and propriety of every expenditure. No treasury 
warrant, therefore, has been drawn against the National Treas- 
ury without the countersignature of the Auditor General or his 
duly authorized representative. 

f>44,404,000 RELEASED FOR VITAL PROJECTS 

The Department of Finance has certified that funds are 
available to cover the , release of a total appropriation of 
1*44,404,643.40 for various purposes, as follows: 



For the payment of life insurance policies issued by the 

Government Service Insurance System, C. A. No. 706.... PI, 670, 000.00 
Aid to national, provincial and city hospitals and their 

dispensaries, C. A. No. 705 1,285,973.40 

For the rehabilitation of the Manila Railroad Company, 

C. A. No. 707 2,500,000.00 

To continue the payment of retirement gratuities or pen- 
sions under existing laws, C. A. No. 710 2,000,000.00 

For a bonus for public school teachers and other low-sal- 
aried employees, C. A. No. 714 5,566,670.00 

To be paid as bonus from July 1, 1945 to enlisted men of 
the army, the army band and the air corps, Philippine 
Army, C. A. No. 717 .. 30,000,000.00 



31 



To continue the agronomical survey of the Philippines, C. A. 

No. 718 16^000.00 

For the establishment, improvement, development, main- 
tenance and operation of agricultural experiment and de- 
monstration stations, C. A. No. 718 160,000.00 

To continue the classification, survey and subdivision of 

agricultural lands of the public domain, C. A. No. 718.... 472,000.00 

Bureau of Forestry ... 68,000.00 

To continue the reforestation and afforestation of water- 
sheds, denuded areas, and cogon or open lands within 
forest reserves, communal forests, National parks and tim- 

berlands, sand dunes, etc., C. A. No. 718 216,000.00 

For the creation of the Cinchona Plantation Revolving 

Fund, C. A. No. 718 60,000.00 

To rehabilitate the cadastral survey revolving fund, C. A. 

No. 719 .. 238,000.00 



Total ' P44, 404, 643.40 



THE BUDGET OFFICE AT WORK 

The Budget Office prepared three national budgets (Adminis- 
trative Order No. 5, Commonwealth Act No. 674, and Common- 
wealth Act No. 723) . In the preparation of the budget for the 
fiscal year from July 1, 1945 to June 30, 1946, the total appro- 
priation set aside in the said budget for ordinary operating ex- 
penses was 1*123,117,249.50 as against the sum of 1*91, 839, 629.50 
appropriated under Commonwealth Act No. 654, or an increase 
of 1*31,277,620. The increase was represented mainly by a new 
outlay of 1*30,000,000 for advances to provinces, cities, and 
municipalities to cover- their operating expenses for essential 
ordinary services which were being reestablished after their 
liberation from Japanese occupation. The sum of 1*400,000 was 
set aside for the transportation and incidental expenses of the 
officers of the Government of the United States and other guests 
of the Philippine Government who may be invited to attend the 
inauguration of the Republic of the Philippines upon the decla- 
ration of Philippine independence by the President of the United 
States. 

Modifications of this budget were later on submitted by 
this office. The first involved an additional appropriation of 
1*1,333,520, a major portion of which was for the consumption 
of supplies and materials, traveling expenses of personnel and 
rentals of buildings and grounds. The second was for an ad- 
ditional appropriation of 1*13,392,070, 1*10,000,000 of which was 
for the payment of back salaries, gratuities, bonuses or other 



32 



emoluments of loyal and deserving officials and employees of the 
National Government, and 1*3, 000, 000 for the Contingent Fund 
to meet unforeseen contingencies. As modified, the total appro- 
priation requested in the budget for the ordinary operating ex- 
penses was increased from P123, 117, 249.50 to 1*137, 842, 839.50. 

In view of the inability of Congress to act on this budget and 
in order that the National Government may not be hampered 
in its activities, Commonwealth Act No. 674 was passed as a 
temporary measure to cover the period from July 1, 1945 to 
September 30, 1945. 

INSTRUMENTAL IN GRATUITY PAYMENT 

The Budget Office was also instrumental in the payment of 
the two months’ gratuities authorized in Administrative Order 
No. 27 and Executive Order No. 83 by furnishing the Office of 
the President the estimated amount necessary to cover the pay- 
ment of said gratuities. 

Regarding the preparation of the budget for the fiscal year 
1947, the Budget Office issued on October 18, 1945 a Budget 
Memorandum Circular which prescribed the necessary disposi- 
tions in the submission of estimates. 

The Budget Office conducted a regular investigation and exam- ' 
ination of expenditure proposals payable from lump-sum appro- 
priations, special and trust funds, bond funds, receipts auto- 
matically appropriated, aids, and donations, in accordance with 
the provisions of section 7-1(4) of Commonwealth Act No. 246, 
as amended. 

A total of 234 special budgets involving expenditures in the 
total amount of 1*73, 475, 673.55 were received for a variety of 
purposes, including the creation or recreation of 16,365 positions. 
Of this amount, the sum of 1*70, 989, 678.61 was recommended 
for approval of the President, thereby effecting savings amount- 
ing to f*2,480, 994.94. This action was based on the actual needs 
of the service as determined by investigation made for the 
purpose. 

The Budget Office compiled a list of the outstanding obliga- 
tions of the Government. This compilation showed that the net 
outstanding obligations amounted to 1*289, 856, 657.02. A draft 
of a proposed bill appropriating the necessary fund, to cover the 
payment of these outstanding obligations was submitted to the 
President which was in turn sent to the Congress of the Philip- 
pines for enactment into law. However, Congress failed to pass | 
the bill. 



33 



ASSISTS PRESIDENT’S FINANCIAL EXPERT 

The Budget Office also gave assistance to the financial expert 
of the President in preparing the financial statements which 
were taken to the United States in connection with the delibera- 
tion on rehabilitation measures pending in the Congress of the 
United States. 

This office was instrumental in the creation of the Purchasing 
Agency Revolving Fund by preparing its corresponding budget 
up to June 30, 1946, and cfrafting the necessary Executive Order. 

This office also recommended the reconstitution of 'the Alabang 
Laboratories and the Fiber Inspection Service. The first service 
is meeting the needs for vaccines and sera for the prevention of 
epidemics and the second service is helping to rehabilitate the 
cordage industry. 

From February 27 to December 31, 1945, the Budget Com- 
mission received 81 bills for comment and recommendation from 
the Office of the President and the committees and individual 
members of both Houses of the Congress of the Philippines. 
Most of these bills involved proposals for the appropriation of 
public funds to finance new and essential services in connection 
with the rehabilitation and reconstruction program of the Ad- 
ministration as well as the resumption of the important pre-war 
activities of the Government. Among the legislative measures 
recommended by this Office for approval, 29 became laws which 
are now Commonwealth Acts Nos.: 



676 


693 


706 


712 


718 


682 


695 


707 


713 


722 


683 


696 


708 


714 


724 


684 


699 


709 


715 


725 


685 


701 


710 


716 


726 


689 


703 


711 


717 





PREPARES DRAFTS OF BILLS, EXECUTIVE ORDERS 

The Budget Office also prepared drafts of eight bills and 
recommended their enactment into law. Four of these bills 
became laws, which are Commonwealth Acts Nos. 674, 680, 686, 
and 723. 

Of the bills recommended for disapproval by this Office, the 
most prominent are House Bill No. 302 creating the Institute 
of Nutrition, and Senate Bill No. 598 creating the National 
Urban Planning Commission. The first was recommended for 
disapproval because it would be impossible to carry out the 



4999 - 



-3 




34 



purpose of the bill in the coordination of all work of the Govern- 
ment relating to nutrition, and because the precarious condition 
of the finances of the Government would not permit the addi- 
tional outlay of funds proposed for the contemplated new office; 
the second because of some constitutional defects. These two 
bills were vetoed by the President. 

The Budget Office also drafted six Executive Orders which 
were issued by the President (Executive Orders Nos. 30, 33, 
42, 43, 81, and 83). Five Administrative Orders drafted by 
this Office were also promulgated by the President (Adminis- 
trative Orders Nos. 6, 8, 9, 19, and 27). 

ACTS ON APPLICATIONS FOR RETIREMENT 

During the period under review, 83 applications for retire- 
ment under various existing retirement laws were received by 
this Office, 66 of which were under Act No. 2589, as amended, 
11 under Act No. 4151, 3 under Commonwealth Act No. 1, 2 
under Commonwealth Act No. 190, and 1 under Common wealth 
Act No. 536. The recommendations of this Office on these ap- 
plications were based on the merits of each individual case. 

Soon after the reestablishment of the Commonwealth Govern- 
ment in the Philippines, the Budget Office conducted a study 
on the organizational set-up of the Government. The Chief 
Administration Researcher rendered a report entitled “Organ- 
izational Reforms and Economy, Simplicity and Efficiency of 
the Public Service.” These studies are still being undertaken 
with a view to introducing reforms necessary to meet the con- 
ditions after independence is granted to the Philippines on 
July 4, 1946. 

HELPS ALLOCATE POSITIONS PROPERLY 

As a result of actual inspection of the different services in 
the Government, the Budget Commission was able to recommend 
to the Salary Board the proper allocation of the positions of 
academic and industrial supervisors, high school principals, 
superintendents of schools, elementary school teachers, agri- 
cultural, high school and trade school teachers, in accordance 
with Commonwealth Act No. 402. The inspection was also 
made the basis for the recommendation of the rates of per diems 
now being paid to common laborers, semi-skilled and skilled 
laborers of the bureaus and offices under the Department of 
Agriculture and Commerce, the Philippine Army, and the City 
of Manila. 




35 



During the period covered by this report, the Budget Office 
received from the various departments, bureaus and offices of 
: the Government, 24,893 appointments involving 4*25,487,642. 

BUREAU OF PRINTING FILLS 4,750 WORK ORDERS 
Notwithstanding the lack of mechanical facilities and of per- 
1 sonnel, the Bureau of Printing accomplished 4,750 separate jobs 
in the nine months that it has been in operation. These in- 
cluded books, pamphlets, documents, general, provincial, mun- 
icipal and judicial forms, internal-revenue licenses, income-tax 
returns, official receipts, cash and bus tickets, gasoline stickers 
and other printed matters needed in ordinary official transactions. 
I The value of these jobs, for the period from March 13 to No- 



I vember 30, 1945 is as follows : 

Sales income 1*63,520.76 

Service income ? 109,987.87 

Stock form — Production 29,766.74 

Miscellaneous . 601.40 



Total - 1*197,876.77 



====== 

The biggest single job of the Bureau of Printing is the print- 
I ing of election ballots and forms. Work is going on 24 hours 
I a day, in three eight-hour shifts. Before election time the Bu- 
! reau expects to have ready the several millions of ballots and 
I sample ballots, as well as other printed materials, necessary for 
1 the holding of the general elections on April 23, 1946. 

The total cost of printing ballots and other election forms being 
I undertaken by the Bureau of Printing is estimated at 1*138,000. 
I If all these forms were printed outside the Bureau, they would 
I cost 1*415,000, at the current rates of printing charges. Thus 
in this one job alone the Bureau has realized a saving of 
| 1*277,000 for the Government. 

As early as April, 1945, the Bureau started printing the Offi- 
I cial Gazette, starting with 1,000 copies and increasing the cir- 
I culation later to 2,000. The Government distributes to 1,575 
j\ subscribers on its mailing list, as well as to other Government 
I offices and entities, copies of the publication, which gives the 
I latest accounts and reports of the Government’s activities, in- 
j eluding Administrative and Executive Orders and Common- 
I wealth Acts signed by^the President, etc. 

The Bureau of Printing was among the first victims of the 
1 war, its building in the Port Area being among the first places 
1 to be hit by the enemy. The Government has already started 



36 



paying pensions to the families of Government employees killed 
during the bombing: Considerable equipment and supplies were 
destroyed, but thanks to the foresight of Commonwealth officials 
while they were still in Washington, many of the essential forms 
had been ordered printed in the United States, thus enabling 
the Government to carry on its most essential “paper” work. 

GRATUITIES TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES j 

In order to expedite the payment of the two months gra- 
tuities to officials and employees of local governments as well 
as to those of government-owned or controlled corporations as 
authorized in Executive Order No. 83 dated December 24, 1945, 
Department Order No. 16 dated January 9, 1946 has been is- 
sued. 

ALL PROVINCIAL, MUNICIPAL TREASURIES FUNCTIONING 

The Department exercises direct supervision and control over 
the financial officers and affairs of local governments through 
the Division of Provincial and Municipal Finance. The imme- 
diate task of the Division upon reconstitution was the reestab- 
lishment of the provincial, city and municipal treasury service. 

Practically all of the pre-war provincial and city treasurers 
have been recalled to duty and reappointed or designated to 
their pre-war positions. All of the Provincial and City Treas- 
urers, except that of the City of Manila, have been designated 
Acting Assessors in their respective provinces and cities without 
additional compensation. After the reconstitution of the pro- 
vincial treasuries, that of municipal treasuries immediately fol- 
lowed as a matter of course. The Department had to recon- 
stitute the local treasuries without waiting for the reconstitution 
of the offices of the local chief executives in order that the tax 
collection service might be set to function immediately. This 
had to be done because of the need for funds with which to. 
finance the operation of the Government and its branches. A t 
of December 31, 1946, provincial treasurers had been appointed 
for 38 regular provinces, 11 special provinces, 10 cities, and 4 
special municipalities of Romblon. 

Upon the liberation of the provinces, cities, and municipal- 
ities from enemy occupation, there was practically no money in 
their coffers with which to defray the expenses incident to the 
reconstitution of their governments under the Commonwealth 
Government. This must have been foreseen by the Adminisj 
tration because under Executive Order No. 19-W of the pres- 
ident of the Philippines, issued at Washington, D. C., an appro- 




37 



priation of ¥*10,000,000 for the reconstruction of the local 
governments was set aside. The allotments made and released 
to the provinces, cities and municipalities by the Department of 
Finance by authority of the President from this appropriation, 
which all'in all amounted to ¥*2,364,942.63, hastened the recon- 
stitution of the local governments. 

With a view to raising funds as much as possible to finance 
local government administration after the reconstitution of the 
local governments, instructions were issued to the provincial, 
city and municipal treasurers to resume the collection of taxes 
and fees as provided by the existing laws of the Commonwealth 
Government at the rates prevailing as of December 31, 1941. 
However, on account of the disastrous effects of the war on 
agriculture and business and of the loss of various tax records, 
not much has been accomplished. 

P17,347,000 RELEASED TO AID LOCAL GOVERNMENTS 

In order, therefore, to enable the local governments to function 
property, it became necessary to extend to them financial assist- 
ance. For this purpose, the amount of 1*17,347,279.19 has 
already been allotted by this Department -to 48 provinces and 
their municipalities, 10 cities and 4 special municipalities in 
the Province of Romblon out of the sums of ¥*10,000,000 appro- 
priated in Commonwealth Act No. 674 and ¥*20,000,000 in Com- 
' monwealth Act No. 723 as aid to the local governments. 

The minimum aid given to a province, city or municipality rep- 
resents 50 per cent of its ordinary expenses for essential services 
during the fiscal year 1939, as reflected in the report of the Au- 
ditor General for said year, the only financial report available. 
. Where a province, city or municipality needs more than the min- 
imum aid herein referred to, as reflected in its budget, addi- 
tional aid has been granted it to cover the deficit in its budget. 

It may, however, be stated that because of the fact that their 
budgets for the current fiscal year have not been received in this 
Department certain provinces, cities, and municipalities have 
not as yet been given the full amount of the financial assistance 
that they may need during the current fiscal year for the pur- 
pose of defraying their operating expenses for ordinary essential 
activities. 

Due to the extensive and intensive tax-collection campaign of 
the local treasurers pursuant to the Administration’s instruc- 
tions, some appreciable progress has been attained. The net 
result, however, cannot compare favorably with the pre-war col- 



38 



lections for the simple reason that, as stated above, agriculture, 
industry and business have been severely hit by the war. In ad- 
dition, the tax records on which to base collection have, in the 
majority of cases, been destroyed. Appropriate steps have al- 
ready been taken toward the reconstruction of said records. 

SMALL-SALARIED EMPLOYEES GIVEN RAISES 

Because of the present precarious conditions of the local fin- 
ances, the Department of Finance has adopted the policy of not 
authorizing the creation of positions which did not exist as of 
December 31, 1941, and the- granting of salary increases, except 
in meritorious cases, and in the interest of public service. How- 
ever, in order to extend certain relief to small-salaried em- 
ployees, the Department of Finance has made exceptions to the 
said policy by allowing salary increases proposed for employees 
receiving less than f*600 per annum, P50 a month or P2 a day. ! 

In order to determine the extent of the destruction or damage | 
suffered by the assessment and other tax records, such as the 
schedules of values, assessor’s field sheets, tax declarations, I 
property tax registers, etc, some of which are necessary for the i 
collection of the real property tax, the provincial treasurers have 
been instructed to submit a report on the condition in which 
such records were found upon the liberation of the provinces 
and to state whether or not it is possible to reconstruct the de- 
stroyed or damaged records without the necessity of undertaking 1 
a general revision of real property assessments, which would j 
take a long time and require much expense to complete. 

BOARDS OF TAX APPEALS RECONSTITUTED 

The reports received indicate that the destruction or damage 
caused to the assessment and other tax records is very extensive 
and that in many cases it would not be possible to reconstruct the ; 
records unless a revision of assessment of individual properties i 
is made. In spite of the insufficiency of funds and th^ lack of 
printed assessment forms and office equipment, the reconstruc- 
tion work is going on as fast as facilities permit. 

In the expectation that many assessment appeals would be 
filed, because in many cases the old assessments had to be changed 
on account of the changed conditions of the property, steps 
have been taken to reconstitute the boards of tax appeals in the 1 
provinces and cities, as well as to obtain the approval of the 
rules and regulations governing the procedure of filing appeals 
to the Central Board of Tax Appeals created under Common- 
wealth Act No. 530. 



39 



Tax measures intended not only to provide additional revenue 
but also to correct, in certain cases, inequalities in tax rates, 
were prepared and recommended for enactment. These prop- 
osed bills sought to increase the fixed and percentage taxes on 
business, the basic and additional residence taxes, documentary 
stamps taxes, charges on forest products, and the rates of in- 
come tax. A measure intended to tax at high rates income dur- 
ing the enemy occupation was also recommended. However, 
only the bill extending the period for the filing of returns and 
payment of internal revenue taxes was enacted into law (Com- 
monwealth Act No. 722). 

SWEEPSTAKES TO BE RESUMED SOON 

The operation of the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office, 
which comes under the administrative supervision of the De- 
partment by virtue of the appointment of the Secretary of Fin- 
ance as Chairman of its Board of Directors, had to be suspended 
because sweepstakes races could not be held as both racetracks 
were occupied by the U. S. Army. The repeated recommend- 
ations made by this Department for the early reopening of the 
Office by the holding of lotteries in the meantime were not favor- 
ably considered. Recently, however, its new Board of Directors 
has been appointed, with the Secretary of Finance as Chairman 
and Messrs. Rafael Roces, Gabriel Daza, Alfonso Ponce Enrile, 
and Dr. Aristeo Ubaldo as members. The Board will meet soon 
to consider the appointment of the Manager of the Philippine 
Charity Sweepstakes Office, its prompt reorganization and 
its program of activities. The reopening of this Office will not 
only provide much needed relief funds for civic, health and 
charitable organizations, but also increase government revenue 
and give employment to many. Besides, it will enable the Office 
to ‘pay outstanding obligations, such as the unpaid prizes of the 
December, 1941 draw, the three months’ advance salary and 
gratuity due its pre-war employees, and other miscellaneous 
accounts. 

BUREAU OF BANKING REESTABLISHED 

The Bureau of Banking was reestablished under the Common- 
wealth Government on 3 March 1945. 

The Bureau of Banking is vested with the visitorial power of 
the government over banks and banking in the interest of the 
maintenance of sound banking service and the smooth flow of 



40 



credit. Upon the outbreak of war in 1941, in addition to its 
regular duties of banking supervision, the President of the 
Philippines, by Executive Order, instituted strict control over 
capital movement and entrusted upon the Bureau of Banking 
the effectuation of the Order. The timely execution of a program 
of licensing of withdrawals from banks made possible the con- 
servation of bank funds and assets which were later evacuated 
to the United States, and thus prevented from falling into the 
hands of the enemy. 

Three years of occupation of the Philippines by the enemy has 
brought havoc upon the entire economy of the country, partic- 
ularly upon the centripetal and vital part of that economy, the 
banks, resulting from looting of banks by the Japanese, flooding 
the country, through force, with worthless currency and ultim- 
ately, the destruction of bank premises. The liberation of the 
Philippines found the banking institutions in an abject state 
of collapse. In this state, the reconstruction of the economy of 
the country had to start with the resumption of operation of 
banks. 

GOVERNMENT OFFERS FIRST BANK FACILITIES 

Under Executive Order No. 25, dated 18 November 1944, all 
banks in liberated areas were ordered closed and their existing 
accounts frozen. However, mindful of the indispensability of 
banks in the day-to-day life of the community, the President 
ordered the Banking Division of the National Treasury opened, 
under Executive Order No. 33, dated 10 March 1945, with 
4*30,000,000 capital to tide over until the old established banks 
could be allowed to resume operations. 

It was the initial task of the Bureau to determine the actual 
financial position of all banks as of date of liquidation. Having 
accomplished this about the middle of the second quarter of 
1945, the Bureau of Banking was well prepared to assume re- 
sponsibility of licensing the resumption of banks. Forthwith, 
the President by Executive Order No. 48 dated 6 June 1945, 
authorized the Bureau of Banking to reopen banks that were 
found in condition to resume operation. As it was necessary to 
determine the true extent of the liability of banks for commit- 
ments undertaken during the period of enemy occupation, Ex- 
ecutive Order No. 49, dated 6 June 1945, was promulgated, and 
on the basis thereof, an examination was made into the assets 
and liabilities of every bank to supplement preliminary analyses 
previously made. 



41 



BANKS, 10 BRANCHES, 40 AGENCIES LICENSED 

Subsequently, the following banks were licensed to perform 
their usual banking functions as of dates indicated. 

1. National City Bank of New York . — June 15, 1945 

2. Philippine National Bank July 23, 1945 

3. Chartered Bank of India, Australia and 

China July 23, 1945 

4. China Banking Corporation July 23, 1945 

5. Philippine Bank of Communications July 27, 1945 

6. Agricultural and Industrial Bank August 6, 1945 

7. Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corp August 6, 1945 

8. Nederlandsch Indische Handelsbank, N. V. August 6, 1945 

Philippine National Bank Branches: 

1. Bacolod, Negros Occidental August 27, 1945 

2. Baguio, Mountain Province July 30, 1945 

3. Cabanatuan, Nueva Ecija July 23, 1945 

4. Cebu, Cebu - - July 31, 1945 

6. Dagupan, Pangasinan August 11, 1945 

6. Iloilo, Iloilo July 30, 1945 

7. Legaspi, Albay . August 18, 1945 

8. Lucena, Tayabas .. July 23, 1945 

9. Tarlac, Tarlac - July 23, 1945 

10. Davao, Davao November 8, 1945 

Philippine National Bank Agencies: 

1. Abra October 1, 1945 

2. Agusan - October 22, 1945 

3. Albay ‘ October 11, 1945 

4. Antique October 1, 1945 

6. Bataan September 28, 1945 

6. Batanes 1 - August 2, 1946 

7. Bohol - . - November 1, 1945 

8. Bulacan August 2, 1945 

9. Cagayan - October 17, 1945 

10. Camarines Norte October 23, 1945 

11. Camarines Sur October 16, 1945 

12. Capiz November 16, 1945 

13. Cavite September 19, 1945 

14. Cebu October 19, 1945 

15. Cotabato ’ October 24, 1945 

16. Ilocos Norte - September 1, 1945 

17. Ilocos Sur *. October 24, 1945 

18. Iloilo . September 1, 1945 

19. Isabela - November 10, 1945 

20. Laguna September 10, 1945 

21. Lanao November 1, 1945 

22. Leyte November 7, 1945 



42 



23. Marinduque 

24. Mindoro . 

25. Masbate 

26. Mountain Province 

27. Nueva Ecija 

28. Occidental Misamis .... 

9 Q Mnpva Vizeava 






October 6, 1945 

December 15, 1945 

November 19, 1945 

December 11, 1945 

September 26, 1945 

December 1, 1945 

September 8, 1945 


30. Occidental Negros 






November 21, 1945 


31. Oriental Negros 






^ November 26, 1945 


32. Pampanga 








33. Pangasinan 






October 1, 1945 


34. Rizal 






September 20, 1945 


35. Samar 






October 3, 1945 


36. Sorsogon 






November 5, 1945 


37. Tarlac 






October 2, 1945 


38. Tayabas 






, September 17, 1945 


39. Zambales 







September 25, 1945 


40. Zamboanga 






: December 29, 1945 ^ 



Other Provincial Sub-Agencies : 

Chartered Bank of India, Australia and China: 

Iloilo . 

Cebu 

Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation: 

Iloilo December 4, 1945 

PHILIPPINE NATIONAL BANK FUNCTIONING AGAIN 
Under the provisions of Commonwealth Act No. 672, which 
provides for the rehabilitation of the Philippine National Bank, 
Philippine government deposits held by the bank prior to enemy 
occupation, inclusive of f*15,000,000 from the capital of the Bank- 
ing Division of the National Treasury, have been blocked and 
made available for writing off the losses incurred by the Philip- 
pine National Bank by reason of the enemy occupation of the 
Philippines. The aggregate of government deposits so blocked 
amount to over fifty-two and one-half million pesos. The ag- 
gregate losses of the bank have not as yet been finally determined, 
but it is estimated that by the application of the blocked govern- 
ment deposits to these losses the resulting capital structure of 
the bank will not be less than 1*10,000,000. Commonwealth Act 
No. 672 allows the bank a period of one year within which to 
determine the losses of the bank and to charge the same against 
the blocked government deposits. The charging of these losses 
against the blocked account is placed expressly by law under 
the supervision of the Bureau of Banking. 



October 15, 1945 
January 2, 1946 



43 



PRIVATE BANKS GET REHABILITATION AID 
With 1 espect to the other banks which were in operation be - 
fore the war but which to date remain closed, various measures 
have been proposed by this Bureau to permit their reopening. 
In the Second Special Session of the Congress of the Philippines*, 
a bill was passed appropriating the amount of ten million pesos 
for the rehabilitation of private banks and providing for a Fi- 
nancial Institution Rehabilitation Board for the management 
and investment of the appropriated amount. However, this pro- 
posed legislation enacted by Congress was vetoed by the Pres- 
ident on the ground that the appointment of the members of 
the Rehabilitation Board unduly limited the prerogatives of the 
President as provided in the Constitution. In the Fifth Special 
Session of Congress, a bill was again passed providing for the 
rehabilitation of Philippine banks and appropriating the sum 
of ten million pesos to. constitute a Special Fund to be managed 
by a Financial Institution Rehabilitation Board. This measure 
has been signed by the President. 

CLEARING HOUSE ASSOCIATION RESUMES OPERATIONS 
At the instance of the Bureau of Banking, the operation of 
the Manila Clearing House Association was resumed simul- 
taneously with the reopening of the Philippine National Bank 
on July 23, 1945. All operating banks, except the Agricultural 
and Industrial Bank, are members of this Association. With a 
modest beginning of a total clearing balance of only PI, 500, 000 
at the end of the first day of clearing the operating fund has 
since grown to a sizable amount of 1*26,000,000 as of December 
29, 1945. 

REHABILITATION OF BUILDING AND LOAN ASSOCIATIONS 
Like banks, all building and loan associations in the Philip- 
pines suffered the ravages of war. The importance of rehabil- 
itating these associations can be well appreciated if we take 
into consideration the fact that they are specialized institutions 
dedicated to financing home construction. Having ascertained 
the present condition of these associations, the Bureau of Bank- 
ing proceeded in search of ways and means for their rehabilita- 
tion. With the cooperation of building and loan executives, the 
Bureau of Banking has been able to present to the Secretary of 
Finance a formula of rehabilitation which, it is believed, if put 
into effect, will permit normal operation of all associations al- 
ready in existence. 



44 



Effective supervision of banks calls for intimate knowledge by 
the Bureau of Banking of the constantly changing conditions of 
each institution as reflected by their day-to-day transactions. 
This is achieved through examination by a staff of well trained 
bank examiners of regular and periodic reports rendered to the 
Bureau by the subject banks and examination of the original 
books and records at intervals, utilizing the element of surprise. 

TANGIBLE BENEFITS FROM REOPENING OF BANKS 

Since the reopening of banks, the pooling of surplus funds of 
the community has been tremendously accelerated, with bank 
deposits as of 29 December 1945 reaching an all-time record 
of over 259 million pesos, exclusive of deposits of public funds 
of over 81 million pesos. These figures will show the extent 
of funds canalized to banks in combating inflationary tendencies 
and serving as a stable basis for generating the productive flow 
of credit. The financing of imports from the United States 
which is reportedly to the extent of almost a million pesos every 
day has been undertaken through the medium of banks, thus 
enabling the constant flow of goods and commodities into Philip- ; 
pine homes and reestablishing normal standards of living for 
the people. Through extensions of bank credit, commerce and 
industry are assuming normal aspects and the productive poten- i 
tials of the country are being generously assisted for sound 
development and growth after the period of atrophy resulting 
from enemy occupation. 

WORK AT THE TREASURY RESUMED 

The pre-war functions of the different divisions comprising 
the Bureau of the Treasury have been restored, with the excep- 
tion of the Mint Division, which is not yet operating. The 
Mint used to handle the manufacture and production of sub- 
sidiary coins needed to ease out the dearth of coins in the 
Islands, and thus help facilitate retail trade transactions. 'At j 
present these coins are being minted in the United States. This ! 
Office plans to have the Mint resume operations as soon as ; 
facilities therefor are available. 

Considerably increased are the activities in the Currency 
Division of this Bureau. The inflow of money to this Treasury 
is to such an extent that this Office has been constrained, for 
the sake of an efficient public service, to employ eight emergency 
money counters at the rate of flOO per month each to reinforce 



45 



ttie pre-war and regular 13 money counters in this Bureau. 
Tlie increase in the volume of work has been brought about by 
the resumption of the National Treasury of selling exchanges 
against its dollar deposits in the United States. 

From January 4 to 11, 1946, this Office, has sold 26 demand 
drafts aggregating f*32, 643,000. Of this amount, 1*243,000 per- 
tained to premiums charged on these exchanges at the rate of 
three-fourth per cent. Deposits from the different bureaus and 
offices, provinces, . cities, government-owned corporations and 
other entities have also increased. From July 1 to December 
31, 1945, the deposits received in this Treasury aggregated 
1*24,623,139.54. Treasury warrants drawn on the National 
Treasury and duly paid for the same period amounted to 
1*57,727,218.67. Actual cash transfer from the United States 
depositories to the Treasury vaults of the amount of 1*60,000,000 
have also been effected during the said period. 

MUTILATED BILLS REDEEMED; COINS DISBURSED 

Mutilated currency redeemed since liberation totalled 1*5,826,- 
668. Heavy demand by the public for minor and subsidiary 
coins has been noticeable. Subsidiary coins of various denomin- 
ations amounting to 1*36,016,200 have been made available to 
the Army for disposition and this Treasury has already requi- 
sitioned from the Army considerable portion of the above coins 
for disbursement, thus easing out the dearth of small coins in 
the Islands. 

In view of this great volume of work in the Treasury, the treas- 
ury vault in the Charity Sweepstakes Building is inadequate to 
accommodate the big volume of currency turned over to this 
Treasury either for deposit or for payment of demand drafts and 
telegraphic transfers ; the Treasury had to utilize the vaults in 
three other different places. The Department of Finance plans 
to' recommend the setting up of a better building for this Bureau 
where better vault facilities could be installed. 

FIDELITY FUND NOW OPERATING 

The Fidelity Fund, one of the special funds under the ad- 
ministration of this Bureau, is now also operating. This fund 
takes charge of the insurance of the fidelity of officers and 
employees of the Government entrusted with the custody of 
public funds. The premium charged for such insurance is one- 
fourth of one per cent per annum. Up to and including De- 
cember 31, 1945, there were 6,888 bonded positions, varying 
in amounts from 1*100 to 1*150,000. There has been no transac- 



46 



tion in the public debt during the enemy occupation and since 
liberation up to the present. This Office has submitted a state- 
ment embodying requiring sinking fund up to and including June 
30, 1947. The Government is taking steps to provide funds 
for the payment of interest in arrears on bonds issued and sold 
in the Philippines. 

INSURANCE BUSINESS BACK TO NORMALCY 

During the period from the reestablishment sometime in April, 
1945 of the Office of the Insurance Commissioner of the Philip- 
pines up to this date, said Office has licensed 74 insurance 
companies to operate in this country. Of this number, 18 com- 
panies are domestic, 22 are American and 34 are foreign. Of 
the 18 local companies now in operation, 5 are new companies 
and 2 were given conditional permits only. Said Office also has 
under consideration the applications of 2 new American com- 
panies to engage in the business of insurance in the Philippines. 

As there were only 98 companies, both local and foreign, in 
operation at the outbreak of the war in 1941, the Office of 
the Insurance Commissioner, in licensing 74 insurance com- 
panies, has contributed much towards the restoration of insur- 
ance and bonding business, and credit facilities of the country. 
It may be said that insurance business has already been restored 
to normalcy. 

In the case of the 18 domestic companies, before they were 
licensed, they were examined by the examiners of the Insurance 
Commissioner’s Office. Considering the fact that, during nor- 
mal times it usually takes the whole period of one year for the 
examiners to examine an equal number of companies, the speed 
with which the said examiners examined the local companies now 
in operation, which took only a period of a little more than half 
that required during normal times, may be pointed out with 
justifiable pride as a commendable achievement. 

OTHER INSPECTION DIVISION ACTIVITIES 

There were 585 agents’ licenses issued by the Office of the 
Insurance Commissioner during the period under review as 
against 1,387 licenses in force at the close of the fiscal year 
ended June 30, 1941. There are now 42 pending agents’ applica- 
tions for authority to solicit and procure insurance. The dif- 
ference in the number of agents actually licensed as of this date 
and that in force on June 30, 1941, may be due to the fact that 
most of the foreign life insurance companies as well as the 2 
local life insurance companies, which companies had the biggest 



47 



number of agents before, have only recently been granted per- 
mits to operate. 

During the period under review, the Office of the Insurance 
Commissioner, in its desire to help policyholders and beneficiaries 
having claims against closed insurance companies, published 
notices in the local papers that it was ready to render assistance 
relating to claims against said companies. Responding to said 
notice, a number of policyholders and claimants filed claims 
and complaints against insurance companies, which claims and 
complaints have been duly attended to by the Insurance Com- 
missioner’s Office and the companies concerned. 

MUTUAL BENEFIT SOCIETIES GRANTED LICENSE 

On December 31, 1941, there were around 229 societies or 
associations authorized to engage in mutual benefit, relief, and 
benevolent activities under license issued by the Office of the 
Treasurer of the Philippines, pursuant to the provisions of 
section 1628-B of the Administrative Code, as amended by Act 
No. 3612. The annual financial reports submitted by mutual 
benefit societies during the year aggregated 280 and the exam- 
inations made into the financial affairs and condition of such 
societies aggregated 62 organizations and 22 duly organized 
branches. 

Since the liberation of the Philippines and the reestablish- 
ment of the Commonwealth Government, 7 societies have filed 
applications for licenses to engage in mutual benefit activities. 
Of the said applicant organizations, 2 have been granted licenses 
and the rest (5 applications) are still pending consideration 
either on account of the failure of the applicant organizations 
to submit the required amendments to their constitutions and 
. by-laws or for incomplete papers. 

GOVERNMENT SERVICE INSURANCE SYSTEM REOPENS 

After the liberation of Manila, or on March 16, 1945, the 
Office of the President authorized a skeleton force to take charge 
I of the records and property of the Government Service Insur- 
; ance System. Immediate steps were taken by the force to gather 
; together and arrange all the records of the System which were 
| found mixed up and scattered, but which, luckily, were not 
' burned or destroyed. Efforts were also exerted to locate the 
furniture and equipment of the System and to ascertain what 
were lost or missing. 



48 



With a view to determining the status of the policies of the 
System, the opinion of the Secretary of Justice on the matter 
was requested on April 14, 1945. Said official replied on June 
21, 1945, stating that by virtue of Executive Order No. 72, 
issued by the Chairman of the Philippine Executive Commission 
on July 31, 1942, all policies of the System were terminated on 
December 31, 1941, and that the System was not liable for any 
death and disability that occurred on or after that date irrespec- 
tive of the circumstances surrounding the same. 

GOVERNMENT DECIDES TO DO JUSTICE BY MEMBERS 
However, in view of the desire of the Government to live up 
to its commitments, and in order to do justice to the members 
of the System, steps were taken to determine the true financial 
condition of the System and to compute the additional amount 
needed to enable it to pay all benefits promised under its policies. 
For this purpose some insurance examiners of the Bureau of 
the Treasury were detailed to the System, and the services of 
a private actuary, Dr. Emeterio Roa, were availed of to make 
an actuarial valuation of the System. 

On September 18, 1945, Dr. Roa submitted his report in which 
he recommended that the “Insular Government should appro- 
priate 1*4, 000, 000 in order to cover the deficit. This will reha- 
bilitate the System as of December 31, 1941.” In the same 
report Dr. Roa stated that from December 31, 1941, to December 
31, 1945, there was an increase in policy reserves of PI 4,651,071. | 
This increase in policy reserves must be counterbalanced by 
premiums receivable from the members corresponding to prior 
years. 

P4, 00 0,0 00 APPROPRIATED TO REVIVE POLICIES 
In accordance with the recommendation of Dr. Roa a bill was' 
approved by Congress on October 3, 1945, reviving all policies 
of the System which were in force on December 31, 1941 ; honor- 
ing all obligations of the System under its policies; and appro- 
priating the sum of P4,000,000 to help the System pay said 
obligations. That bill became Commonwealth Act No. 706 on' 
November 1, 1945, when it was approved by the President of 
the Philippines. 

INSURANCE CLAIMS, OBLIGATIONS PAID 
By law the administration of the System is vested in the 
Government Service Insurance Board. The members of said 



49 



Board were appointed on December 3, 1945, and its first meeting* 
was held on December 10, 1945. At that meeting Hon. Fer- 
nando E. V. Sison, Undersecretary of Public Works and Com- 
munications, was elected Chairman of the Board, and Mariano 
G. del Rosario was appointed Acting General Manager pending 
the appointment of a permanent incumbent. Upon the recom- 
mendation of the Board, the Office of the President released on 
December 22, 1945, the sum of PI, 670, 000, representing part of 
the appropriation of P4, 000, 000 authorized in Commonwealth 
Act No. 706, in order to enable the System to pay insurance 
claims and other obligations. 

In accordance with existing laws, the Government Service 
Insurance System is also in charge of the payment of pensions 
to retired teachers, retired officials and employees of the Bureau 
of Health, and retired officers and enlisted men of the Philippine 
Constabulary. The payment of said pensions was stopped 
during the Japanese occupation, except that the pensions of 
retired teachers were restored effective April 1, 1944, although 
very few cared to collect their pensions during that time because 
of the little purchasing value of money then. 

PI, 370, 000 PAID IN RETIREMENT GRATUITIES 

Inasmuch as after liberation all pension systems had no funds 
available for disbursement, and in order to alleviate the financial 
condition of pensioners, most of whom are old or disabled or 
without means of livelihood, the Government, by virtue of Com- 
monwealth Act No. 710 approved on November 1, 1^45 appro- 
priated the sum of 1*2,000,000 “for the payment of retirement 
gratuities or pensions to all persons who under existing laws 
have been receiving such gratuities or pensions, including pay- 
ment of pensions or gratuities as of December 8, 1941. ’ From 
said appropriation the sum of 1*1,370,820 was released by the 
Office of the President on December 12, 1945, to enable the 
System to resume the payment of pensions effective July 1, 1945. 

Besides paying pensions, death claims, disability benefits, 
maturity or old-age benefits, cash surrender values, dividends, 
and policy loans, the System may give medical aid and other 
forms of financial assistance in order to rehabilitate the people.. 
In the reconstruction of the country the System also plans to 
play an important role by adopting such policies in the invest- 
ment of its vast funds as would improve the economic condition 
of the nation and help it rise from the ruins of the last war. 

4999 4 



50 



PURCHASE AND SUPPLY DIVISION REORGANIZED 

Reorganized on March 15, 1945, with 12 employees and 6 
laborers to carry on the function of procuring supplies for the 
Commonwealth Government, the Division of Purchase and Sup- 
ply has up to this time of writing, around 80 employees including 
laborers, all of the regular employees being the same as those 
prior to the outbreak of the War. Thirteen Buyers and As- 
sistant Buyers have been recalled, 1 Buyer less than the pre- 
war force. As supplies and equipment have been ordered from 
the United States for stock, the Supplies Division has been 
reinforced in order to cope with its enlarged function. 

Around 6,000 Buyer’s orders and contracts under the Cir- 
cular Proposal have been issued covering office desks, chairs, 
revolving chairs, bookcases, aparadors, steel safes, typewriters, 
adding and mimeograph machines, stationery and office supplies 
such as bond, mimeograph and onion skin paper, clips, pencils, 
pens, pen points, etc. for the Departments of National Defense, 
Public Works and Communications, Finance, Justice, Instruc- 
tion, Labor, Agriculture and Commerce, Office of the President, 
the People’s Court, Office of Special Prosecutors, and all the re- 
organized bureaus and offices as well as provinces, cities, munic- 
ipalities and Government owned or controlled corporations. 

Contracts under the Direct Order and Payment System for hot 
asphalt and emulsified asphalt, explosives, water meters and 
heavy and light hardwares for delivery beginning January 1, 
1946, have been entered into with the leading merchants in the 
City. 

P5, 000, 000 IN SUPPLIES ORDERED 

These articles costing about ¥=5,000,000 will be used mostly 
for public works projects. 

Supplies and equipment valued approximately at ¥500,000 
have been received since about the middle of July, 1945, from 
the United States, and have since then been issued to the dif- 
ferent departments, bureaus and offices as well as provinces, 
cities, municipalities and Government owned or controlled cor- 
porations. These supplies have greatly broken the black market 
as their prices are, in the main, just slightly above the pre-war 
level. 

In order to maintain price equilibrium, it is the plan of 
this Office to carry in stock supplies in the amount of around 



51 



n, 000, 000, to be set aside as Reimbursable Fund. Stationeries 
will mostly constitute the articles for stock. 

NINE PORTS OF ENTRY OPEN TO WORLD TRADE 

The Bureau of Customs was reorganized under President 
Osrneha in March, 1945. Since then all the pre-war divisions 
of the Bureau have been reestablished and former officials and 
employees have been recalled. Only exception is the lighthouse 
service, delay in the reorganization of which is due to the de- 
struction of lighthouses by the enemy and the lack of revenue 
cutters to be used in the inspection and maintenance of light- 
houses, buoys and navigation aids. 

The eight pre-war ports of entry, namely, Cebu, Iloilo, Aparri, 
Jose Panganiban, Legaspi (now Tabaco), Zamboanga, Jolo, and 
I Davao have been reorganized and are now open to domestic 
and foreign trade. The opening of each port was made as 
l early as possible in order to hasten the return to normalcy by 
[ the resumption of shipping and local trade. The latest port 
[ of entry made available to coastwise and foreign trade is Taclo- 
I ban, Leyte, which was opened on August 16, 1945. 



FOREIGN TRADE FAST RETURNING TO NORMAL 



The foreign trade is fast being resumed and expanded. The 
I first foreign vessel carrying commercial cargo arrived on August 
L 31, 1945. Since then 32 foreign vessels have arrived carrying 
I consumed goods and construction materials, which are abso- 
l lutely necessary for rehabilitation and reconstruction. From 
1*3,007,873 in August, the amount of exportation has grown by 
l leaps and bounds and was expected to reach about 1 * 15 , 000,000 
k in December. 

The increase in importation has resulted in a corresponding 
.^increase in customs collection, which reached its highest in 
December, amounting to 1*2,246,780.45. 

The Bureau is taking all necessary measures to protect im- 
? ported merchandise from thievery, pilferage and damage in 
i order to attract foreign shipping and thus reduce the price of 
i essential commodities through increased importation. 

Domestic trade is becoming active and expanding as shown 
l by the increasing number of licenses that the Bureau has issued 
; to vessels engaged in bay and river business and coastwise trade. 
\ The Bureau has licensed a total of 183 motor boats, barges, 
!. cascos and sailing vessels for bay and river trade, and a total 



52 



of 889 motor launches, motorships, steamers and sailing vessels 
for coastwise trade. 

TO RECONSTRUCT PORT WORKS, FACILITIES 

The Bureau plans to: 

1. Reconstruct port facilities. Most of our piers, wharves 
and warehouses were damaged during the enemy occupation. I 
In the work of reconstruction, the Osmena administration has 
the pledge of support from President Truman and other Amer- 
ican officials. Already experts from the U. S. Army and Navy 
have conducted surveys on the reconstruction needs. 

2. Restore the coastguard and lighter services. Revenue i 
cutters are needed to patrol our seas, enforce customs and navi- . 
gation laws, etc. 

3. Take over the arrastre service. This branch of the cus- ■ 
toms service takes charge of the receiving, care and delivery of 
imported merchandise. Before the war it was leased to different \ 
companies. This service should be handled by the Bureau 
instead of awarding it to a private company. Apart from the ' 
manifest advantages from government supervision and control, 

a big income could be realized and made available for govern- 
ment expenditures. 

REUTERS REPORTS IMPORT TRADE BOOM 

One of the reliable indications of the swift return of normalcy 
under the Osmena administration is the tremendous spurt in 
import trade. An unprejudiced source, the Reuters News 
Agency, gives the following account of the development of this 
trade: 

Manila, Jan. 1 U- (Reuter ) . — The spectacular expansion of 
Philippine import trade since the resumption of shipments to 
the Islands in June 15 shown in official figures compiled here. . 

“From a total of 1*3,646 in June, the value of commercial 
goods shipped to the Islands pumped to 1*3,007,873 n August j f 
even before war's end, spurted further to 1*5,049,096 in Sep- : 
tember following V-J Day, and then doubled to 1*9, 445, 002 in ! j; 
October. 

“Official statistics on the value of importation during the lastjl 
two months of 1945 are still unavailable, but estimates place j I 
the figures at around 1*12,000,000 in November and 1*15, 000, 000 \ 
in December. 

“Another significant feature of the import trade is the fact ; 
that the Philippines is now trading with about a score of na- j 
tions — at least purchasing goods from them to help in the relief ; 



53 



and rehabilitation program here. Up to October, some 17 na- 
tions had supplied the Philippines with goods ranging from 
flour to rice and other grains, and from canned goods to textiles. 

'“Imports from nations other than the United States, however, 
represented merely transhipments through United States ports. 
Nations which have already helped send relief goods to the 
Philippines include Brazil, Canada, Mexico, Spain, Chile, Bri- 
tain, West Indies, Argentina, Cuba, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Por- 
tugal— British Africa, White Russia, France, Sweeden and the 
Netherlands. 

MOST SHIPMENTS COME FROM U. S., CANADA 

“The preponderant portion of shipments to the Islands, how- 
E ever, came direct from the United States sources, almost f*8 
million worth of imports in October having been supplied by 
American exporters out of a total of f*9i million worth of ship- 
ments from all exporting countries during that month. 

'‘Canada came next to the United States in supplying the 
Philippines with relief goods which passed through private trade 
' channels, accounting for more than a million pesos worth from 
August to October alone. Canadian shipments consisted largely 
of flour, Canada being one of the largest food granaries of the 
world. 

“With the virtual termination of import restrictions as ' 
[ December 31, 1945, the Philippines more sup- 

plies from many of the pre-war sources and also eventua y o 
i export Philippine products, to countries which represen e 

l some of the Islands' best customers.” 

INTERNAL REVENUE COLLECTION RESUMED 

The reorganization of the Bureau of Internal Revenue was 
[ started on March 6, 1945, under great difficulties. The lack of 
i an adequate office building and office equipment retarded the 
, opening of the different divisions and units. 

During the first week of the reorganization of the Bureau, 
i only a small number of former officials and employees were 
l- available. Employees have been recalled to the service grad- 
ually so that on December 31, 1945, a total of 848 were actually 
on duty. Of this total, 433 are now assigned v in Manila and 
[ 415 in the different provincial inspection units. There were 
l( 141 employees whose appointments were recommended but who 
I have not yet reported for duty. During the period under re- 
view, 63 promotional appointments were approved by the Sec- 
retary of Finance. 



54 



The activities of the Bureau cover the collection of all the 
national internal revenue taxes, fees, and charges and the en- 
forcement of all forfeitures, penalties, and fines connected there- 
with. The Bureau also administers the supervisory and police 
power conferred to it by the National Internal Revenue Code 
and other laws. 

P 8 , 835, 000 IN INTERNAL REVENUE TAXES 
From the date of the reorganization of the Bureau to De- 
cember 31, 1945, the total collection was f*8, 835, 785.08. 

During the same period, as a result of the activities of the In- 
spection Division with a field force distributed in 32 inspection 
units throughout the archipelago, a total of 518,095.05 as defi- 
ciency taxes, surcharges and compromise was collected; 16,916 
privilege tax-receipts were issued ; 24,352 business establishments 
were inspected; 5,220 violations of the internal revenue laws 
were detected, and 5,199 internal revenue cases were settled. 

The Prohibited Drugs Section of the Inspection Division 
issued during the period under review 18 permits for the im- 
portation of prohibited drugs, 46 special permits for the im- 
portation of non-taxable prohibited drugs, and 45 permits for 
local purchases of prohibited drugs under the Narcotic Act of 
the United States Congress and the Regulations of the Depart- 
ment^ Finance. 

457 MANUFACTURING FIRMS *TAXED 
Dui ing the same period th 9 llurn b e j. 0 f manufacturers of prod- 
ucts subject to specific taxes authorized and duly licensed by this 
Bureau to operate are as follows: 



Kind, Number 

Cigar factories 72 

Cigarette factories 43 

Manufactured tobacco factories 20 

Distillers 220 

Compounders : gg 

Repackers 4 

Breweries 



The net cost to the National Government for the operation of 
the Bureau of Internal Revenue during the period from March 
6, 1945, to December 31, 1945, was ¥=739,062.08. The total 
internal revenue collections during the same period amounted 
to ¥8,835,785.08. Thus, the unit cost of operation of the Bu- 
reau of Internal Revenue during the period under consideration 
was only ¥0.0836 for each peso tax collected. 




the administration of justice 

SETTING UP THE JUDICIAL BRANCH 

The Constitution of the Philippines provides that “the judi- . 
cial power shall be vested in one Supreme Court and in such 
inferior courts as may be established by law.” Pursuant to 
this provision President Osmena lost no time in re-establishing 
the Supreme Court and the inferior courts, with their comple- 
mentary offices necessary for the administration of justice. 
The Court of Industrial Relations has also been re-established. 
Bureaus and offices under the Department of Justice, namely, 
the Bureau of Justice, the Bureau of Prisons, the Public Service 
Commission, the General Registration Office and the Securities 
and Exchange Commission are now functioning. 

To meet the problem of administering justice to those charged 
with collaboration with the enemy, the People’s Court and the 
Office of Special Prosecutors were organized and ■are now 
working. 



PSC AND SEC HELP IN REESTABLISHING NORMALCY 

To meet the great demand for transportation facilities which 
were seriously crippled by the war, the Public Service om 
mission, in the exercise of its jurisdiction and control over all 
public service enterprises not under the jurisdiction of the 
Bureau of Customs and the Bureau of Aeronautics, has acted 
with promptness and dispatch in the granting of certificates at 
public convenience to all qualified applicants who can show to 
its satisfaction that the operation of their services woul promo e 
the public interest. The presence in Manila’s streets and on 
national highways of numerous motor vehicles for passengers 
and freight attests to the efficacy with which the Commission 
has responded to the exigencies of the situation. 

With the re-establishment of the Securities and Exchange 
Commission, the formation of corporations and other business 
associations adapted to handle large-scale business and trade 
during the present emergency has been encouraged and facili- 
tated. Transactions on speculative securities, such as stock cer- 
tificates, treasury stock certificates, bonds, debentures, and othei 
kinds of certificates, at a time when business conditions are 
still abnormal, have been placed under effective regulation by 
the Securities and Exchange Commission to protect the invest- 
ing public from frauds. 



65 



56 



ACTING APPOINTMENTS ARE JUSTIFIED 

Upon the re-establishment of the Commonwealth after the 
liberation of our country, the foremost concern of the Adminis- 
tration was the restoration of the public service. To attain 
this end, acting appointments had to be made, since the majority 
of government officials in 1941 either were absent from their 
former positions or served in the Government sponsored by the 
enemy. Since the judiciary, more than any other branch of the 
Government, had to be free from the taint of collaboration, it 
was not possible permanently to appoint anyone who had not 
been cleared by the U. S. Army Counter-Intelligence Corps. 
Every appointee needed such a clearance in order to prove his 
continued fidelity to the Commonwealth Government. However, 
lest the restoration of the public service be unnecessarily de- 
layed, the Administration could not wait for the CIC clearance 
of these officials prior to their reinstatement. It was also 
thought that the simplification of the Government, consistent 
with efficiency and within our financial means, was necessary 
under the circumstances. Hence in re-establishing the dif- 
ferent government bureaus and offices, the Administration ap- 
pointed only a skeleton force. Pending their clearance, the 
officials were appointed in an acting capacity.. The number of 
judicial positions was reduced by reorganizing the judiciary 
and abolishing the positions of district attorneys. The Court 
of Appeals, with its large personnel, was also abolished, and, 
in order to enable the Supreme Court to cope with the situa- 
tion, its membership was increased by four members, i. e., 
from seven to eleven. This step was not taken as an indict- 
ment of failure against the Court of Appeals. It was simply 
taken to meet an emergency. * 

4 he Administration has taken particular care in the choice 
of members of the judiciary. This caution has been prompted 
not, by distrust of the appointees but by the compelling necessity 
ol not committing, if possible, a single error. As quickly as 
theii CIC clearance has been received, their acting appoint- 
ments have been changed with permanent ones. Thus such 
appointments constitute the recognition of their proven loyalty 
to the Government, their integrity and their ability and worth. 

INDEPENDENCE OF JUDICIARY NOT IMPAIRED 

The feai has been expressed in some quarters that the in- 
dependence of the judiciary has been impaired. The resort to 
acting appointments, as well as the reorganization of the judi- 
ciary which was impelled by the abnormal situation above stated, 




57 



has not impaired the independence of the judiciary. The De- 
partment of Justice asserts that no single. instance can be found 
which would even hint such impairment, for the independence 
of the judiciary is upheld and can be upheld only by the judiciary 
itself. It can be impaired only if the men entrusted with the 
administration of justice are remiss and subservient in the dis- 
charge of their duties or are wanting in strength of character 
to assert their rights and use their powers. The people can 
have full confidence in the present members of the judiciary. 



PROMOTION OF AGRICULTURE AND COMMERCE 

COMMERCE BUREAU LISTS ACHIEVEMENTS 

Under President Osmena, the Bureau of Commerce has: 

1. Supplied trade information and data to 673 parties. 

2. Assisted 14 local importers establish business connections 
with U. S. manufacturers, and 86 provincial dealers and re- 
tailers make direct connections with Manila merchants. 

3. Completed economic survey in 24 provinces. Reports 
from 20 provinces have not yet been submitted. 

4. Organized 2 provincial trading corporations, 4 city busi- 
ness associations (all in Manila) and 8 municipal merchants’ 
associations of Filipino businessmen to engage in the importa- 
tion of foodstuffs and other essential commodities as well as 
to help Filipinos get a bigger share of our retail trade. 

5. Renewed market quotation service by issuing weekly re- 
ports on prices of 310 commodity items, with graphical pre- 
sentation of weekly changes in price levels of 150 selected com- 
modities. 

6. Registered 3,179 business names and 233 aliases ; licensed 
87 merchandise brokers, 86 exchange brokers, 8 ship brokers, 
30 real estate brokers and 3 real estate salesmen. 

7. Issued 13 trade opportunity notices in connection with 
inquiries from abroad seeking trade connections with local im- 
porters. 

8. Investigated possible exportation of important pre-war 
Philippine products. 

9. Gathered materials for the importers’ and exporters’, in- 
dustrial and business directories. 

10. Reorganized 18 provincial offices. 

11. Investigated extent of war damages to important Phil- 
ippine export products. 

TO ESTABLISH AGENCIES ABROAD 

The Bureau plans: N 

1. To establish commercial agencies in the U. S., China and 
Europe. 

2. To establish branch offices in all provinces, insteacTof only 
in 18, as at present, in order to extend its services as widely as 
possible. 

58 



59 



3. To revive the Manila Trading Center and the National 
Produce Exchange. 

4. To send qualified personnel to American consular offices 
abroad for training in trade promotion work. 

PROMOTING THE COOPERATIVE MOVEMENT 

The National Cooperatives Administration, which started 
operation on January 2, 1946, has under its supervision 724 
cooperatives with a total membership of 155,249. Twenty-four 
of these have been organized "under the NCA, the others were 
organized and registered under the cooperatives division of the 
former ECA in J945. 

The total authorized capital is ^182,195,374, the paid up cap- 
ital is f*2,091,324. Of these cooperatives, 179 are in Manila 
and 545 in the provinces. They are classified as follows : 

1. Consumers* cooperatives 609 

2. Producers* cooperatives - 68 

3. Retailers* cooperatives ✓. 45 

4. Credit union - * 

5. Wholesale * 

ACTIVITIES OF THE NATIONAL COOPERATIVES ADMINISTRATION 

The activities of the NCA have been confined to the following: 

1. The study of all registered cooperative associations to de- 
termine which of them are truly cooperative and which are not. 
Those found to be not truly cooperative will be urged to re- 
organize and operate in accordance with the accepted principles, 
policies and methods of cooperative associations. 

2. Helping cooperatives to straighten their books and furnish 
guidance to their managements whenever it is found that the 
books are not properly kept. In this manner the NCA helps 
to safeguard the people’s money. 

3. Helping to produce commodities from local sources or from 
abroad for distribution to the established cooperatives, which 
in turn distribute to their members at reasonable prices so that 
they may help eliminate the black market. 

4. To help locate markets for marketable products of estab- 
lished producers’ (farmers’) cooperatives. 

5. To give advise and encouragement regarding the coopera- 
tive movement and to preach the principles, ideals and objectives 
of cooperation to the people. 

The people of this country are but beginning to understand 
the principles, objectives and methods of cooperative associa- 



60 



tions, but the NCA is going ahead with its work confident of 
making cooperatives operate successfully here, as they have in 
other countries. % 

PROMOTION OF PLANT AND ANIMAL INDUSTRIES 

EXPERIMENT STATIONS PROPOSED 

The Bureau of Plant Industry has: 

1. Reopened 10 out of its 18 experiment stations and seed 
farms. 

2. Resumed agricultural extension work in 40 provinces. 

3. Established 125,062 home, commercial, community and 
school gardens with an aggregate area of 12,615 hectares. 

4. Distributed seeds and plant materials to 348,627 farmers 
as follows : Seed palay, 2,351 cavans ; corn, 184 cavans ; cassava, 
190,742 cuttings; camote, 121,019 cuttings; gabi, 3,877 kilos; 
beans, 889 kilos; vegetables seeds, 17,415 kilos; vegetable seed- 
lings, 366,815; fruit-tree seedlings, 8,335. 

5. Reopened 33 of the 84 pre-war provincial and municipal 
nurseries; planted 110 hectares of land to different vegetables 
for seeds production ; and formulated 40 recipes for wheat meal 
preparations. 

TO ESTABLISH REGIONAL SEED FARMS 

The Bureau plans to : 

1. Reopen all the closed experiment stations^seed farms, and 
provincial and municipal nurseries. 

2. Establish one regional seed farm each in Luzon (Bicol 
Region), Visayas (Iloilo), and Mindanao (Cotabato) ; One in- 
troduction garden in Luna, Mountain Province; and the one ex- 
periment station in Davao. 

3. Intensify agricultural extension activities especially in con- 
nection with the current food production campaign. 

4. Procure and distribute pedigreed seeds and plant mate- 
rials. 

5. Resume researches and investigations on rice, corn, sugar 
cane, coconut, abaca, ramie and other fibers, tobacco, vegetables, 
fruits and nuts, coffee, cacao, rubber, etc., and on the utilization 
of these crops as well as the control of plant pests and diseases. 

6. Send abroad pensionados in plant exploration, food tech- 
nology, agricultural extension and plant propagation. 

The Bureau has recalled 373 employees. 



61 



MEAT INSPECTION SERVICE REESTABLISHED 

In the few months that it has been operating under the Com- 
monwealth Government, the Bureau of Animal Industry has : 

1. Reestablished meat inspection service in six cities and 158 
municipalities. 

2. Promoted the control of animal diseases, vaccinating 17,397 
carabaos, 1,190 cattle, 191 hogs and 425 chickens. 

3. Manufactured 35,000 doses of anthrax vaccine, 10,000 doses 
of fowl pox vaccine. 

4. Established nine research projects on the control and treat- 
\ . ment of destructive parasitic diseases. 

6. Collected and cultivated medicinal and forage plants for 
- research on the control of parasites. 

6. Extended public breeding services to 10 stations and cen- 
ters of the bureau. 

7. Arranged for the purchase abroad of breeding animals. 

8. Promoted production of good livestock by castrating 531 
carabaos, 148 cattle, 10 horses, 1,070 hogs, 803 chickens, 72 
goats. 

9. Procured work animals for needy farmers by contacting 
parties with such animals for sale. 

TO PURCHASE BREEDING ANIMALS 

The Bureau plans to: ' 

1. Purchase breeding animals and needed equipment with the 
1*500,000 appropriated under Commonwealth Act No. 721. 

2. Establish and maintain additional breeding stations with 
1*500,000 appropriated under Commonwealth Act No. 721. 

3. Stop indiscriminate slaughter of animals, by campaigning 
to this end and securing legislation penalizing such slaughter. 

4. Seek a revolving fund of 1*200,000 for the purchase of woik 
and breeding animals found for sale. 

Four hundred forty officials and employees were in the service 
as of December 31, 1945. 

CONSERVATION OF AGRICULTURAL AND FOREST RESOURCES 

Since it was reorganized by President Osmena, the Bureau 
of Forestry has: 

1. Established the Bataan National Park of about 31,000 
hectares 

2. Received 2,298 applications for timber licenses, of which 
number 1,118 were granted, 116 were rejected and the rest are 
pending action. 



62 



3. Undertaken a survey of the extent of damage to the lum- 
ber industry and to our forests. 

4. Granted 1,170 permits for minor forest products, includ- 

ing 425 for firewood, 429 for rattan, 49 for almaciga and 267 
for other forest products. ‘ vx 

5. Collected forest charges amounting to 1*93,754.44, includ- 
ing 1*86,274.88 for timber and the rest for minor forest products. 

6. Sold forest products amounting to f*2, 463.38 from the 
Makiling National Park and 1*3,003.00 from the Arayat Na- 
tional Park. 

7. Reestablished the 120-hectare ipil-ipil research tract in 
L,os Banos. 

8. Rebuilt the forest herbarium, which Has a collection of 
4,444 specimens representing 91 families, 333 genera and 468 
species. 

9. Rebuilt a mycological collection consisting of 135 speci- 
mens of wood-rotting fungi. • 

10. Classified 6,000 wood hand specimens salvaged from the 
vault of the bureau. 

11. Prepared a bibliography of Philippine literature on for- 
estry. So far 750 bibliographic entries have been assembled. 

12. Reopened six of the 35 reforestation projects in operation 
in 1941. The others will be reopened as soon as possible. 

13. Reopened the 344 hectares of cinchona plantation in Bu- 
kidnon. Of the million and a half cinchona, trees in the planta- 
tion, only one-half million have survived. However, funds re- 
leased by the administration will soon enable the bureau to 
renew its former activities in this field and in the manufacture 
of quinine. 

14. Cooperated with the U. S. Army by furnishing various 
units with maps, surveying instruments, forest data, etc. f 

15. Salvaged and classified 79,144 sketches of preliminary 
data, 5,990 blueprint copies of cadastral communication land 
classification maps; and 1,500 tracings. 

16. Prepared tracings of 112 progressive maps, 750 ordinary 
timbei license areas, 13 land classification projects, and com- 
pilation of vegetative data in control maps. 

17. Reopened 17 forest districts; 100 of the 135 forest sta- 
tions m 1941. 

18. Reinstated 531 forestry employees. 




63 



administration of public lands 

The Bureau of Lands has: 

1 Reopened 20 land districts and 17 provincial land offices. 

2. Reopened five friar lands agencies. - 

3. Reopened the school of surveying. . 

4. Acted on the following applications and other public land 
matters : 

a. 90 orders for approval, transfer, issuance of patents, etc. 

b. Four patents issued. 

c. 151 permits issued. 

d. 13 applications reinstated, rejected or cancelled. 

e. 25,858 actions taken on miscellaneous matters. 

/. Administrative settlement of conflicts, land registrations, 
and other legal matters. 

5. Taken steps to legalize by proper application the settlement 
and acquisition of public lands subdivisions by evacuees. 

6. Look after the enforcement of 22 public laws affecting pu- 
blic lands, 26 lands administrative orders, 33 circulars and bul- 
letins, and 67 land registration, cadastral and civil cases. 

7. Investigated 51 claims to lands covered by public lands ap- 
plications. 

8. Examined 28 applications for registration of lands and 
acted on 92 decisions on land registration cases. 

9. Done computation work on 7,839 lots. 

10. Verified and approved surveys of 1,053 lots. 

TO REPAIR IRRIGATION SYSTEMS 

The Bureau plans to: 

1. Ask for release of P236.000 for the construction and repair 
of the irrigation system in the friar land estate. 

2. Start new cadastral surveys. 

3. Resume 20 pre-war projects of public lands subdivisions 
covering approximately 1,000,000 hectares of rich agricultural 
public lands. 

The Bureau has recalled 1,029 employees. 

COMMERCIAL FISHING ENCOURAGED 

The Division of Fisheries has: 

1. Surveyed the extent of damage to the industry. 



2. Reopened two experimental stations abandoned during the 
war: Dagat-dagatan salt-water fishery experimental station, 
Navotas, Rizal; and Experimental Oyster Farm at Binacayan, 
Cavite. 

3. Furnished information and technical advice on varied 
fishing subjects. 

4. Issued 51 commercial fishing boat and 53 fisherman’s li- 
censes and fishponds permits. 

5. Investigated and inspected fishponds. 

6. Campaigned against illegal use of dynamite in fishing. 

7. Studied commercial shells for exportation. 

8. Assisted fishermen in the procurement of petroleum for 
fishing operations. 

TO TAKE OVER DEEP-SEA FISHING FROM JAPANESE 

The Division plans : 

1. To open the school of fisheries to train students in the 
science of fishing as an industry. In this connection, the Os- 
mefia administration has been promised U. S. assistance. With 
this aid the Commonwealth plans to oust the Japanese from 
their control of deep-sea fishing in Philippine waters. 

The Division has recalled 75 employees. 



NDC AND OTHER GOVERNMENT FIRMS 
RESUME ACTIVITIES 

AIRLINE, SUGAR INDUSTRIES FINANCED 

The Board of Directors of the National Development Com- 
pany was reorganized on July 14, 1945. 

To help the Philippine Air Lines, Inc. resume its former ac- 
tivities, the Company has increased its holdings in said cor- 
poration by subscribing for an additional 5,300 shares of stock 

valued at ¥=571, 834.12. . m 

It has also granted financial aid to the Far Eastern Air Tran- 
sport, Inc. (formerly INAEC) by subscribing to ¥150,000 worth 
of shares of said Corporation. 

To finance the rehabilitation of the sugar industry, the Com- 
pany secured a loan of ¥=4,500,000 from the Philippine National 
Bank to be used in financing the production of the 1946-47 
sugar crop. 

TEXTILE GOODS SOLD TO PUBLIC 

1. The pre-war stock of textile goods of the Textile Mills 
amounting to about 1,200,000 yards has been sold direct to the 
public and through cooperatives organized in Manila and m the 
provinces, thereby relieving in a measure the present short- 
age of this material. 

2. 27,600 cones of thread (6000 yards to a cone) have been 
distributed to the public. 

3. To help the home weaving industry established m the 
Ilocos regions, Malabon, Rizal and other weaving centers, 155,000 
lbs. of weaving yarns have been distributed in these localities. 

4. One thousand yards of simple ducks have been sold to 
shoe manufacturers for the manufacture of rubber footwear. 

TO INCREASE TEXTILE MILLS 7 CAPACITY 

To relieve the present scarcity of textile goods, the Company 
is planning to increase the present capacity of the textile mils 
to its ultimate goal of from 40,000 to 50,000 spindles and about 
1,200 looms, under which condition it would then be possible to 
manufacture about 35,000,000 yards of cloth per yeai, using 
15,000,000 pounds (6,800 metric tons) of cotton. 

The company will also manufacture thread for sewing pur- 
poses, weaving yarns to foster the home weaving industry,, and 
such other products as will relieve industrial and occupational 
needs of the country. Sufficient raw cotton and the necessary 
spare parts for our machinery have been ordered from the 
United States. 

65 

4999 5 • 



66 



SABANI ESTATE TO BE SUBDIVIDED, SOLD 

The Sabani Estate has been operating since February of last 
year. This year the company expects approximately 5,000 ca- 
vans of palay. Various licenses for the cutting of lumber and 
other minor forest products within the Sabani Estate have also 
been granted. 

In accordance with the wishes of President Osmena, arrange- 
ments are now being made to sell the sub-divided lots of the 
Estate to bona fide tenants and tillers thereof. 

FOOTWEAR CORPORATION RESUMES OPERATIONS 

The National Footwear Corporation resumed operations on 
Sept. 22, 1945, when it started issuing raw materials to the 
Marikina shopowners for the manufacture of hand-made shoes. 
At the beginning it supplied only 12 shopowners but now it is 
supplying 31 shopowners with approximately 600 to 700 shoe- 
makers served. 

Before the war the National Footwear Corporation had about 
250 shoe shops in the towns of Marikina, San Mateo, Montal- 
ban and Pateros but most of these shopowners lost their be- 
longings and some died from torture and starvation during the 
Japanese occupation. 

Since September 22, 1945, the corporation has produced 15,617 
pairs of shoes for men, women and children at an approximate 
cost of ¥=187,404. On November 10 it opened a store in the 
compound of the National Development Company to sell shoes 
to the public, disposing of 6,925 pairs of shoes up to January 
12, 1946, valued at 1*129,476.80. There is now in stock in the 
store and the bodega 8,692 pairs for men, women and children, 
valued at 1*126,816. 

The present stock of raw materials is but enough to manu- 
facture about 8,000 to 9,000 pairs of shoes representing a value 
of ¥=45,000. 

FOOD PRODUCTS CORPORATION FUNCTIONING 

In line with the present policy of operating only available 
and ready projects, the NDC is operating the semillero in Pam- 
panga. This is an important project since it serves as the 
source of seedlings stocked up in fishponds in Bulacan, Pampanga 
and Bataan. Last year it could not operate to full capacity 
owing to difficulties theif existing immediately after liberation, 
but it will be possible during the coming fry season (April to 
June) to supply fishpond owners with seedlings at reasonable 



67 



prices. Properly stocked with enough bangus fry, this project 
will not only give a fair return on the investment but will also 
go a long way in helping stabilize the prices of fresh bangus. 

The NDC fishponds in Capiz are now being repaired to put 
in condition about 2,000 hectares ready for planting next April. 
It is hoped to stock up these ponds during the coming fry season 
and within this year to begin harvesting. These fishponds ought 
to be in full blast production now if operation had not been 
suspended early last year after the liberation. It is presumed 
that even without a canning plant in Capiz now, the fish to be 
harvested would prove of inestimable value especially at this 
time when marine fishing has not yet resumed. 

MACHINERY, EQUIPMENT SALVAGED 

Upon resumption of the governmental functions of the Phil- 
ippine Commonwealth on February 27, 1945, a salvage crew 
was hired to salvage machinery, equipment, supplies, build- 
ing materials, etc. The total amount salvaged so far is esti- 
mated at about 1*300,000, while the amount of money spent 
so far is approximately ¥=50,000. 

The total number of employees and laborers up to December 
31, 1945, was 57. On January 1, 1946, the Board of Directors 
approved the increase of personnel to 111 in order to prepare 
the foundations for the new machineries that will replace the 
destroyed ones and to start repairs on damaged equipment. 
The storeroom and the chemical and the carbon warehouses 
have already been repaired. The men are at present busy dis- 
mantling the boilers, turbines, switchboard, pipings and electrical 
wirings which have been damaged due to mines, bombs, shell 
explosions and fires. 

SUGAR REFINERY TO START OPERATING SOON 

The Insular Sugar Refining Corporation may be expected to 
start operations within eight months after the delivery of the 
materials imported for replacements. On or before August 1, 
1946, it expects to recall a total of 300 employees and laborers. 
Before the war, the Refinery had approximately 500 employees 
and laborers. The minimum wage has been increased from 
PI a day in 1941 to ¥3 a day. The employees are given their 
pre-war salaries plus a bonus of ¥50 for those receiving ¥100 
or less and ¥30 for those receiving ¥101 to ¥200 a month. 

In view of the shortage of the sugar crop, the Refinery may 
not be able to operate in 1946 at its present site at Mandalu- 




68 



yong but it is expected to operate in 1947. However, it is 
possible that the Refinery may refine sugar in some centrals 
in Luzon by lending some of its equipment and technical aid 
to sugar centrals so that the necessary amount of refined sugar 
may be produced this year. The essential consumers of refined 
sugar are hospitals, drug stores, nurseries, bakeries, soft drink 
manufacturers, hotels, restaurants and the United States Army 
and Navy. The Insular Sugar Refining Corporation is now in 
a position to transfer temporarily its refining operation to any 
of the centrals in Luzon while the Mandaluyong plant is being 
rehabilitated. In other words, if sufficient brown sugar can be 
produced by the sugar centrals to meet local demand, the Insu- 
lar Sugar Refining Corporation can produce, out of this amount, 
sufficient refined sugar to obviate importation from abroad. 

NARIC SEEKS QUOTA OF 490,000 TONS OF RICE 

The National Rice and Corn Corporation (NARIC) has been 
allocated 156,968 tons of rice. It has requested a total of 490,000 
tons, for which negotiations are now under way. The following 
figures give the itemized report on what the NARIC has accom- 
plished and what it plans to do in order to relieve the rice 
shortage in the Philippines: 

1. Allocations requested by Resident Commissioner Romulo 
from the Combined Food Board for rice during the year 1946 : 



From the United States' 120,000 tons 

From Siam 150,000 tons 

From Indo-China 150,000 tons 

From Chile 25,000 tons 

From Brazil 25,000 tons 

From Ecuador 20,000 tons 



Total 490,000 tons 



If this request cannot be considered, the NARIC believes that 
we should work for a minimum of 350,000 tons. 

2. Allocations granted: 

4th Quarter, 1945 — 



United States 


27,500 


tons 






Siam 


16,500 


tons 






Chile 


17,963 


tons 


61,963 


tons 


1st Quarter, 1946 — 










United States 


60,000 


tons 


60,000 


tons 


2nd Quarter, 1946 — 










United States 


35,000 


tons 


35,000 


tons 



Total 



156,963 tons 



69 



Other allocations not yet decided. 

3. Rice Purchased by NARIC: 

From United States— 

Thru U. S. Commercial Co. . 

Thru Gen. Products Co 

Thru Local USCC ’***•* 

From Siam — 

Thru U. S. Commercial Co. . 
From Chile — 

Thru U. S. Commercial Co. . 



Total 



4th Quarter 1st Quarter 

27.000 tons 60,000 tons 
2,500 tons 

3,228 tons 

15.000 tons 
3,670 tons 



51,398 tons 60,000 tons 
111,398 tons 



4. Expected Arrivals: 

From Siam 

From United States .. 



4th Quarter Allocation . 

7,500 tons— Jan. 81, 1946 

800 tons — Feb. 22, 1946 
600 tons — Feb. 18, 1946 
300 tons — Feb. 16, 1946 
300 tons — Feb. 20, 1946 
4,000 tons— Abt. Mar. 20, 1946 
21,000 tons— During April 



Total 



34,500 tons 



5. 



% 



1st Quarter Allocation 

From United States — shipment to be started between Februaiy 15 
and February 28, 1946. 

Proposed Distribution of the Uth Quarter Allocation . 



Cagayan de Misamis 

Cebu 

Tacloban 

Iloilo 

Manila - 



500 tons 

5.000 tons 

1.000 tons 

2.000 tons 
20,000 tons 



The foremost objective of the NARIC is to stabilize the price 
of rice and corn at a level which will guarantee the producers 
a reasonable margin of profit and at the same time keep the price 
low enough to be within the reach of the consumers. It is also 
its objective to secure for the whole country an adequate supply 
for the entire population. More than ever before, the question 
of rice is now playing a very important role in the rehabilitation 
and reconstruction of our country. Rice is one of the most 
important factors that determines the prices of all other com- 
modities, as it is the staple food of the people. Economic nor- 



70 



malcy can be reestablished only as fast as the price of rice can 
be brought to normalcy. 

NARIC rice is being distributed through the PRRA in the 
City of Manila. For example, the NARIC sold to the PRRA 
1,628 tone in December, 1945. The NARIC is also distributing 
rice to the provinces of Tayabas, Batangas, Laguna, Uocos Sur, 
Abra, La Union and Mountain Province, where there is a big 
deficit in the rice supply. The official prices in these provinces 
range from ?1.20 to 1*1.50 per ganta, depending upon the dis- 
tance from Manila. The black market prices have been pulled 
down in these provinces by 30 to 35 per cent. 

CEMENT PLANT PRODUCING 6,000 BAGS DAILY 

The Cebu Portland Cement Company has a productive ca- 
pacity of 12,000 to 15,000 bags per day when its two units are 
working full blast. Fortunately the company suffered no dam- 
age due to the war, although the plant was so misused during 
the enemy occupation that the machinery must undergo repairs. 
One unit is now operating, with a daily output of 6,000 bags. 
It is expected that the other unit will be ready to start production 
as soon as greater demand warrants it. 

The U. S. Army took over the cement plant shortly after the 
liberation and continued operating it until November 1 , 1945, 
when it was turned over to the Commonwealth Government. In 
the liquidation of the accounts, the Army paid for the use of 
the plant and for the cement it produced, while the cement com- 
pany reimbursed the U. S. Army for the cost of all installations 
and equipment it put in as well as of all operating supplies. 

The cement that the company has produced since November 
1 has abruptly brought down the price of cement in Manila, 
forcing dealers to sell imported cement at a price as low as 
f*2.40 per bag. The available supply is now more than suf- 
ficient to take care of immediate demands. 




RECONSTRUCTING PUBLIC WORKS AND 
COMMUNICATIONS 

PUBLIC WORKS SUFFERED GREATEST DAMAGE 

The greatest damage the Government has suffered due to the 
war has been in public works. Incomplete reports show that 
public improvements, national, provincial, city as well as mu- 
nicipal, amounting to 1*202,605,180, have been either destroyed 
or damaged. The loss of public buildings naturally handicapped 
the setting up of government offices everywhere. But the Ad- 
ministration showed ingenuity and adaptability in solving this 
problem, even going to the extent of putting up tables for gov- 
ernment employees under trees, just so there would be no delay 
in the return of civil government. 

Upon representations of the Administration, President Tru- 
man has ordered the U. S. Army, Navy and State Department 
to conduct a survey of the damage to port works, roads and 
highways and to help in the reconstruction of ports and high- 
ways. The Department of Public Works has cooperated with 
representatives sent here by President Truman to carry out his 
instructions, providing American engineers and experts with 
information and data. 

For public works, particularly the repair and maintenance 
of roads and bridges and the maintenance and operation of irri- 
gation systems, the President has already made available the 
sum of 1*9,900,000. 

TEN-YEAR RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAM PLANNED 

The Bureau of Public Works is preparing a 10-year program 
in all provinces and cities for the reconstruction of public works. 
For these projects, additional funds will soon become available. 
The funds have been promised by American authorities, and 
the promise will be carried out. 

Thousands of vehicles are already being received from the 
U. S. Army, and these are being distributed to the government 
offices that have the greatest need for them. 

To help food production, irrigation systems are being reopened. 
The initial sum of 1*135,000 has been released for the operation 
and maintenance of the systems, plus an additional sum of 
1*391,000 for the same purpose. 

The Department of Public Works and Communications and 
the various offices under it are drawing up or reconstituting 

71 



72 



plans for public works construction/?. As quickly as funds are 
made available, these plans will be carried out. 

MOST POST OFFICES REOPENED 

Practically all the postal, telegraph and radio equipment of 
the Bureau of Posts was destroyed or lost through war opera- 
tions. Notwithstanding this handicap, the Government has 
made great progress in reopening postal, telegraph and radio 
services. 

Out of 1,062 post offices in operation in the Philippines prior 
to the war, 948 have already been reopened. Only the difficulty 
or lack of transportation to the other places have delayed the 
reestablishment of post offices there. 

MAIL AND MONEY ORDER SERVICE 

Airmail service is available between Manila and Iloilo, Bacolod 
and Cebu. Airmail service is also available between the Phil- 
ippines and the United States. 

The exchange of money orders with the United States and 
Hawaii was resumed on September 20, 1945. The exchange of 
money orders and telegraphic transfers between post offices, as 
before the war, will be resumed as soon as the necessary forms 
and equipment are obtained. Practically all provincial post- 
offices have no safes wherein to keep postal funds. However, 
action has already been taken to obtain release of funds needed 
to purchase necessary equipment. 

RADIO-TELEGRAPH FACILITIES TO BE SET UP 

As a result of the war, telegraph lines and radio, telegraph 
and cable equipment, have almost all been lost but complete 
overall plans and specifications for the rehabilitation of the 
electrical communication system have already been prepared. 

Radio or telegraph stations, which accept commercial and 
private messages from the public, have been reestablished in 
Manila, Bacolod, Catbalogan, Cebu, Iloilo, Tacloban, Tagbila- 
ran, Zamboanga, Balanga, Cabanatuan, Cavite, Dagupan, Iba 
(Zambales), Malolos, Paniqui, Pasig, San Fernando (Pam- 
panga), and Tarlac. Former telegraph lines to Santa Cruz 
(Laguna), Batangas, and Lucena are now being reconstructed. 
Beyond Lucena toward Naga, the lines are also being recon- 
structed with salvaged materials and borrowed tools. 

The Bureau of Posts is ready to undertake the reestablish- 
ment of 36 radio stations in preparation for the coming national 
elections. However, the project is held in abeyance until the 




73 



U S Army authorities deliver the necessary equipment and 
materials The Bfireau of Public Works has already been asked 
to undertake construction of buildings for housing the proposed 
radio stations. 

POSTAL SAVINGS BANK REOPENS SHORTLY 
The Postal Savings Bank will be reopened upon receipt of 
the needed forms. The Congress of the Philippines recently 
passed an Administration Bill providing, among others, for the 
rehabilitation of the Postal Savings Bank, by making available 
the sum of P2, 500, 000 for the purpose. This Bill was signed 
a few days ago by President Osmena. . , 

Steps have already been taken to secure the release of the 
necessary funds to purchase safes, postal scales, mail distribut- 
ing tables and pigeonholes, mail boxes, ordinary and rotary 

locks, bag-racks, mail bags, etc. . 

President Osmena has created various agencies to step up 
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the country. One ot 
these agencies is the Petroleum Products Control Administra- 
tion. The PEPCA has been charged with the work of rationing 
gasoline, kerosene and other petroleum products to essen la 
civilian consumers. 

PEPCA KILLS GASOLINE BLACK MARKET 
Before the creation of the PEPCA, gasoline was sold in the 
black market at prohibitive prices. Consequently, illicit trans- 
portation companies charged scandalously high faies. 
tial commodities likewise had to cost very much more than they 
should because of the great expense involved in moving | em 
to consuming centers. After the PEPCA started operation, 
motor fuel became available at reasonable prices, making pos- 
sible a great reduction in the fares charged by transpor a 
companies. With reduced transportation costs, a greater flow 
of essential commodities has become possible between Manila 

and the provinces, and vice versa. _ . , . 

The PEPCA also served motor launches, rice mills, ice plan , 
saw mills and other establishments, thus helping in e m us 
trial recovery of the country. By the end o e Z^ ar ’ . 
PEPCA had served 593 rice mills and threshers, * 70 “° ‘ 

boats and launches, 223 saw mills, ice plants an 0 ® r ™ 
trial equipment and machinery. It had also serve , 
of trucks for transportation of passengers, foocs u s an 
commodities, private cars used by hospitals, pio essiona c 
business men and by educational and charita e ms i u 



PUTTING OUR CHILDREN BACK fN SCHOOL 

Notwithstanding the almost insuperable obstacles, such as the 
destruction of school buildings, the lack of books and school 
equipment, and the failure of our best teachers to report for 
duty, the Admnistration has acted with speed and thoroughness 
in putting our educational system back on its feet. 

MORE CHILDREN IN SCHOOLS NOW THAN IN 1941 

In 1941 the elementary school enrolment was 1,508,524 ; by the 
end of 1945, a few months after the liberation, the enrollment 
was 1,720,457, or over 200,000 more than the pre-war enrollment. 
Enrollment for secondary, as well as normal and technical 
schools, is almost back to normal as shown by the following com- 
parative figures: 

1941 1946 

Secondary ' 86,328 84,558 

Normal and technical 1,792 846 

The comparatively number of schools open in Manila and the 
provinces, in 1941 and in 1945, also tells the story: 

1941 1916 * 

Elementary 9,375 9,047 

Secondary 88 116 

Normal and technical 4 4 

MORE SECONDARY SCHOOLS OPEN 

There are more secondary schools open now than there were 
before the war, and that the elementary enrollment has increased 
notwithstanding the fact that there are 300 less schools now 
than before. The elementary enrollment has been made pos- 
sible through the increase in the size of classes and the holding 
of morning and afternoon sessions. 

A total of 1*864,650 has been released for the maintenance and 
repair of school buildings. An appropriation of 1*150,000 is 
available for the purchase of animal stocks, hand tools, farm 
machinery, agricultural books and supplies for agricultural 
schools. 

Realizing the importance of extending social justice to the 
teachers, who constitute a potent force in the rehabilitation of 
the. country, the Administration is exerting itself to improve 
their lot. The payment of two months’ gratuity to all loyal of- 
ficials and employees and the payment of bonuses to low-salaried 
74 



75 



teachers and employees have relieved the situation considerably. 
In the distribution of relief goods, such as clothing and shoes, 
teachers are given preference. A call has been sent out to ab- 
sent employees of the Department of Public Instruction who may 
want to come back to their jobs. 

four hundred seventy private schools, colleges licensed 

The demand for education has been so great that in the short 
space of less than a year 79,589 have so far sought admission 
in 470 private educational institutions from the grades to the 
graduate level offering general, vocational or professional courses 
from Northern Luzon to Southern Mindanao. While these fig- 
ures are still below the 190,471 enrolled in 871 private schools, 
colleges and universities before the ar, it is reasonably anticipated 
that there will be an unprecedented increase both in the number 
of schools and in the size of enrollment over the pre-war figures. 

TWO THOUSAND STUDENTS BACK AT STATE UNIVERSITY 

The State University, scene of heavy fighting during the Battle 
for South Manila, has reopened. Eight colleges and three schools 
report a total enrollment of about 2,000 students, or over one- 
fourth of the pre-war enrollment. Within a few months it is 
expected that this figure would have doubled. By 1948 the 
University hopes to transfer to its new Site at Diliman, which 
is at present being leased by the U. S. Army. 

The formal reopening of the University took place when the 
Board of Regents, upon the recommendation of President Os- 
meha, re-elected Dr. Bienvenido M. Gonzalez as President of 
the University, on June 28, 1945. However, before this step, 
there had been preparatory work, mostly salvage. There was 
not much, t turined out, on which to start all over again. 

The first problem that presented itself was the location. A 
survey of possibilities showed that not a single building of the 
University campus was suitable for immediate use. All Uni- 
versity buildings were damaged, some so severely as to be beyond 
repair. The libraries, offices and laboratories, and the valuable 
scientific equipment in these, were a total loss. It was finally 
arranged to have the Cancer Institute, which was not very badly 
damaged, prepare for the opening. Immediate steps were taken 
to clear the debris, fix the roofing, and provide make-shift win- 
dows. When the building as about ready, the groundwork of 
the faculty reorganizations was completed; and the opening. was 
announced to take place on August 6, 1945. 



7G 



EIGHT COLLEGES, THREE SCHOOLS OPENED , 

The units opened were the Colleges of Liberal Arts, Medicine 
(Including Dentistry) , Pharmacy, Engineering, Law, and Edu- 
cation in Manila, Veterinary Science in Pandacan, and Agricul- 
ture, School of Forestry, and the Rural High School in Los Banos. 
The enrollment n these units for the first semester of this aca- 
demic year was as follows: 



Students Pre-War 

Liberal Arts , 1 665 2,822 

Medicine 168 490 

Pharmacy 166 169 

Engineering .'. * 345 724 

Law a 100 562 

Education . 104 467 

Veterinary Science 22 8$ 

Agriculture 4 .: 114 510 

School of Forestry 11 182 

School of Dentistry 36 71 

Rural High 214 163 



Others (Arts and Sciences in Baguio, Business Ad- 
ministration, Cebu Junior College, Conservatory of 
Music, School of Fine Arts, Institute of Hygiene, 

School of Nursing, U. P. High, Graduate Depart- 
ment) 1,818 

Totals : 1,946 7,567 

During the second semester, other buildings, this time on the 
campus itself, in the College of Medicine compound, were re- 
habilitated and this ermitted a slightly larger enrollment. 

The J unior College of Cebu was reopened on December 1, with 
an enrollment of 260, and the Conservatory of Music began en- 
rolling students in January, 1946. 

SERUM-VACCINE LABORATORIES FUNCTIONING 
One other activity of the University deserves mention — the 
Serum and Vaccine Laboratories at Alabang. Unlike the other 
units, the Alabang laboratories did not suffer very much damage 
from Japanese occupation. Because of the importance of its 
product, it functioned even ahead of the University. 

The difficulties have been manifold as no facilities and no 
equipment were available when the University reopened. Some 
hardship was encountered in recalling members of the faculty. 
Due to the long period of inactivity, many found employment 
in more profitable work. On account of the prevailing inflation 
the position of the faculty has neither been happy nor secure. 
Love for the University and for the University work has been 

".•.3c! 



77 



a steadying influence. The partial loss of student records, and 
the almost complete loss of financial records has created many 
vexing problems. 

The immediate plans for future reconstruction and expansion 
include only the campus proper in view of the fact that the 
U. S. Army has leased the new site of the University at Diliman. 
Some of the buildings on the old campus are being repaired for 
temporary use. The. University Infirmary and the medical 
stockroom have recently been roofed with salvaged iron and' 
now house the U. P. High School and the Conservatory of Music, 
respectively. 

TO TRANSFER TO QUEZON CITY IN 1948 

The United States Army expects to turn over to the University 
in another four months some partially serviceable buildings on 
the main campus, including the College of Engineering Build- 
ing, the Alumni Hall and one Chemistry building. Other build- 
dings, such as the Villamor Hall, will be repaired for partial and 
temporary use. As soon as materials for construction become 
available, or their prices come within reason, temporary build- 
ings will be built on the campus to accommodate prospective 
registrants. 

When all these buildings become available, it will be possible 
to restore the University to considerably more than fifty percent 
of its pre-war enrollment and activities. The classrooms, labor- 
atories and offices are gradually being re-equipped. 

The permanent plans envisage the ultimate location of the 
University at Quezon City. Active construction will proceed 
as soon as funds and materials are available, since under the 
terms of the contract of lease with the U. S. Army the Univer- 
sity may proceed with its building program. With the expira- 
tion of the lease in 1948, the University should be able to transfer 
tp its new site. 

RECONSTRUCTING AND REHABILITATING THE 
NATIONAL LIBRARY 

The National Library, together with its provincial and city 
branches, suffered from enemy vandalism during the closing 
phases of the war. With the exception of its Archives Division 
collection, which was housed in the old Bureau of Prisons com- 
pound, the National Library lost almost the entire bulk of its 
equipment and collections, which had reached a total of around 
775,000 -volumes, as well as its Gallery of Art and History con- 
taining more than 10,000 specimens. 



78 



Immediately after the liberation of Manila, salvage operations 
began. So far this work has made possible the recovery of 
36,600 volumes, of which 17,000 were saved from the Central 
Office collections and the remaining 19,600 from the various 
collections of its city and provincial branches. Among those 
saved were about 2,500 volumes or half of the famous Taba- 
calera collection and the greater part of the book rarities col- 
lection, including the original manuscripts of the Noli Me Tan- 
gere, the El Filibusterismo, the Ultimo Adios, and the album 
of 146 letters of Rizal to Dr. Ferdinand Blumentritt. 

On March 5, 1945, barely one month after the liberation of 
Manila, the Archives Division was reconstituted. Later the 
Administrative, Filipiniana, and Research and Bibliography 
Divisions were organized, thereby completing the reconstitution 
of the National Library as a Bureau. 



SOCIAL JUSTICE FOR THE WORKING MAN 

LABOR DEPARTMENT RECONSTITUTED 

The Department of Labor was reconstituted shortly after the 
liberation of Manila, on the basis of its pre-war organization. 

Among the matters to which the Department directed its at- 
tention soon after its reorganization were the questions of wages 
and the enforcement of the labor laws enacted before the war. 
With the aid of the Bureau of the Census and Statistics, a survey 
was made on the costs of living prevailing last year, and with 
the aid of the statistics gathered, it was possible to promote a 
campaign for substantial wage increases which would enable 
the laborer to meet the essential necessities of civilized life. 
Many employers labored under the impression that the pre-war 
labor laws had ceased to be binding and enforceable. It was 
necessary to correct such impression. 

THE DEPARTMENT’S ACCOMPLISHMENTS 

The Department of Labor has undertaken: 

(1) The inspection of labor establishments to determine com- 
pliance with labor laws and safety measures, particularly the 
Eight-Hour Labor Law, the Woman and Child Labor Law, and 
the Safety Orders issued by the Secretary of Labor. For the 
purposes of the first law, 1,043 establishments were inspected ; 
of the second, 546 establishments; and of safety promotion, 611 
establishments. 

(2) The conciliation and settlement of industrial disputes. 
It mediated in five industrial disputes, one of which was amicably 
settled by the parties themselves, one by the Department, and 
three were certified to the Court of Industrial Relations. 

(3) The registration of labor organizations. Only twenty 
legitimate labor organizations, with a membership of about 4,000 
laborers, have yet registered and been permitted to operate as 
such, while there are eight applications still under study and 
consideration. 

(4) The control or recruitment of Filipino laborers for Ha- 
waii and other foreign countries. The Hawaiian Sugar Planters 
Association has been granted license to conduct such recruit- 
ment. This authority extends to the provinces of I locos Norte, 
Ilocos Sur, Abra, La Union, Pangasinan, and Bohol. 

(5) The extension of legal assistance to laborers in the col- 
lection of their unpaid wages and compensation for industrial 

79 



80 



injuries and other claims from their employers, and the defense 
of certain indigent persons accused of crimes. 

(6) The enforcement and administration of the Workmen’s 
Compensation Act and the Employers’ Liability Act. It has 
handled a total of 181 compensation cases, 39 of which are Army 
cases and 141 are cases involving private employers and the 
government. 

(7) The giving of assistance to laborers in the collection of 
their unpaid wages. Up to December 31, 1945, it handled 74 
claims involving 231 claimants. Of these, 14 claims involving 
4*5, 815.44 have been amicably settled. The pending 52 cases 
are mostly claims filed by laborers who worked with the United 
States Army before the war and involve a total amount of 
1*54,543.73. 

(8) The extension of credit facilities to farm tenants who may 
need the same for the purpose of their support during the period 
of harvest seasons and to cover the expenses incident to the pur- 
chase of seeds and proper cultivation of the land which they 
are working. It is the policy of the Department to extend credit 
facilities to tenants through Farmers’ Cooperative Associations. 
Four cooperative associations with a membership of 621 tenants, 
have obtained loans amounting to ¥=14,544. Textile costing 
¥8,111.05 were also distributed to the four associations. 

(9) The inspection of factories to promote the health of lab- 
orers therein and to estimate the extent of disabilities sustained 
by laborers under the Workmen’s Compensation Act. Medical 
inspectors of the Department have inspected a total of 2,241 
establishments employing 25,803 laborers. 

(10) The contracting of the services of seamen, the exten- 
sion of help to unemployed persons in their quest for jobs, and 
the supervision of the activities of employment agencies. Up 
to December 31, 1945, it has placed 210 unemployed, of whom 
97 are non-skilled, 74 semi-skilled, and 39 skilled. 

PLANS TO IMPROVE THE LABORER’S LOT 

The program of the Department covers the practical problems 
of administration and of labor legislation aimed at bringing 
about the social justice program of the Osmena administration. 

It will be necessary to enlarge the Department so that it can 
deal more adequately with the vastly increased problems of 
labor and capital in the Philippines, which will be rendered more 
acute by the influence of labor movements in America, Europe, 
and in other parts of the world. It is proposed to establish here 
a counterpart of the Conciliation Service of the United States 




81 



Department of Labor with such modification in functions and 
composition as may be justified by local conditions. Such a 6tep 
is necessary, although we have compulsory arbitration, because 
adjustment of an industrial dispute by the agreement of the 
parties is more likely to promote industrial peace and induce 
harmony between the employer and the laborer than by the im- 
position of a third party or tribunal. 

There is also need for improvement in the administration of 
the Workmen’s Compensation Act, which should be vested in 
a board or commission, with quasi-judicial powers. The present 
method of combining pure administrative with judicial enforce- 
ment has been discarded in many countries, which have adopted 
either the board or the commission method. 

It is also the purpose of the Department by administrative 
action to promote industrial democracy in the Philippines by 
encouraging the organization of sane, healthy, responsible, and 
intelligently-led labor unions and the processes of collective bar- 
gaining by which labor may have commensurate voice with that 
of capital in the solution of their common problems in industry. 
The development of industrial democracy is a necessary counter- 
part to our democratic political system and in the last analysis 
strengthens the system itself. 

TO ENACT PROGRESSIVE LABOR LAWS 

In connection with labor legislation, the Department proposes 
the amendment or revision of existing laws to make them up- 
to-date and the enactment of new ones in conformity with the 
established principles of labor legislation so far as local con- 
ditions may permit. 

We need to enact a law governing the contract of employment 
in the light of modern principles and the conditions existing 
in the Philippines, to take the place of antiquated provisions of 
the Civil Code which conceive of the labor contract as a lease, 
placing the labor of man in the same category as a chattel or 
any other piece of property — a concept utterly repugnant to the 
socialized spirit of our Constitution. 

Our legislative program includes the enactment of a Wage- 
hour law along the same lines as the Fair Labor Standards Act 
of the United States, in which the wage regulations will be co- 
ordinated with those covering hours of work, in place of the 
present setup in which these two subjects are treated separately. 

It is also proposed to establish a statutory minimum wage 
and a statutory maximum working period, and at the same time 

4999 6 



82 



allow laborers to bargain with employers for higher wages or 
shorter working hours. 

TO BROADEN COMPENSATION ACT’S SCOPE 

The Workmen's Compensation Act should be further amended 
to bring a larger number of laborers under its protection, to 
liberalize the death and disability benefits therein provided and 
to intergrate 'a program of rehabilitation of disabled laborers 
with the administration of law. 

Finally, it is the purpose of the Department to recommend 
the enactment of a social security law covering unemployment 
compensation, old age and invalidity insurance, widows' and 
orphans' insurance, and health insurance. 




THE FILIPINO SOLDIER AND NATIONAL DEFENSE 

The liberation of the Philippines started on October 20, 1944 
when General Douglas MacArthur and his forces of liberation 
landed in Leyte as he had promised. The Filipino people had 
long expected this liberation and to them it was no surprise. 
It was the fulfilment of 3 years of hope and faith. When Gen- 
eral MacArthur appealed to the Filipino people to rally around 
him, they were ready long before he had planned to land in 
the Philippines. The guerrilleros met and Jed the men of 
General MacArthur into the enemy areas, saving American lives. 

GUERRILLEROS INCORPORATED INTO ARMY 

President Sergio Osmena of the Commonwealth of the Philip 
pines landed with General MacArthur in Leyte and by Executive 
Order No. 21 issued on October 28, 1944, he incorporated all the 
remnants of the USAFFE and the guerrillas into the service 
of the USAFFE and the Commonwealth. In effect, there- 
fore, the Philippine Army never ceased to exist throughout the 
whole period of Japanese occupation. 

The veterans of 1941—42 Campaign did not hesitate to lally 
around General MacArthur. Unfortunately, their old oigani- 
zation had long since vanished and so, they were relegated into 
the casual camps. 

With the liberation of Manila on February 3, 1945, there 
arose a need for a more coordinated activation of the Philippine 
Army. First in the list was the recognition of and the incor- 
poration into the USAFFE of all active and deserving guerrilla 
units. Second was the establishment of the replacement batta- 
lions to take care of officers and men of the USAFFE not in 
the active list of the guerrillas. Originally there were five re- 
placement battalions established — the 1st in Leyte, the 2d in 
Camp Bayambang, the 3d and 4th in Camp Murphy, the 5th 
in Lanao, and the 6th in Iloilo. 

MILITARY POLICE COMMAND CREATED 

Immediately upon the return of a semblance of normalcy, it 
became apparent that the keeping of peace and order should 
take priority, thus the creation of the Military Police Com- 
mand. ^The MP Command is the police force of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines, supervised and directed jointly by 
the U. S. Army and the Philippine Army. 

At about the time that Japan surrendered, there was already 
existent in the Philippine Army a total of 98,255 officers and 

83 



85 



men roughly organized into recognized guerrilla units, men in 
the casual camps, men attached for duty to U. S. Army as 
activated units. 



HOW THE PHILIPPINE ARMY IS ORGANIZED 



The Philippine Army is at present organized into the fol- 
lowing: (a) Central General Staff, (6) Special Staff, (c) Camp 
complements, (d) Activated Units, and (e) Others. 

The Central General Staff is patterned after that of the U. S. 
Army, except that there is no G-5. The duties of the various 
sections are the same as before; namely, G-l is personnel, G-2 
is Intelligence, G-3 is Operations and Training, and G-4 is 
Supply. 

The Special Staff has not been changed either. It still con- 
sists of the following: (a) Air Corps, ( b ) Off-SfTbre Patrol, 
(c) Adjutant General Service; ( d ) Inspector General Service, 
(e) Judge Advocate General Service, (/) Quartermaster Serv- 
ice, (g) Corps of Engineers, ( h ) Ordnance Service, (i) Signal 




i 

mm- 

: • 

§• 

: 

Wfis: 












86 



Corps, ( j ) Medical Service, (k) Finance Service, (l) Auditing 
Service, (to) Chaplain Service, (w) Special Service, (o) Public 
Relations, ( p ) Procurement & Contract, and ( q ) Budget Service. 

Unassigned officers and men are placed in casual camps which 
generally are being administered by a camp complement and 
replacement battalion organization. The replacement battalion 
locations have previously been enumerated. There are 5 camp 
complements in the Philippine Army. The 1st is in Camp 
Olivas, the 2nd in Camp Murphy, the 3d in Calasiao, the 4th 
in Camp Ord, and the 6th in^Iloilo. 

Members of guerrillas who were active during the liberation 
campaign were ordered organized in the so-called activated di- 
visions. There were 5 divisions activated. The 2d composed 
of the Volckman guerrilla units known as USAFIP NL, the 
3d from tKe regiments in Central Luzon and points south of 
Manila, the 4th from units in Eastern Visayas, the 5th from 
Western Visayas and the 6th from Mindanao. Out of these 
five, however, only 4 actually took shape. The 3d Division (PA), 
though ordered activated, never took shape, and it has already 
been demobilized. The other divisions are gradually being 
demobilized in conformity with the demobilization plan of 
AFWESPAC dated 10 October 1945. 

All other members of recognized guerrilla units have been 
temporarily left to themselves in various camps, pending dis- 
position by the U. S. Army or Philippine Army. 

OPERATIONS IN CONJUNCTION WITH U. S. ARMY 

For the period covering this report, all operations of the Phil- 
ippine Army had been in conjunction with the U. S. Army. In 
most cases, these were not independent operations as small units 
had been attached to the U. S. Army for specific mission such 
as combat, reconnaissance, intelligence, etc. An outstanding ex- 
ception is the case of the USAFIP NL which alone, of all the 
guerrilla units, had ben alloted an independent sector by the 
U. S. Army and it performed its mission independent of any 
supervision by the U. S. Army. 

What little training has been done in the Philippine Army has 
been conducted under the direct supervision of U. S. Army 
officers attached for duty as members of the U. S. Army Train- 
ing Group more popularly designated “UTG”. In most cases, 
training has been confined to the basic principles of military 
instruction. However, other schools basically non-military in 
nature have also been opened, such as the AGS School, the Cooks 



87 



and Bakers School, the QMS Mess Management School. In ad- 
dition, the opening of U. S. Army service schools to Philippine 
Army personnel has made it possible for carefully selected offi- 
cers and men to further their military studies. This plan en- 
ables the Philippine Army to draw upon a reservoir of highly 
trained and skilled personnel pool. Many of these schools are 
located in the continental United States, altthough AFWESPAC 
has set up several installations in the Philippines for this same • 
purpose. Among these may be mentioned the Engineer School 
at Clark Field, Pampanga, the U. S. Army Athletic Staff School, 
and CWS School in Alabang. 

At present, there are definite plans to revive the Philippine 
Military Academy in Baguio as a means of providing a steady 
supply of young junior officers. 

The Philippine Army is dependent on the U. S. Army not only 
for salary payments, but also for its food and clothing. In most 
cases, the supply of units in the Philippine Army activated or 
unactivated had been made by direct arrangement with the 
nearest U. S. Army Supply Base. Only when supply could not 
be secured through this means has the Philippine Army Head- 
quarters intervened. 

With the end of the war with Japan, it became obvious that 
there was no longer any need in maintaining an army of ap- 
proximately 250,000 officers and men. Demobilization, there- 
fore, became the next step. The demobilization had been divided 
into 3 phases with inclusive dates of execution of each phase. 
So far we have not been able to keep pace with our plans. The 
1st phase was the inactivation of all units ordered activated but 
not actually organized, the reversion to inactive status of all 
officers and men in the casual camps and the demobilization of 
all authorized guerrilla units attached unassigned to U. S. Army. 
The 2d phase is the demobilization of certain activated units 
and others. The 3d phase is the demobilization of the remaining 
part of the army. At this instant, it should be made clear that 
demobilization is a function of the U. S. Army. Any part which 
the Philippine Army may have taken is purely for the pur- 
pose of aiding the U. S. Army in the performance of its mis- 
sion. 

The Philippine Army has been most fortunate in the influx 
of American soldiers into the Philippines, for transportation to 
the United States early became available on army boats. As a 
result, we have been able to send to the United States more than 



88 




our usual share of officers for training in U. S. Army Service 
Schools. Almost 90 per cent of the regular officers have already 
gone there in addition to a large number of reserve officers and 
deserving guerrilla officers. No doubt these men will help im- 
prove the discipline and training of the Philippine Army. 

TO CORRECT IRREGULARITIES, ANOMALIES 
To weed out undesirable men who took advantage of the years 
of occupation to further their own ends, the Philippine Army has 
established loyalty status boards to investigate whether these 
men were victims of circumstances or simply disloyal. A large 
number of these boards are in Manila but there are others or- 
ganized in the replacement camps. 



The President and Admiral Lord Louis Mountbatten, Commander-In-Chief, 

Southeast Asia Area 

Due to the confusion during the surrender and the change of 
government, officers and men of weak character committed ano- 
malies and irregularities involving misappropriation of funds 
and the maltreatment of prisoners of war. These men are be- 
ing investigated by a board of officers especially created for 
this purpose. 

When General Mac Arthur landed in Leyte, Major General Ba- 
silio J. Valdes, prewar Chief of Staff of the Philippine Army, 
was with his party. He assumed command as Chief of Staff 



89 



, c 

and Br-ig. Gen. Rafael Jalandoni was appointed as Deputy Chief 
of Staff. In November 1945, Major General Valdes resigned 
as Chief of Staff to sit on the board for the trial of Japanese 
war criminals in the Philippines. On December 21, 1945, Bri- 
gadier General Jalandoni was made Chief of Staff and Col. 
Macario Peralta, Jr., Deputy Chief of Staff. 

ARMY READY TO FACE ALL TASKS 

The coming year will find the Army ready for any and all 
tasks assigned to it, according to its Chief of Staff. 

The Philippine Army is a youthful and progressive organiza- 
tion. It has had its growing pains. It has had its liberal 
share of praise as well as abuse. It has weathered the test of 
battle. It has fought recrimination and insult. It is a citizen 
army for it draws its life-blood and sinew from the lowly tenant- 
farmer, the small-town clerk, the sugar baron’s heir, the college 
student, the village teacher, the wharf stevedore, and the ship- 
ping magnate’s son. It does not believe in military aristocracy 
nor in supermen. It is grounded on democracy and inspired by 
loyal service. 

The Army has faced its problems with courage and decision. 
It has not shirked responsibility. It has placed • its previous 
manhood to the test of battle with a clarity of vision and a 
peerless zeal that have been the envy of the world. 

CIVILIAN AVIATION 

The Bureau of Aeronautics, which is entrusted with the func- 
tion of promotion, development and control of air commerce, 
air communication and all forms of civil aeronautics in the 
Philippines, has accomplished the following since it was recon- 
stituted under President Osmena: 

AIR TRANSPORT FIRMS RESUME OPERATIONS 

1. Studied the allocation of local -air routes to two prewar 
airline companies, namely, the Far Eastern Air Transport, Inc. 
(formerly INAEC), which resumed operations on November 
15, 1945; and the Philippine Air Lines, Inc. (PAL), which is 
expected to reopen on or before January 30, 1946. With do- 
mestic and foreign air transport companies planning to operate 
soon in the Philippines, a tremendous expansion of air transport 
activities is expected soon. 

2. Taken initial steps in order to enable local air line com- 
panies to operate to nearby countries such as China, Manchuria, 
Malaya, Borneo, and Java. 



90 



3. Extended full cooperation to the representatives ' of the 
Civil Aeronautics Administration of the United States Govern- 
ment. These aeronautics experts came to the Philippines in 
October, 1945, in accordance with President Truman’s directive 
to “study the needs, make recommendations, and cost estimates 
relative to adequate inter-island (Philippine) air routes.” 

4. Inspected and reconditioned landing fields for the use of 
local commercial airlines. 

5. Secured an initial appropriation of 1*250,000 for the opera- 
tion, maintenance and repair of existing airports and landing 
fields. 

6. Reconstructed records; including aviation laws, rules and 
regulations, office files, plans, maps and aeronautical charts 
destroyed during the war. 

7. Prepared estimates for the construction, improvement and 
repair of proposed and existing national airports and landing 
fields. 

8. Exerted efforts for the acquisition of radio and meteoro- 
logical equipment. 

9. Issued the following licenses: 

a. Airplane — 7 

b. Airline pilots — 9 

c. Transport pilots — 8 

d. Student pilots — 4 

e. Mechanics — 25 

PLAN TO CONSTRUCT CENTRAL AIR PORT 

The Bureau plans: 

1. To acquire and construct the Manila Central Airport to 
accommodate international and trans-oceanic airplanes. 

2. To establish and maintain a network of aeronautical radio 
and weather stations. 

3. To establish radio beacons and other aids to air navigation. 

4. To improve and lengthen pre-war airfields. 

5. To encourage aviation and promotion of air-mindedness. 

COAST AND GEODETIC SURVEY WORK RESUMED 

With the limited equipment, supplies and personnel, the Bu- 
reau of Coast and Geodetic Survey has been able to achieve the 
following : 

1. Prepared or caused to be printed and issued to the Armed 
Forces and other agencies revisions of nine U. S. C. & G. S. 
Charts. 



91 



2. Prepared or caused to be printed and issued to the Armed 
Forces and other agencies one new chart. 

3 ; Prepared, compiled and caused to be printed to the Armed 
Forces and other agencies one publication. 

4. Established a Chart and Map Depot for the distribution 
of Philippine maps and charts to the Armed Forces and other 
agencies. 

5. Assisted United States Army Engineers in preparing and 
executing leveling work in Manila and elsewhere. 

6. Assisted United States Army Engineers in preparing for 
the extension of triangulation in the Philippine Islands. 

7. Procured and issued to the Armed Forces, maritime in- 
terests, and other agencies, copies of coast pilots and predicted 
tide tables. 

8. Assisted the United States Army Engineers in the distri- 
bution of charts for the Far East Theatre in Nielson Air Field. 

9. Assisted the General Engineer District, U. S. Army, Ma- 
nila, in the investigation and surveys of the Manila Harbor 

area. . _ 

10. Secured from the Allied Geographical Section and GHQ 
valuable publications, aerial photographs, terrain studies, charts, 
maps, and other publications dealing on the Philippines and 
used as records of the Bureau. 

WHAT THE BUREAU PLANS TO DO 

The Bureau is presently engaged in preparing plans, procuring 
equipment and supplies, selecting personnel for the resumption 
of its map and chart work and other activities undertaken 
previous to the war. A revision survey of Manila North Harbor 
is in progress. Revisions of other charts are also being under- 
taken. Plans and arrangements for moving the Office to the 
O’Racca building are being made. Records are being recon- 
stituted and duplicated whenever possible. 

Five additional U. S. Coast and Geodetic Survey officers have 
been requested from the United States and it is understood that 
two are now en route. 

The Bureau plans to secure one or two large ships and other 
equipment from the surplus U. S. Navy property. Many rn- 
struments and field equipment have been assigned and are on 
shipment to the Bureau from the Japanese Hydrographic Office 
and Imperial Japanese Land Surveys. A search for map re- 
production plant from the U. S. surpluses is presently being 





undertaken in order to reestablish the photolitrographic acti- 
vities of the Bureau before the war. 

Plans for the appointment and training of more Filipino 
officers in the Bureau and in the United States are under 
consideration. 



The President and Admiral of the Fleet Chester W. Nimitz, Chief of Naval 
Operations and Commander-in-Chief of the U. S. Navy 

Plans have been formulated for the extension of closely spaced 
systems of triangulation and leveling schemes throughout the 
Islands. The work is to be done by the 29th Engineers assisted 
by this Bureau. 

When ships and equipment become available an attempt will 
be made to restore the Coast Survey to its approximate peace 
time level. . 

Of the 68 office personnel, 50 have been reappointed. 





93 



PHILIPPINE NAUTICAL SCHOOL REOPENED 

As part of the program of the government to reconstruct 
and rehabilitate the Philippine merchant marine, the Philippine 
..Nautical School was opened in August, 1945. It had to start 
with practically nothing, its facilities and equipment having been 
destroyed during the enemy occupation and during the liberation 
campaign, by shellfire. The school therefore could admit only 
first year students. More students will be admitted next school 
year, when the government appropriates more funds for its 
operation. 

The United States Army Transport Service and the United 
States War Shipping Administration have had to employ marine 
officers without the proper certificate of competency because of 
the present acute shortage of marine officers, especially in the 
coastwise service. First year students in the Nautical School 
who have had little sea experience are among those given op- 
portunity for employment by these United States Government 
agencies. By the end of March, 1946, about 50 coastal marine 
officers may be turned out by the School. 

TO ESTABLISH 2 ADDITIONAL DEPARTMENTS 

The present plans for the reconstruction and improvement 
of the School call for the establishment of two departments,' as 
in the U. S. Merchant Marine Academy, namely, the deck officer 
and the marine engineer departments; the acquisition of a new 
site of at least five hectares of land near the sea; its equipment 
with all the modern facilities in order to keep it abreast of 
the progress of the marine profession; the acquisition of a 
proper “Training Ship” of not less than 600 gross tons; and 
an annual appropriation of not less than two hundred thousand 
pesos. 



HEALTH AND PUBLIC WELFARE ACTIVITIES 

RELIEF SUPPLIES DISTRIBUTED 

In his capacity as Director of Public Welfare and as official 
representative of President Osmena to the UNRRA, Dr. Juan 
Salcedo, Jr. has taken steps to insure an equitable distribution 
of relief supplies to all provinces of the Philippines. As of 
December 31, 1945, the PRRA has issued the following relief 
supplies throughout the Philippines, including the Greater 
Manila area: 

176,341 sacks of UNRRA flour at 50 lbs. per sack 
28,584 sacks of Army flour at 100 lbs. per sack 

2,542 sacks of Army flour at 80 lbs. per sack 

2,766 sacks of Army flour at 50 lbs. per sack 

80 sacks of Army flour at 40 lbs. per sack 

31,936 bales of UNRRA civilian relief clothing 
996 bales of Philippine War flelief clothing 
1,211 bales of Salvaged Army clothing 
284 cases of canned peas 
7,064 cases of Canadian herring 
890 sacks of edible peas at 100 lbs. per sack 
2,981 cases of evaporated milk 
2,784 sacks of rolled oats 
1,813 cases of dehydrated beans 

EVERY FOURTH MANILAN GIVEN RELIEF 

In Manila alone the Government served 65,042 families com- 
prising a total of 386,364 persons, or 26.3 per cent of the popu- 
lation of 1,045,000, during the period from June 15 to December 
31, 1945. These figures do not include government personnel, 
on whom a separate report has been forwarded to the UNRRA. 

The former Emergency Control Administration was reorgan- 
ized into the Office of Procurement, Storage and Distribution 
of the PRRA; the activities of the cooperative division were 
transferred to the National Cooperatives Administration; the 
7 EC A units were merged into 5 PRRA units ; and the accounting 
and finance units were centralized. 

THE FACTS ON THE ECA’S ACTIVITIES 

These are the facts and figures regarding the ECA for Manila 
alone : 

From June 8 to December 31, 1945, or a period of 206 days, 
the Office of Civilian Relief Supply Distribution, Greater Manila 
district, distributed by means of ration: 

112,601,325 lbs. of food through the regularly authorized ECA 
stores, and 

3,839,333 lbs. of food through relief units, hospitals, and * 

other welfare institutions, or a total of 

116,440,658 lbs. 

94 




k;-v; 






This represented a total of 58,220 tons of food distributed at 
a daily average of 228.6 tons in 189 truckloads. 

1 , 327,000 SERVED DAILY BY EC A STORES 

The average number of persons assisted daily during this 
period by ECA stores aggregated 1,827,063. In addition, a daily 
average of 37,416 persons was served with free relief. 



Loading relief good for the Philippines on a UNRRA ship at Seattle, 
Washington, U. S. 

In addition to the above, the CRSD has baked 5,650,497 loaves 
of bread weighing 4,350,883 pounds from September 3 to De- 
cember 31, 1945. These have also been distributed through the 
regularly authorized ECA stores, relief units, hospitals, and 
welfare institutions. 

The CRSD sold fl5, 237, 061.67 worth of food and other relief 
supplies. This amount does not include the value of 3,839,333 
pounds distributed free through relief units, hospitals, and wel- 
fare institutions. 





The President and Frank S. Gaines, UNRRA director, Pacific Area 




■ 



The President — and a group of laborers during the unloading of relief 
cargo from the S. S. Bering 

It cost the Government dui’ing the 206-day period approximately 
1*0.573 centavos per capita to serve the total daily average of 
1,364,479 persons assisted, or approximately 1*0.0028 per capita 
per day. 

WHAT THE PRRA PLANS TO DO 

The activities of the PRRA in the future will be along the 
following lines: 






98 



1. Procurement of more relief goods from the UNRRA, Philip- 
pine War Relief and other relief agencies in the United States. 

2. An equitable and fair distribution of the above relief sup- 
plies to areas and individuals needing same. 

3. An efficient and effective correlation of all relief and reha- 
bilitation on activities of such agencies of the Commonwealtji 
Government. 

4. Close cooperation with other relief agencies not under the 
Commonwealth Government. 

5. Immediate steps will be taken to start rehabilitation of 
farming, poultry, piggery and similar industries. 

6. Carrying out of a national program of vocational training 
and of studies on the rehabilitation of major industries. 

OTHER PUBLIC WELFARE ACTIVITIES 

The Training School for Boys and Girls has been reorganized. 
At the end of the year it has 218 parolees under its care. Up 
to this time the school had made 208 visits, office interviews 
and miscellaneous contacts. The Government Orphanage is also 
in operation, looking after scores of boys and girls orphaned 
during the war. Furthermore, the Bureau of Public Welfare 
handled 416 probation cases referred to it by various courts in 
1945. 

SAFEGUARDING THE PEOPLES HEALTH 
HEALTH CONDITIONS GENERALLY SATISFACTORY 

From March 12, 1945, the date of reorganization of the Bureau 
of Health, to December 31, 1945, the general health conditions 
of the Islands were fairly satisfactory. There were no epi- 
demics of dangerous communicable diseases such as cholera or 
smallpox. There were only localized outbreaks of dysentery, ma- 
laria and measles, mostly in places where prolonged military 
operation had taken place. For example, dysentery flared up 
in Kiangan, Mountain Province, in August. Personnel of the 
central office, Bureau of Health, were immediately sent out with 
medicines and relief supplies. The disease was placed under 
complete control. 

The problem of venereal disease control was aggravated by 
the concentration of the Forces of Liberation in the Islands, 
alarming even the military authorities. To correct the situa- 
tion, the Government appropriated the sum of 5*200,000, from 
which the Bureau established five VD hospitals and four social 
hygiene clinics in Cebu, Iloilo, San Jose (Nueva Ecija), Dagu- 
pan, San Fernando (La Union), Pasay, Calamba and Angeles. 



99 



Thousands of women were examined with over half their num- 
ber being found sick with gonorrhea and syphilis. 

The spread of malaria became inevitable following the re- 
turn of evacuees from malarious regions. There was increased 
incidence and high mortality in Isabela, Pangasinan, Abra, Min- 
doro, Leyte, Occidental Negros, Oriental Negros, Lanao, Capiz, 
etc. Malaria health units were dispatched with adequate me- 
dicines and medical supplies to minimize the incidence. 

In general terms, sanitation throughout the Islands was fairly 
satisfactory. In Manila garbage collection has improved con- 
siderably. The city health department is overseeing the sanitary 
facilities at commercial establishments, factories, schools, eating 
places, slaughterhouses and cemeteries. 

The nationwide program of mass immunization against chol- 
era, dysentery, smallpox, and typhoid was carried on despite 
the lack of facilities. Over 380,000 were given triple vaccine 
injections in places where there was danger of cholera, dysen- 
tery and typhoid during the period from June 10 to November 
30, 1945. Over 39,000 were given vaccination. 

233 PUERICULTURE CENTERS BEING SET UP 
Child and maternity health conditions are constantly being 
improved. Activities in this direction received great impetus 
following the appropriation of ¥500,000 in addition to a pre- 
vious appropriation of ¥=72,000 for this purpose. These ap- 
propriations made possible the reactivation of 101 puericulture 
centers, with 132 more in the process of organization. Another 
appropriation of ¥700,000 has made possible the establishment 
of maternity and charity clinics in towns with less than 8,000 
population. Great health benefits are also expected from the 
operation of 20 health mobile units, the plans for the operation 
of which are nearly complete. 

* The Bureau received from the U. S. Army millions of pesos 
worth of medicines, which have made possible the operation of 
the bureau’s hospitals, clinics and dispensaries-. 

LEPERS WHO ABSCONDED ARE ROUNDED UP 
During the Japanese occupation, most of the lepers confined 
in leper colonies either absconded or died. In Culion alone, 
where there were over 6,000 inmates, only 1,594 remained. Af- 
ter the liberation, leprosaria were reorganized by the Govern- 
ment. A total of 3,591 lepers were rounded up or voluntarily 
returned to the following leprosaria, and treatment stations : 
Culion, 1,978 ; Central Luzon leprosarium, 158 ; Western Visayas, 




100 



284; Bversley Childs, 656; Mindanao Central, 63; Lanao, 17; 
Jolo, 16; Cotabato, 19; San Lazaro Hospital, 316. 

The Bureau has been busy with scores of other health ac- 
tivities, including those pertaining to public sanitation, sanitary 
engineering, food inspection, etc. 

PRACTICALLY ALL HOSPITALS REOPENED 

As a result of the war, many of the hospitals were damaged, 
some beyond repair. However, practically all the hospitals 
under the Bureau in Manila and the provinces have now been 
reopened. This has been made possible by the. approval of the 
Administration bill appropriating 1*3,779,000 as aid to hospitals. 
The benefit derived from this appropriation may be seen from 
the following table of admissions, discharges and dfeaths in 
various hospitals: 



NAME OF HOSPITAL 



Albay Provincial Hospital i__ 

Baguio General Hospital 

Bohol Provincial Hospital 

Bataan Provincial Hospital ; 

Bontoc Hospital 

Capiz Provincial Hospital 

Cuyo Hospital 

Batangas Provincial Hospital 

Bayombong Hospital 

Eladia Memorial Hospital.. 

Iloco8 Norte Provincial Hospital 

Ilocos Sur Provincial Hospital 

Leyte Provincial Hospital 

Laguna Provincial Hospital 

Marlnduque Provincial Hospital. 

National Psychopathic Hospital 

Nueva Ecija Provincial Hospital 

North General Hospital 

Occidental Negros Provincial Hospital. 

Pampanga Provincial Hospital 

Pangasinan Provincial Hospital 

Puerto Princesa II os pita 

Rizal Memorial Hospital.. 

Rizal Provincial Hospital 

Samar Provincial Hospital 

Sorsogon 1 Provincial Hospital 

San Lazaro Hospital 

Tarlac Provincial Hospital 

Tayabas Provincial Hospital. 

Zambalea Provincial Hospital.. 

Zamboanga General Hospital 

B ula can Provincial Hospital 



Patients 
Remain- 
ing by 
March 
1945 


Ad- 

missions 


Deaths 


Dis- 

charges 


0 


650 


23 


483 


109 


334 


15 


332 


0 


942 


19 


899 


0 


609 


28 


564 


4 


28 


3 


27 


3 


30 


1 


23 


0 


68 


0 


50 


91 


471 


30 


471 


0 


370 


18 


331 


9 


125 


6 


123 


0 


383 


14 


857. 


5 


161 


6 


149 


87 


792 


60 


751 


0 


753 


88 


672 


25 


311 


14 


328 


292 


586 


83 


372 


31 


2,982 


81 


2,830 


844 


818 


48 


766 


192 


339 


30 


401 


134 


2,526 


128 


2,427 


83 


2,666 


84 


2,575 


31 


492 


15 


478 


0 


80 


1 


67 


30 


287 


27 


261 


8 


90 


5 


86 


16 


233 


14 


224 


1,233 


14,493 


1,875 


13,017 


171 


621 


82 


556 


99 


850 


9 


862 


31 


895 


11 


417 


110 


449 


19 


449 


80 


1,651 


58 


1.616 



TUBERCULOSIS WORK RESUMED 

The Government reorganized the Philippine Tuberculosis So- 
ciety on October 1, 1945, giving it an initial appropriation of 
1*800,000. Since then the Society has reopened its central office 
dispensary in Manila, the tuberculosis dispensaries in Vigan, 
Ilocos Sur; Tuguegarao, Cagayan; and in the cities of Iloilo 



101 



and Zamboanga. Since October 16, the central office dispensary- 
alone has attended to 9,736 persons; made 6,828 X-ray exam- 
inations, rendered 7,376 treatments and made 2,732 home visits. 

QUEZON INSTITUTE TO BE EXPANDED 

The Quezon Institute started operations on January 2, 1946, 
after the release of its buildings by the 80th General Hospital 
of the U. S. Army. Supplies and equipment were left at the 
hospital by the Army, making possible the resumption of the 
Quezon Institute’s work. As of January 15, there were 118 
patients, with admissions ranging from 10 to 20 daily. The 
former capacity was 750 beds', but there are indications that 
this would have to be expanded. It is possible to increase the 
capacity to 1,500 beds, provided funds are available. 

War operations partly damaged the buildings of the Quezon 
Institute and the tuberculosis pavilions in Iloilo and Cebu cities. 
Vital tuberculosis equipment has been lost and would have to 
be replaced. Despite these difficulties, the Society is doing its 
level best to rehabilitate all its pre-war activities. 



LEGISLATION TO PROMOTE THE PEOPLE’S WELFARE 

Even before his return from the United States, President 
Osmena’s critics were already looking for an opportunity to 
charge him with ruling by decree, with ignoring the prerogatives 
of Congress, in short, with dictatorship. Almost the first act 
of the President, however, was to summon Congress to a session, 
which was followed by other special sessions. 

Out of these sessions came the following legislative measures, 
most of which were initiated and sponsored by the Adminis- 
tration : 

PNB rehabilitation: 

On July 19, 1945, the President signed Commonwealth Act 
No. 672, providing that the Philippine National Bank shall re- 
sume business immediately, taking over the assets of the Bank- 
ing Division, which had been organized early after the occupa- 
tion to provide the first banking facilities in the Islands. 

Salaries and allowances for deceased P. I. fighting men: 

On July 24, 1945, the President signed Commonwealth Act 
No. 675, which provided for the “immediate payment of salaries 
and allowances of deceased Filipino members of the United 
States Army, United States Navy, Philippine Scouts, Philippine 
Army, including duly recognized guerrilla organizations, and 
civilian employees of the War and Navy Departments, and other 
Departments of the United States Government and of the Phil- 
ippine Army.” 

Tacloban made port of entry: 

To speed the flow of imported goods into the Philippines, 
especially the Visayas, the President declared Tacloban, in the 
Province of Leyte, a port of entry, by Commonwealth Act No. 
677, signed by him on July 31, 1945. Tacloban has since become 
a boom town, helping in the return to normalcy of surrounding 
areas. 

Anti-Tuberculosis work: 

On September 24, 1945, the President signed Commonwealth 
Act No. 681, appropriating one million pesos for the immediate 
rehabilitation of the Philippine Anti-Tuberculosis Society, in- 
cluding the Quezon Institute, and of other agencies engaged in 
the fight against and the control of tuberculosis. Quezon Insti- 
102 



103 



tute has been reopened and is now taking care of Filipino fighting 
men sick with tuberculosis, as well as civilian patients. 

YD control: 

In order to prevent the spread of venereal diseases, the Pres- 
ident, under Commonwealth Act No. 685, on September 25, 1945 
appropriated f*200,000 for such purpose. 

People’s Court: 

' On September 25, 1945, the President signed Commonwealth 
Act No. 682, creating a People’s Court and an Office of Special 
Prosecutors for the prosecution and trial of crimes against na- 
tional security committed during the second World War. The 
trial of those accused of giving aid and comfort to the enemy 
is now going apace. 

Foreign Relations Office: 

The President on September 25, 1945, created the Office of 
Foreign Relations, which is empowered to handle all matters 
affecting the relations of the Government of the Philippines 
with the United States and foreign nations, and such other mat- 
ters of an international character as the President may consider 
to place under its charge. 

Three months’ advance pay: 

On July 28, 1945, the President signed Commonwealth Act 
No. 676, which authorized the payment of three months’ 
advance pay to Officials, employees and laborers of the Com- 
monwealth Government who had not received such pay at the 
outbreak of the war. 

Three-month bonus: 

To help government employees tide over the difficulties of the 
post-liberation months, the President on September 26, 1945, 
signed Commonwealth Act No. 686, declaring as bonus the three 
months’ advance pay authorized in Administrative Order No. 
167, dated December 12, 1941. Through this act, all govern- 
ment officials, employees and laborers were relieved of the bur- 
den of reimbursing the three-month advance pay. 

Gratuity to all employees: 

The Congress of the Philippines approved a bill to grant back 
pay to officials and employees of the National government. Not- 
ing that the legislation had ignored personnel of provincial and 
municipal governments as well as of government corporations 




104 



and other agencies, President Osmena issued an Executive Order 
extending the benefits of back pay in the form of gratuities and 
bonuses to all pre-war officials and employees of the Common- 
wealth, including those in local governments and other govern- 
ment agencies. 

Catanduanes made a separate province: 

This was done under Commonwealth Act No. 687, of Sep- 
tember 26, 1945, which helped to make that provincial govern- 
ment truly more representative. 

Pegging of house rentals: 

To protect the civilian population, a large portion of which 
had become homeless on account of the jvar, the President took 
measures to penalize speculation on rents of buildings destined 
for dwelling purposes. Commonwealth Act No. 689, approved 
on October 15, 1945, provided among other things, that in a 
suit for ejection or for the collection of rents due and payable 
by virtue of a contract of lease of buildings, the fact that the 
rents are unjust and unreasonable shall constitute a valid de- 
fense. 

Free distribution of land: 

Commonwealth Act No. 691, approved on October 15, 1945, 
provided for the free distribution, under certain conditions, 
of lots of 24 hectares each of agricultural land of the public 
domain. In the actual distribution, preference will be given 
to members of the Philippine Armed Forces and legitimate guer- 
rillas. To carry out the purposes of the act, the sum of 
f*500,000 was appropriated. 

Farm machinery and tools: 

Commonwealth Act No. 694 provided for the creation of the 
Agricultural Machinery and Equipment Corporation. This Cor- 
poration was recently organized by the President and a subs- 
tantial portion of the 1*10,000,000 fund appropriated for it has 
been made available. Purchases of the machinery and equip- 
ment to be needed by Filipino farmers have already been ordered. 

Development of hydraulic powers: 

Looking forward to supplying hydraulic power for the rich 
but undeveloped island of Mindanao, the Osmena administration 
approved Commonwealth Act No. 700, which appropriates the 
sum of 1*10,000,000 for the development of hydraulic power from 
the Maria Cristina Falls, Province of Lanao, and for the cons- 



105 



truction, operation and maintenance of a hydraulic power plant 
near the falls. When completed, this project will be compar- 
able with the biggest power development projects in the world, 
according to the Associated Press, in reporting the signing of 
this measure by President Osmena on November 1, 1945. In 
approving this ambitious plan to bring about the industrial dev- 
elopment of Mindanao, the Osmena administration went beyond 
the immediate needs of reconstruction and took a decisive stei> 
toward the future progress and prosperity of the country. 

Protection of infancy, maternity and child health: 

On November 1, 1945, President Osmena signed Common- 
wealth Act No. 701, which appropriates f*500,000 for the re- 
sumption of the activities and functions relative to the protection 
of early infancy, maternity and child health. This act made 
possible the reorganization, as Quickly as practicable, of pueri- 
culture centers and maternity houses existing before the ap- 
proval of the act and to establish new one in the places where 
such institutions are greatly needed. (See public welfare report 
on progress in this regard.) 

Land' tax remission: 

Realizing the need for affording relief to owners of lands, 
many of which have been ravaged and have therefore been 
unproductive, President Osmena signed Commonwealth Act No. 
703 on November 1, 1945. This act authorizes the remission 
of all land taxes and penalties due and payable for the years 
1942, 1943, 1944 and 50 per cent of the tax due for 1945. The 
act declares that the land taxes and penalties due and payable 
for the second semester of 1941 shall also be remitted if the 
remaining 50 percent corresponding to 1945 shall have been 
paid on or before December 31, 1945. The act also remits the 
land taxes on all lands, used mainly for the construction of any 
building which has been burned or destroyed by reason of the 
war, until another building shall have been constructed, the 
period of exemption to last not more than a year. 

Municipal maternity and charity clinics: 

By signing Commonwealth Act No. 704, President Osmena 
authorized the Director of Health to establish municipal ma- 
ternity and charity clinics in municipalities and municipal dis- 
tricts having a population of not more than 8,000 inhabitants. 
President Osmena thus extended the benefits of medical atten- 
tion to small towns, where such service is needed most. These 



106 



clinics shall attend to all obstetrical cases and render free serv- 
ice to indigent patients certified as such by the municipal 
treasurer. The sum of ¥=700,000 was appropriated for this 
purpose. 

Aid to Philippine hospitals: 

On November 1, 1945, President Osmena signed Common- 
wealth Act No. 705, which appropriates the total sum of 
¥=3,779,500 as aid to national, provincial and city hospitals and 
their dispensaries. When funds become available for this pur- 
pose, all government hospitals and their dispensaries, in Manila 
as well as in the provinces, will benefit from this act. 

Government Insurance System: 

Taking another important step in improving the lot of gov- 
ernment personnel, President Osmena signed Commonweealth 
Act No. 706 on November 1, 1945. This act provides that each 
and every life insurance policy issued by the Government Serv- 
ice Insurance System to its members which was in force as of 
December 31, 1941, shall be considered in force notwithstand- 
ing the nonpayment of premiums. It also provides that any 
policy which matured by death or otherwise, shall become pay- 
able to the insured or his beneficiaries. Four million pesos was 
appropriated to carry out the purposes of this act. 

Manila Railroad Rehabilitation: 

Personnel of the Manila Railroad Company, who like other 
employees of government corporations as well as government 
personnel in general need help in order to improve their living 
conditions during the present emergency, should take heart from 
the signing of Commonwealth Act No. 707 on November 1, 
1945. The act sets aside the sum of ¥=20,000,000 to be loaned 
without interest to the Manila Railroad Company for its re- 
habilitation particularly for the purchase of locomotives, cars, 
rails, ties and other equipment and accessories of railroad trans- 
portation; for the repair of tracts and bridges; and— this is 
the significant point — for the reorganization and salaries of 
personnel. As quickly as relief funds become available from 
the United States, the Manila Railroad Company will be reha- 
bilitated under this act, and personnel of the company will get 
the government aid and support that is their due. 

Pensions and retirement gratuities: 

On November 1, 1945, President Osmena signed Common- 
wealth Act No. 710, which sets aside the amount of ¥2,000,000 




107 



or so much thereof as may be necessary for the payment of re- 
tirement gratuities or pensions of all persons who under existing 
laws have been receiving such gratuities or pensions including 
payment of pensions or gratuities accruing as of December 8, 
1941. This act reestablishes the right of beneficiaries, such as 
teachers and war veterans, to their pensions and gratuities, 
payment of which has been resumed. 

Land settlement: 

On November 1, 1945, President Osmena approved Common- 
wealth Act No. 711, which appropriates the sum of 1*5, 000, 000 
to enable the National Land Settlement Administration to re- 
sume its functions. In a subsequent executive order, the Pres- 
ident reconstituted the NLSA and released part of the original 
appropriation for the purpose. (See Executive Orders.) 

Radio and telegraph reconstruction: 

To make possible the speedy reconstruction of destroyed ra- 
dio and telegraph installations, President Osmena signed Com- 
monwealth Act No. 712 on November 1, 1945. This Act ap- 
propriates ¥=3,073,820 for the replacement, maintenance and 
operation of destroyed or damaged radio stations and instal- 
lations in Manila and 36 other key radio communications center. 
It also appropriates ¥1,682,960 for the reconstruction of tel- 
egraph lines and reestablishment of necessary stations for 11 
telegraphic circuits strategically located throughout the ar- 
chipelago. 

Cooperative Associations: 

To encourage the cooperatives movement in the Philippines, 
Preesident Osmena on November 1, 1945, signed Commonwealth 
Act No. 713, amending section 5 of Commonwealth Act No. 
565. As amended, the section creates a non-stock National Co- 
operatives Administration to take charge of the promotion, 
organization and supervision of cooperative and mutual aid as- 
sociations now existing as well as those which may later be 
formed. The sum of ¥5,000,000 is set aside for the purpose. 

Bonus for teachers and low-salaried employees: 

By approving Commonwealth Act No. 714, President Osmena 
took an important step in enabling government personnel to 
meet the relatively high prices of essential commodities. Effec- 
tive upon its approval on November 1, 1945, the act provides a 
monthly bonus, in addition to the basic salaries, for public school 




108 



teachers and other low-salaried employees embraced in Grades 
10 to 7 as follows : 

(A) For rates in Grades 10, 9 and 8: ¥=30. 

(B) For rates in Grade 7 : ¥25 for rate ¥80; ¥15 for rate 

f*90; ¥5 for rate 100; provided that, a teacher or employee in 
this grade receiving salary other than any of the said rates 
shall be given a monthly compensation of ¥105, including bo- 
nus. To carry out the purposes of this act, 1*16,700,000 has been 
appropriated. 

Reparations Commission: 

On November 1, 1945, President Osmena approved Common- 
wealth Act No. 715, which creates a Commission on Reparations 
to be composed of five members and which shall act as a fact- 
finding body as well as an agency to determine the most appro- 
priate ways and means of securing indemnity for losses caused 
by the Japanese Armed Forces. Thus the Osmena Administra- 
tion called into being another agency to see to it that the Gov- 
ernment and the people get properly indemnified for losses suf- 
fered during the war. 

Philippine Army Budget: 

On November 1, 1945, President Osmena approved Common- 
wealth Act No. 717, with additional sums totalling 1*52,861,254, 
for the operation of the Philippine Army for the fiscal year 
ending June 30, 1946. Approval of this burget is one of the 
measures' of recognition of the role of the Army in the defense 
of the country and in helping to liberate it from the invader. 
Agricidtural Rehabilitation: 

Commonwealth Act No. 718, approved on November 1, 1945, 
appropriated ¥=2,941,000 from the Coconut Oil Excise Tax Fund 
for important activities under the Department of Agriculture 
and Commerce. These activities include: (1) agronomical sur- 
vey of the Philippines; (2) establishment, development, improve- 
ment, maintenance and operation of agricultural experiment 
and demonstration stations; (3) reforestation and afforestation 
of watersheds, denuded areas, and cogon or open lands within 
forest reserves, communal forests, national parks, timberlands, 
sand dunes, etc.; (4) classification, survey and subdivision of 
agricultural lands of the public domain, especially those lying 
along the national highways; (5) organization, maintenance and 
operation of a School of Fisheries; and (6) creation of a Cin- 




109 



chona Plantation Revolving Fund, for the establishment, cultiva- 
tion, development, maintenance and operation of cinchona plan- 
tations to feed the quinine and totaquina industry. 

Cadastral survey: 

On November 1, 1945, President Osmeiia approved Common- 
.wealth Act No. 719, which appropriates Pi, 700, 000 for the re- 
habilitation of the Cadastral Survey Revolving Fund. 

Animals for breeding purposes: 

Commonwealth Act No. 721, approved on November 1, 1946, 
appropriates P500.000 to buy locally or import animals for 
breeding purposes. This measures is expected to improve the 
quality the quality of work animals and promote the cattle 
industry. 

Exchange Standard Fund: 

On November 14, 1945, President Osmeiia approved Common- 
wealth Act No. 724, which amended Sections 162 and 22 of the 
Adinmistrative Code, regarding the Exchange Standard Fund, 
in order to make available to the Commonwealth Government 
the sum of approximately ¥*50,000,000. This important Ad- 
ministration measure released money which, together with 
¥*142,000,000 in Excise Tax Funds released by the U. S. Treas- 
ury, enabled the Government to reopen government offices, pay 
salaries of government personnel and carry on the functions of 
government at a time when the national income was down to a 
fraction of what it was before the war. 





• OTHER ACTIVITIES 

THE LAND PLANNING OFFICE 

Immediately after the liberation, an office to replan the dam- 
aged cities and towns of the Islands was organized. On March 2, 
1945, the personnel of the pre-war National Parks Office formed 
the beginning of a staff which was augmented later by personnel* 
loaned from various government agencies and from the U. S. 
Armed Forces. 

From the ruins of old communities, it was determined to 
build anew — to build not according to expediency but rather 
according to a plan, in order not to repeat the mistakes and 
faults of the old urban set-up with its attendant traffic con- 
gestions, mixed-up uses of land, over-crowding of population, 
and deterioration of land values. 



The President affixing his signature to the master plan for Manila prepared , 
by the Land Planning Office 



Apparently, planning on areas levelled by war appears easy. 
Actually, it is not as easy as some people thought. Under 
normal conditions the task of planning would have been com- 
plicated enough, but the problems would have been normal ones. 
Basic information necessary for a realistic approach to plan- 
110 




Ill 



ning, the analysis of this information, and the application of 
the findings and solutions arrived at would have followed closely 
in normal order. 

But the emergency presented abnormal problems. Most of 
the basic information needed was not available from normal 
sources. The war destroyed valuable documents and maps. 
Data have to be reconstructed from whatever salvaged records 
by piecing together miscellaneous information picked up here 
and there, and at times from actual surveys that have to be 
done without the benefit of modern equipment. 

Working under terrific pressure of time and. limitation of 
materials, personnel, funds, and equipment, the Land Planning 
Office has made considerable headway. 

The Land Planning Office knows that its work had to be done 
right in order to insure a firm foothold for planning in the 
Islands. No amount of propaganda can possibly give planning 
a genuine prestige unless it has some accomplishments that are 
based on facts. This involved researches and analyses as a 
prerequisite to any planning proposal of lasting and practical 
value. 

Plans cannot be manufactured merely from the imagination. 
They must be based on the actual needs, resources, and wishes 
of the people. Behind the actual drawing of plans is much 
sweat and thought. The results obtained are more essential 
than dramatic. 

Here are the accomplishments: 

Base maps have been finished for Manila, Cebu, Iloilo, Ba- 
tangas, Tarlac, Cabanatuan, San Pablo, Dagupan, Ormoc, and 
many other cities and towns. The Land Planning Office has the 
most accurate maps of these communities showing existing con- 
ditions complete with all available cadastral information; loca- 
tion of streets and extent of rights-of-way ; layout of under- 
ground utilities; uses of land; assessed valuation and ownership 
of real estates; distribution of schools, health centers, markets, 
and other community facilities ; and types and condition of struc- 
tures. From such information, minimum standards have been 
set for playgrounds, residential areas, streets, shopping centers, 
etc. 

A Major Thorofare Plan for Metropolitan Manila has been 
completed. It reflects the composite thinking of the planning 
staff and of those who are concerned with the traffic and 
transportation problems and highway developments of Manila. 
It was evolved after studying the distribution of population and 




the uses and character of the land within the metropolitan area 
and also the relation of this area to the region as a whole. 
The major thorofares form the framework of the city and 
serve as a guide for construction when and if money is made 
available for such construction. In other words, this plan will 
see to it that projects, either small or big, would contribute to 
the ultimate realization of a definite objective. It will avoid 
haphazard and unrelated projects that usually result from the 
lack of a plan. The same kind of plan is being prepared for 
each of the other cities and towns of the Islands. 

With such a plan defining the framework of Manila, for in- 
stance, the details for the downtown commercial area, or any 
section for that matter, can well be determined. 

It is the purpose of the Land Planning Office to plan for and 
with the people. Plans work only if and when supported by 
the people for whom they are made. In order" to keep the 
people informed of what is being planned as well as to plan 
what they want, public meetings, lectures, radio addresses, and 
exhibits have been held, and popular articles and reports on 
planning and housing have been written and published by mem- 
bers of the staff. The Land Planning Office helped organize the 
Manila Metropolitan Planning Association, a citizen body which 
is dedicated to the popularization of plans and the encourage- 
ment of citizen participation in the planning process. 

Citizen support, however, is not enough to make plans at- 
tractive. Planning legislation is needed to implement the plans. 
The National Urban Planning Bill could have supplied this need. 
It was passed by both houses of the Legislature but an amend- 
ment inserted by the Senate which provided the membership 
of two congressmen in the Planning Commission rendered the 
bill unconstitutional and was therefore vetoed by the President. 

An executive order embodying the better parts of the bill has 
been prepared and may soon be issued to give planning in the 
Islands the necessary legal tool to make its work effective. 



