QUEZON 

MEMORIAL BOOK 



COMPILED AND EDITED 
BY 

FiLEMON POBLADOR 



Originally Prepared under the Auspices of 
the Committee in Charge of the 
Reception and Burial of 
the Mortal Remains 



OF 



^resiibent jHanuel (Simeon 




Published by the 

€tue}on Mtmoviai Committee 

MANILA, PHILIPPINES 
1952 



20824 



Copyright, 1952 

BY THE 

QUEZON MEMORIAL COMMITTEE 

All Rights Reserved Including Translation 
Into Other Languages 

Printed by the Bureau of Printing 
Republic of the Philippines 



jforetMorb 



O MAN in any age or clime ever served his country 
and his people so well as did our illustrious President, 
Manuel Luis Quezon. It can truly be said that he lived and 
died for us. He led a useful life and died a glorious death— 
in the service of his people. 

The efforts we exerted in giving him the posthumous honor 
by according his mortal remains a fitting reception and a 
stately burial are as nothing compared to the ceaseless efforts 
he exerted in life to make us happy and free. 

This book is but a modest expression of our appreciation 
and gratitude. It is far from being worthy of so great a man, 
but we are happy to have been able to contribute in this small 
way to the perpetuation of his memory which will forever be 
dear and sacred to us. It is our hope that this modest book 
will, in time, reach the hands of the countless mass of our 
people whom he had served so well and loved with a passion. 

This memorial book was prepared by Mr. Filemon 
Poblador in 1946 under the personal supervision of President 
Manuel Roxas, Mrs. Aurora Aragon de Quezon, and Mr. Jose 
Yulo. Difficulties in securing appropriate printing material at 
the time prevented its immediate publication. Realizing, 
however, the value of this work to our generation and the 
generations yet to come, the Quezon Memorial Committee has 
ordered its publication, confident that it will be received as 
warmly as it would have been in 1946. In view of the con- 
siderable time that has elapsed since the day of interment 
in the Philippines, a few additions to the original material 
have been made to bring the work up-to-date, namely the 
report of the Committee and the plan of the Memorial to be 
erected in the near future. 

The COMMITTEE 

June 7, 1952 




[iii] 



-iii Q U E Z ON MEMORIAL COMMITTEE m ^= = 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 



Foreword iii 

List of Illustrations vii 

Administrative Order No. 40 1 

Proclamation No. 2 2 

Proclamation No. 3 4 

Program of Ceremonies 7 

A Biographical Sketch 11 

From His Own Lips 23 

Inaugural Address of President Quezon, Corregidor, December 

30, 1941 39 

Proclamation of President Quezon Issued at Corregidor, January 

3, 1942 43 

Some Messages of Condolence 45 

Honors at Washington 62 

Pall-Bearers at Washington 63 

Honors at San Diego, California 65 

The Story of the USS "Princeton" 72 

U.S. Navy Bulletin, San Diego, California 75 

Honors at Pearl Harbor 77 

Radio Greetings from Col. Manuel Nieto 81 

Oration of President Manuel Roxas 83 

Oration of Vice-President Elpidio Quiring 93 

Oration of Justice Frank Murphy 101 

Oration of Senator Mariano Jesus Cuenco 103 

Message of General Douglas Mac Arthur 107 

Oration of Mayor Valeriano Fugoso 110 

Oration of Former Justice Claro M. Recto Ill 

Excerpts from Other Orations: 

From the Oration of Senator Garcia 118 

From the Oration of Floor Leader Leuterio 118 

From the Oration of former Commissioner Delgado 119 

From the Oration of Governor Yanza 120 

From the Oration of Governor Antonio 120 

From the Oration of Board President De la Fuente 121 

From the Oration of Mr. Inteii:as 122 

From the Oration of Judge Camus 122 

Invocation by Mons. Jose N. Jovellanos 123 

Oration of Father Pacifico A. Ortiz 124 

SiLENCio! Pasa Quezon! 128 

The Reception and The Burial 130 

Contribution to Allied War Efforts 135 



[v] 



Seven Poems: 

A Manuel L. Quezon— Balmori 

A Quezon— Barcelon y Barcelo 

Manuel Luis Quezon— Anonymous 

In Memoriam — Vega 

Padre y Senor !— Bernabe 

Di Ka Namin Malilimot— Villanueva - 

Manuel L. Quezon — Laurel 

Editorial Appraisals: 

Evening Herald, July 27, 1946 

Manila Post, July 27, 1946 

Manila Chronicle, July 27, 1946 

Manila Daily Bulletin, July 27, 1946 

Evening News, July 29, 1946 

Manila Daily Bulletin, July 30, 1946 - 

Voz de Manila, 31 Julio 1946 

Philippines Free Press, August 3, 1946 

Prayer (OraciOn) 

The President's Record of Public Service 

Report of Quezon Memorial Committee 

Membership of Committee as of June 1952 



[vi] 



^^^^m Q UEZON MEMORIAL CO MM I T T E E m^= m 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

Page 



Manuel L. Quezon, Advocate of Social Justice Frontisjnece 

Home of the Quezon F'amily in Pas ay 6 

Signing of the Tydings-McDuffie Act 10 

Signing of the Constitution of the Philippines 10 

Inauguration of the Commonwealth 12 

President Quezon at the Supreme Court 14 

Laying of Cornerstone of the Government Center, Quezon City .... 16 

President Quezon Addressing the National Assembly 18 

President Quezon Planting a Tree in Arayat 20 

The First President of the Commonwealth 22 

President and Mrs. Quezon on the "Casiana" 24 

Dr. Jose Fabella Signing His Oath of Office before President 

Quezon 26 

Meeting of Council of State 28 

MacArthur Visiting President Quezon 30 

Justice Jose Abad Santos Taking His Oath of Office before 

President Quezon 32 

Dr. Jose P. Laurel Taking His Oath of Office before President 

Quezon 34 

President Quezon Receiving Ten-Million-Dollar Check from Brig. 

Gen. Roxas 36 

The Pacific War Council 44 

President and Mrs. Quezon in Leesburg, Virginia 46 

The Quezon Family 48 

President Quezon and His Eldest Daughter 50 

The Quezon Family and Some Members of Staff 52 

President Quezon and Cardinal Spellman 54 

President Quezon Making Last-Minute Changes in His Radio 

Speech in Washington, D. C 56 

Leaving St. Matthew's Cathedral, Washington, D. C 58 

The Caisson Passing the Gates of Arlington National Cemetery 60 

The Special Train Bearing the Remains 64 

The Casket Being Borne into the Chapel, San Diego, California 66i 

The Body Lying in State in San Diego 68 

Returning the Casket into the Hearse 71 

The Aircraft Carrier "Princeton" 73 

Justice Murphy and Col. Nieto at Honolulu 78 

The Family Attending the Service on Board the "Princeton" 82 



[vii] 



Page 

Lowering thk Casket from ^^^//^^^ Charge 86 

Preparing the Casket for the Com_mittee in 

The Body Lying in State in Malacanan Palace 

The Hearse Leaving Mai^acanan Palace 

Service at the House of Representatives ZZZ^^. 106 

Interior of Sto. Tomas Chapel ^^'"'^^ 

The Family at the Chapel 

Preparing to Leave the Chapel ■■ 

The Caisson Drawn by One Hundred Soldiers i4» 

Officials Following the Caisson in the Cemetery 15. 

At the Grave 

The Mausoleum " 

The Quezon Memorial Project 

Members of the Quezon Memorial Committee 164 



[ viii ] 



ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER No. 40 



Whereas, the mortal remains of the late beloved Manuel L. 
Quezon, first President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, is 
expected to arrive in Manila towards the end of next month; and 

Whereas, it is fitting and proper that arrangements be made for 
the reception of his mortal remains and a state funeral commen- 
surate with the ever-lasting debt of gratitude which the Filipino 
people owe the great departed leader; 

Now, THEREFORE, I, MANUEL ROXAS, President of the Com- 
monwealth of the Phihppines, by virtue of the powers vested in me 
by law, do hereby create a committee to take charge of the arrange- 
ments for the reception of the mortal remains of the late President 
Manuel L. Quezon, and the holding of a state funeral subsequent 
thereto, said committee to be composed of the following: 

Hon. Jose C. Zulueta, Chairman 



MEMBERS 

Hon. Ricardo Nepomuceno 
Hon. Ruperto Kangleon 
Hon. Mariano J. Cuenco 
Hon. Nicolas Buendia 
Hon. Tomas Morato 
Hon. Fortunato Suarez 
Hon. Marcial Ranola 



Hon. Valeriano Fugoso 
Hon. Ramon Fernandez 
Hon. Jose Yulo 
Hon. Joaquin Elizalde 
Hon. Sixto Antonio 
Mr. Antonio Paguia 
Mr. Felicisimo Lauson 



Done in the City of Manila, this eighth day of June, in the year 
of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines, the eleventh. 

President of the Philippines 

By the President: 

(Sgd.) Emilio Abello 
Chief of the Executive Office 



2982-1 



[1] 



m iregjiient of tfte ^PiPPin^s! 

PROCLAMATION No. 2 

DECLARWG A PERIOD OF N^^'^f^r"''''"'" 
AND OTHER OBSERVANCES 

Whkhkas, the mortal remains of t^^^ m^^^^^ 
Quezon will be received in the Phibppmes on July f .19^^^^^ J^J 

burial in his native soil, S^^^S °PP°/, .^^^^^ his heroic death and 
men to express their sorrow and gratitude tor nis ne 

historic services; 

Nov. THEREFORE I, MANXJEL ROXAS, President of the Philip- 
pines d"' orTa" p'rovide the following national observance of 
mourning for our beloved leader: 

1 The period of national mourning shall begin on the twenty- 
seventh day'of July and shall -ntinue unti^^the an™^^ of the 
birth of Manuel L. Quezon on the nineteenth day of August Uur 
ing tht^^^^^^^^^ flags on aU government buildings and mstaUations 
throughout the Philippines shall be flown at half-mast and other pro- 
per observances of national mourning shall be manifested. 

2 All government offices and agencies are authorized to fulfill 
only essential functions on the morning of the twenty-seventh day 
of July granting to dispensable government employees the opport- 
unity to attend the cortege from the Manila Bay front to Malacanan 



Palace. 



3. At high noon on the furst day of August, I enjoin the people 
of the Philippines to gather in their respective places of worship to 
pray for the repose of the soul of Manuel L. Quezon. I request that 
three minutes of silent prayer be observed by all the people of the 
Philippines beginning at that hour, when the casket of the late Pres- 
ident Quezon will be placed in its grave. 

4. On the morning of the first day of August, government offices 
and agencies are authorized to fulfill only essential functions, grant- 
ing to dispensable employees the opportunity to attend the funeral 
services for the late President. 



[2] 



QUEZON MEMORIAL C 0 M M I T T E E m^'^m 



In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused 
the seal of the Repubhc of the Phihppines to be affixed. 

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fourth day of July, in the 
year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Inde- 
pendence of the Philippines, the first. 




President of the Philippines 



By the President: 



(Sgd.) Emilio Abello 
Chief of the Executive Office 




[3] 



ti}t f re^ibent of tlje ftiUppmesi 

PROCLAMATION No. 3 

DESIGNATING FOUR DAYS OF ^^^^^^Z^'^IvGvfT?^^^ Ts 
f-rniyjiMr nTTY 27 1946. AND THURSDAY, AUGUbl 1, 
?ZZy^U™i of the late president MANUEL 

L. QUEZON. 

On August 1, 1946, two years wiU have passed since the tragic 
death of Manuel L. Quezon, hero of his people and paladin of the 
Philippine forces of freedom. 

During those two years the mortal remams of the late great 
President have rested in foreign soU, but soil which was the scene 
of his last glorious efforts to bring the succor of liberation to his 
suffering countrymen. For that cause, and in that land, the United 
States, he gave up his life. As sm-ely as the humble soldier who died 
in heroic struggle on the battlefield, President Quezon's life was of- 
fered on the altar of national redemption, that his people might realize 
in magnificent freedom the full independence and true nationhood for 
which he had fought and worked from his earliest years. 

On July 27, 1946, the body of Manuel L. Quezon will return 
here. Reverently borne by friendly hands from its temporary resting 
place in the great burial ground of American patriots, the National 
Arlington Memorial Cemetery, the earthly remains of the great Fili- 
pino hero will arrive in Manila on board an American aircraft carrier, 
the U. S. S. Princeton, on the morning of the twenty-seventh day of 
July. It is fitting that the naval arm of the nation with whose cause 
Manuel L. Quezon identified his people should now solemnly bear 
his body to these shores. 

Now, therefore, I, MANUEL ROXAS, President of the Philip- 
pines, do hereby appoint four days of solemn state memorial services, 
begmning on July 27, 1946, and do further, appoint Thursday, August 
1, 1946, as the day of interment of the deceased President. On that 
day the body of our immortal hero will lie in the earth of his ances- 
tors. I have by separate proclamation provided suitable observances 
and proclaimed a period of mourning for this Nation. 



[4] 



Q U E Z ON MEM 0 R I A L COMMITTEE 



During the four days of memorial services, and during tlie entire 
period of mourning, let us direct our prayers to the Almighty that 
He may give comfort and surcease to the beloved widow and children 
of our great President, and that He may in His goodness bless our 
people with the courage and the nobility so immortally exemplified 
in the spirit of the leader, who having given on distant soil his life 
for his native land, is now coming home to find his last resting place. 

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused 
the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed. 

Done at the City of Manila, this twenty-fourth day of July, in the 
year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-six, and of the Inde- 
pendence of the Philippines, the first. 




President oj the Philippines 



By the President: 

(Sgd.) Emilio Abello 
Chief of the Executive Office 



[5] 



^F=^ Q UEZON MEMORIAL CO M M I T T E E ^ ^ 



program 

OF 

CeremoniejS in Manila from fulp 27 to ^usuiSt I, 1946 

SATURDAY— JULY 27 
8:00 a.m. — ^All flags at half-mast 

3:00 p.m. — Official Reception of Remains at former Pier 7 
3:30 p.m. — Funeral cortege leaves Pier for Malacanan 
5:00 p.m.— Remains will lie in state at Special Chapel until following 
morning 

SUNDAY— JULY 28 
8:00 a.m.— Low Mass, Mons. Jose N. Jovellanos, officiating 
9:30 a.m.— Funeral cortege leaves Malacanan for Hall of Congress, 
Lepanto 

J 1 .00 a.m.— Arrival at the Hall of Congress, Lepanto 
11:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.— Popular Homage 
3:00 p.m. — Necrological service before the joint session of the Senate 
and House of Representatives 

1. In Memoriam — Buenaventura — ^The Philippine Army 

Concert Orchestra; Capt. A. Buenaventura, con- 
ducting 

2. Invocation — Mons. Jose N. Jovellanos 

3. Oration — Justice Frank Murphy 

4. Reading of Oration of Gen. Douglas MacArthur 

5. Agnus Dei — Bezet — ^Mrs. Consuelo S. Perez, So- 

prano, with Orchestral accompaniment; Prof. An- 
tonio J. Molina, conducting 

6. Oration — Congressman Raul T. Leuterio 

7. Oration — Senator Carlos P. Garcia 

8. Oration — Senator Mariano Jesus Cuenco 

9. (a) Melody — Gluch. (b) Elegy — Mossenet, Prof. 

Luis Valencia, Violinist; Prof. Constancia F. 
Marquez at the piano 

10. Oration — By the President of the Philippines 

11. Nearer My God to Thee — L. Mason — The Philip- 

pine Army Concert Orchestra; Capt. A. Buena- 
ventura, conducting 

12. Recession 

5:00 p.m. — Popular Homage until 7:00 a.m., Monday, July 29 



[7] 



MONDAY— JULY 29 

7:00 a.m.— Transfer of remains from Hall of Congress to University 

of Sto. Tomas Chapel 
8:30 a.m.— Arrival at University of Sto. Tomas Chapel 
9:00 a.m. —Knights of Columbus High Mass, Rev. George Will- 
MANN, S. J., officiating 
10:30 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.— Popular Homage 

3:00 p.m.— Necrological service under the auspices of the Province 
of Tayabas 

1. Funeral March— Beef/ioi;en— Manila Symphony Or- 

chestra; Prof. Bernardino Custodio, conducting 

2. Invocation — Mons. Alfredo Versoza, Bishop of the 

Diocese of Lipa 

3. Pied AD, Senor — ^Miss Jo vita Fuentes, Soprano; Ac- 

companied on the harmonium by Miss Carmen 

ROCHA 

4. Oration — Hon. Hilarion Yanza, Provincial Gover- 

nor, Tayabas 

5. Death of Ase — Grieg — Manila Symphony Orchestra 

6. Oration — Hon. Claro M. Recto 

7. O Vos Omnes— (4 voices)— Victona— The U. S. T. 

Seminary Schola Cantorum 
5:00 p.m. to 12 Midnight — Popular Homage 

TUESDAY— JULY 30 

8:00 a.m.— High Mass, Mons. Vicente Fernandez, officiating 
10:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. — Popular Homage 

3:00 p.m.— Necrological service. Under the auspices of the City of 
Manila, Province of Rizal and other provincial dele- 
gations 

I. Prayer— CHORUS of the Conservatory of Music, 
U. P., Mr. Eliseo Pajaro, conducting 

n. Oration — Hon. Manuel de la Fuente, President, 
Municipal Board 

HI. Oration — Hon. Sixto Antonio, Provmcial Gover- 
nor of Rizal 

IV. Ave Maria— (By F. Santiago)— Prof. Lourdes G. 

Razon, Conservatory of Music, U. P.; Prof. Julio 
E. Anguita, accompanyist 

V. Oration— Hon. Valeriano E. Fugoso, Mavor of the 

City of Manila 



[8] 



1^ ^^1^ QUEZON MEMORIAL COMMITTE E = 

TUESDAY— JULY 30— Continued. 

VI. The Last Trail (Posthumous tribute to the late 
President Manuel L. Quezon) — ^By Director Ra- 
mon Tapales — U. P. Conservatory of Music Sym- 
phony Orchestra 

5:00 p.m. to 12 Midnight — ^Popular Homage 

WEDNESDAY— JULY 31 
8:00 a.m, — High Mass, Rev. Fr. Juan Ortega, officiating 
10:30 a.m. to 1:00 p.7n. — Popular Homage 

3:00 p.m. — Necrological service under the auspices of government 
employees, labor, civic, women's and veteran's organ- 
izations, schools and colleges 

1. Ave Maria — By Mrs. Salvacion O. Yniguez, So- 

prano; Prof. Bernardino Custodio, accompanyist 

2. Declamation — By Atty. Baltazar M. Villanueva 

3. Oration — By Mr. Aurelio Intertas 

4. Chorus— By U. S. T. Seminary and U. S. T. Con- 

servatory of Music 

5. Oration — By Judge Manuel Camus 

6. Oration — By Judge Francisco Delgado 

7. Oration — By Hon. Elpidio Quiring 

8. Liberame — By Mr. Pedro Roxas, Tenor; Prof. Ber- 

nardino CusTODio, accompanyist 

9. Recession — By Santo Tomas Universty Conservatory 

of Music, Organ Solo 

5:00 p.m. to 12 Midnight — Popular Homage 

THURSDAY— AUGUST 1 

8:00 a,m, — Pontifical Mass, H. E. Mons. Guglielmo Piani, officiat- 
ing. Rev. F. Pacifico Ortiz, S. J., will deliver the 
sermon 

10:00 a,m. — Funeral cortege leaves University of Sto. Tomas Chapel 
for North Cemetery 

12:00 noon — Lowering of casket and signal hour for national prayer 
throughout the Philippines 

TAPS 



[9] 



=E^^m QUEZON MEMORIAL CQMlM I T T E E ^i j^—^ g 



A Biographical Sketch 

MANUEL LUIS QUEZON, patriot, statesman, champion of social 
justice, and idol of his people, was born in Baler, a little 
village on the northeastern coast of Tayabas, at seven in the morning 
of August 19, 1878. His father was a retired sergeant of the Spanish 
Army and his mother a devout Catholic. 

He received his early education from his own parents, but at the 
age of seven years he was sent to live with a Franciscan friar. Father 
Teodoro Fernandez, then parish priest of Baler, to receive his first 
formal lessons in religion, history, geography, and Latin. This ar- 
rangement lasted only until Father Fernandez was transferred to 
Manila four years later. The transfer, fortunately, was an oppor- 
tunity for the ambitious little Manuel to continue his education in 
the capital. With the encouragement of his parents, he joined his 
tutor as a mess boy so he could study in the Colegio de San Juan de 
Letran. Here he continued diligently until he completed the course 
of instruction. 

Although his parents were glad that he was able to finish his 
studies in Letran with highest honors, they were confronted with the 
problem of sending him to the University. Determined to become a 
lawyer at any cost or sacrifice, the young man counseled his parents 
to leave the matter to him. He approached Father Tamayo, once 
his professor in Letran, and laid before him his great desire of con- 
tinuing his studies in the University of Santo Tomas as a working 
student. Father Tamayo gladly admitted him to the University, 
granting him free tuition, board, and lodging. 

He was still a student of law in that University when he heard 
the first shots in Manila Bay in May 1898. Feehng that the hour 
had come for him to fight for his country, he joined the revolutionary 
movement under General Emilio Aguinaldo. In the beginning he 
was assigned as a member of the staff, doing desk work in the head- 
quarters, first in Cabanatuan, then in Angeles, and later in Tarlac, 
but was eventually sent to the front on his own insistence. 

Fighting under General Tomas Mascardo, he got a taste of war 
in Bulacan when he saw a comrade bleeding and heard the bullets 



[11] 



Q U E Z ON MEMO R I A L COMMITTEE 



whistling over his head. When the Americans were akeady pressing 
hard, General Mascardo sent him to Bataan with 25 men to find a safe 
place for the retreating force. It was a difficult and dangerous mission, 
but he accomplished it to the satisfaction of his superior officer. 

While m the mountains of Bataan, he heard that General Agui- 
naldo had been captured and he proceeded to Mariveles to inquire into 
the truth of the rumor. There he met Lieutenant Miller, who 
brought him to Manila the following day to prove to him the rumor 
was well founded. In Malacanan he discovered that General Agui- 
naldo was under the custody of General Arthur MacArthur. Dis- 
gusted, but resigned to the results of the revolution, he repaired to 
the home of Dr. Alejandro Albert, his friend, with whom he lived 
for some time while looking for work to enable him to continue his 
studies. A modest employment in the Monte de Piedad, paying 25 
pesos a month, solved the problem. 

Immediately after receiving the ratings in the bar examinations, 
from which he emerged with flying colors, he was invited by Fran- 
cisco Ortigas, then already a prominent lawyer, to join his firm at a 
salary of P150 a month, with right to accept his own clients. The 
new lawyer promptly accepted this offer and practiced law to his 
heart's content. 

During a visit he made to Tayabas, he won the friendship and 
admiration of Provincial Governor Paras, a Filipino, and the Amer- 
ican judge, named Linebarger. Before he could return to Manila, 
he was offered the position of prosecuting cittorney for Mindoro 
at Fl,500 a year. The offer was to him an opportunity for service 
and he accepted it in 24 hours. He had hardly stayed six months 
in Mindoro when he was oft'ered by the same judge the position 
of prosecuting attorney for his own province. He also accepted 
this position, but resigned in November 1904, to run for provincial 
governor. 

The yoimg prosecuting attorney was so popular in his own prov- 
ince that he had little difficulty getting elected. As chief executive 
of his province, he incessantly exerted every effort to prove that the 
Filipinos were capable of running their own government. 

His administration of the affairs of his province brought him a 
new triumph. When he ran for the Philippine Assembly in 1907, 



[13] 



Q U E Z ON MEM O R I A L COMMITTEE 



he was elected almost unanimously. The majority party in recog- 
nition of his talent and leadership made him Floor Leader. 

Realizing that Quezon would make an ideal Resident Commis- 
sioner at Washington, the Philippine Assembly elected him to that 
important position in 1909. His record as Resident Commissioner is 
well known to American and Filipino leaders. He was never 
afraid to fight any measure that was harmful to the Philippines and 
was always ready to support any measure that could redound to the 
welfare of his people. His most outstanding achievement as Res- 
ident Commissioner was perhaps the passage of the Jones Law which 
for the first time placed on record the promise of America to grant 
independence to the Philippines. 

His efforts in securing the passage of the Jones Law were duly 
rewarded with his election to the Philippine Senate, in 1916, of which 
he became the President from its organization to the establishment 
of the Commonwealth. As President of the Senate, he made notable 
success in proving the capacity of the Filipino people to govern them- 
selves. 

In 1918, a few days after the signing of the armistice in Europe, 
he married his cousin Aurora Aragon, to whom he had been en- 
gaged for twelve years. The wedding was celebrated in Hongkong, 
while he was on his way to the United States to campaign for Phil- 
ippine freedom, and was attended only by members of his staff. 
To this marriage, four children were born — three girls and a boy, all 
of whom grew to maturity except one. 

During his incumbency the struggle for leadership arose in the 
Party, a fight between collectivism and unipersonalism. Starting at 
first only as an undercurrent, it developed into a furious conflict in 
which he emerged triumphant. As a result, he became the head of his 
Party. This was followed later by another conflict when the Hare- 
Hawes-Cutting Act was brought home by the Os-Rox Mission from 
the U. S. Congress for submission to the Filipino people. His argu- 
ments against the measure proved to be so convincing that the meas- 
ure was turned down. Promising that he could get a better measure 
than the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act, he headed a new mission to the 
United States and, in a comparatively short time, secured the passage 



[15] 



^^^^ QUEZON MEMORIAL C 0 M M I T T E E mW ^^^m 



the Tydings-McDuffie Law, by virtue of which the Commonwealth 
Government was estabhshed in 1935, and our independence 
proclaimed on July 4, 1946. 

The elections held in 1934 for the officials of the new govern- 
ment proved the steady growth of his political power and prestige. 
With a majority that astounded his opponents, he was elected 
President of the Commonwealth. On November 15, 1935, in a 
solemn ceremony held in front of the Legislative Building and 
attended by high dignitaries of the American Government and 
members of the consular corps, he was inaugurated President. 

The first measure President Quezon submitted to the National 
Assembly after his inauguration was a bill creating the Department 
of National Defense for the security of the country, and the freedom, 
independence, and perpetual neutrality of the Philippine Republic, 
which would eventually be established on July 4, 1946. This bill, 
carrying an appropriation of nearly P16,000,000, became Common- 
wealth Act No. 1. 

Believing that the prosperity and happiness of the Filipino 
people depended largely on the proper direction of the economic 
and financial affairs of the nation, he urged and succeeded in getting 
the enactment of a law creating a National Economic Council to 
advise the government in economic and financial questions, including 
the improvement and promotion of industries, diversification of crops 
and enterprises, tariffs, taxation, and to formulate an economic 
program based on national independence. 

In order to avail himself of the talent and experience of the 
best men in the country, he created a Council of State, to advise him 
on matters of public policy. To this body belonged the President 
and the Vice-President, the Speaker of the National Assembly, the 
heads of the executive departments, the Secretary to the President, 
and the Majority Floor Leader of the National Assembly. Heads of 
important offices and government companies were also allowed to 
sit and to participate in the discussions. 

As an avowed champion of social justice, he embraced the cause 
of the working class and utilized every opportunity in his adminis- 
tration to ameliorate the lot of the poor and the needy. He always 



Q U E Z ON MEMORIAL C 0 M M I T T E E 



advocated higher wages and better Hvmg conditions for workers in 
factories and farms and maintained that every man and woman must 
have an opportunity to work and to hve. 

No man could be more indefatigable as a worker. He always 
rose early and always retired late. The dignification of labor was 
to him more than merely a moral precept; it was a religion, a faith. 

During the commonwealth period an unprecedented progress in 
pubHc improvements was attained, particularly in the construction of 
public buildings in Manila and in the provincial capitals, not to men- 
tion the rapid increase of hospitals, schools, roads, and bridges 
throughout the country, and the steady development of the country's 
natural resources. 

His administration was the most successful in the entire history 
of the Philippines. No executive, Spaniards and Americans included, 
had ever united the Filipino people as did President Manuel L. 
Quezon. His winning personality, his sense of justice, and his tact in 
dealing with his fellowmen drew to him all elements of the country. 
He was neither the President of the poor nor the President of the 
rich; yet, never had the poor and the rich been so contented as they 
were during the period of his leadership. 

The contentment and peace brought about by his administration 
and the work of nation-building which had been going on for years 
were interrupted only by the war in December 1941, which com- 
pelled him to move the seat of his government from Manila to 
Corregidor to keep up the morale of the fighting Filipino soldiers 
and the civilian population, and later to evacuate to Washington as a 
symbol of liberation on the insistence of President Roosevelt, General 
Marshall and General MacArthur. 

President Quezon was unusually fond of his family. Despite the 
continuous pressure of his official duties as President of the Senate 
and later as President of the Commonwealth, he always took time to 
associate daily with the members of his family and to promote their 
happiness and welfare. 

His devotion to, and respect for, Mrs. Quezon could be compared 
only to his devotion and loyalty to his people. Even in the 



[19] 



QUEZON MEMO RIAL COMMITTEE ^ ^ 



midst of an absorbing discussion, he would promptly ask to be excused 
when notified that Mrs. Quezon would like to see him, or was on 
the telephone line. 

No man perhaps enjoyed the company of his children more than 
did President Quezon. He had no favorite child; he loved each and 
all of them equally and was always happy in their association. And 
his children loved him no less. He was their idol and their ideal. 

The efforts of President Quezon during the war years proved 
once again his undying love for his native land and his loyalty to the 
cause of democracy. Despite his faihng health, he attended to his 
duties diligently even as the Japanese raids were going on all over 
the Philippines and did not leave the country until he had given 
definite and final instructions to his key men in Luzon, the Visayas, 
and Mindanao to do their utmost for the sake of the people. Those 
who were with President Quezon when he left Mindanao for Austraha 
on his way to the United States knew full well how reluctant President 
Quezon was to leave his people in the darkest hour of their history. 

While in the United States, working for more American aid to 
hasten the rescue of the Philippines, President Quezon attended all 
conferences and fulfilled all speaking engagements to bolster the 
morale of the AUied fighting forces, especially those of the smaller 
nations hke the Philippines, and kept his campaign intensively until 
he could stand and speak no more. 

On August 1, 1944, a few months before the realization of his 
fondest dream — the liberation of the Philippines from Japanese dom- 
ination — death came to the President at Saranac, New York, where 
he was recovering from a lingering illness, and suddenly put an end 
to a most colorful life of public service unsurpassed in the history of 
any nation. He was survived by his distinguished wife. Dona Aurora 
Aragon de Quezon, and their three children who were all at his bed- 
side when the inevitable hour came. — Filemon Poblador, Chairman, 
Quezoniana Committee, Malacanan, 1939-1941. 

* 29824 



[21] 



I 



^^^^Q UEZON MEMORIAL COMMITTEE 



WORDS OF WISDOM ON VARIED TOPICS 

Amhition 

I have no ambition for power, honor, or glory. My only ambi- 
tion Is to see the triumph of the ideals for which my colleagues have 
been fighting for years; to help make our country a better and happy 
place to live in; to carry out to a brilliant and successful termination 
the task which our forefathers began. 
Attitude 

In my life both as an individual and as a public man, I have al- 
ways faced facts squarely. 
Capital 

It would be national suicide to persecute capital. In our age, 
capital, and in large amounts, is necessary for the economic develop- 
ment and the social welfare of the people. 
Character 

One may be the greatest scientist, the bravest general, or the 
most invincible conqueror, but if he is a cheat and a liar, he is worse 
than a dog. It is not a man's position in life or his accomplishment 
that counts, but the moral stamina which he mobilizes to uphold 
good and defeat evil. 
Civic Duty 

It is part of the civic duty of every person residing in the Phil- 
ippines to help in the suppression of crimes by testifying in a crim- 
inal case at his own expense. 
Concept of Duty 

I am not the president of the rich, and I am not the president of 
the poor either. I am the president of the Philippines, of the Fi- 
lipino people, rich and poor alike. The duty of the president of the 
Philippines is a duty which he owes to the whole Filipino people. 

Constitution 

Our Constitution embodies the living ideas of our times. It con- 
tains the solemn demand that the promotion of social justice to in- 
sure the well-being and economic security of all the people should be 
the concern of the State. 
Criticism 

Conservative criticism is necessary to help the government 
correct whatever error it has committed. I am grateful to the news- 
papers for fm^nishing, in several instances, that criticism. 

* 29824 

[23] 



m^^^ QUEZON MEMOR lAL COMMITTEE =—^m 



Democracy 

Democracy is maintained by the cooperative efforts of the gov- 
erned. Contributions made by every citizen toward the support of 
a democratic government should be in direct proportion to the privil- 
eges, opportunities, and advantages enjoyed by him under that 
government. 

If our people want a democracy, they must realize the im- 
portance of the legislative department. They must have confidence 
in the men whom they select to represent them ''^ - until 
by their own acts they lose the right to their confidence and trust. 
Divine Foiver 

Let us entrust our sacred cause to God because we know that 
He is just and He hides not His face from those, who in a spirit of 
humihty seek justice through His loving intercession. To lift our 
hearts in prayer as we begin a nationwide campaign for freedom, 
we but follow the pious example of the ancients, who implored the 
guidance and protection of God before embarking upon their war 
expedition that victory might be theirs. 

Economic Development 

Economic activity must be developed primarily to serve the 
interests of the whole nation, and should be guided towards profit- 
able, convenient, and stable channels where it can render the great- 
est good to the people at large. ^ 

Economic Life 

We do not encourage the accumulation of immense wealth in the 
hands of a few; our ideal consists in being able to tell the world that 
if v/e do not have milhonaires neither do we have anyone that can 
be called poor. * 

Economic Planning 

I favor economic planning to the extent of providing the na- 
tion with the necessary leadership to balance and strengthen our 
economy, establish the proper relationship between our economic 
activities and our national needs, correlate productive energy with 
labor, capital and credit facilities, and direct the wise utilization of 
our natural resources — all with a view to securing the well-being I 
of the people. 

Education 

Education does not have to be forced on the Fihpino. He takes 
it readily. He seeks it for his children. 

[25] 




'1 



QUEZON MEMO RIAL COMMITTEE == 



Educator 

There is, however, one thing which in this period of the history 
of our country, is an essential and indispensable qualification of 
every educator of our youth, and that is, an unquestioning love of 
our country and the most fervent loyalty to her patriotic ideals. 
The educator should not hold himself aloof from the people he is 
serving; he can not turn his back upon the requirements of their 
spirit. Rather, he should feel to the quick the vicissitudes of their 
history, past and present, and gathering them in their throbbing sig- 
nificance, take them into his heart. It is only thus that he can catch 
a vision of the paths and the processes which the culture of the peo- 
ple must follow. 

Faith in the People 

I have an abiding faith in our people. I know that they have 
all the faculties needed to become a powerful and enlightened na- 
tion. The Filipino is not inferior to any man of any race. 

Government 

The Government of the Phihppines is not the government of all 
the officials of the government; it is the government of all the Fili- 
pinos. 

There are two things we must observe for the success of our 
new government. First, we must realize that the government is for 
service. Second, the people must and should obey the laws and 
help the government in the enforcement of these laws. 

Let us endeavor to have the best government that we can make, 
a government that will be an honor to us and worthy of our people. 

I believe that honesty and public morality in the government 
are of far greater value to the people than any immediate profits 
which the government raay make in any enterprise. 
Independence 

Independence is and has ever been the supreme aspiration of 
the Filipino people. It is a longing chastened and hallowed by sa- 
crifice, and strengthened by the conviction that through freedom alone 
can the higher destinies of our people be achieved. 

Our nation has chosen the road to independence. That decision 
was made with full knowledge of the sacrifices and difficulties that 
must be met. We are following that road with determined and 
firm tread. There will be no turning back. 

Independence will be ours ten years from now. Today in all 
matters affecting our domestic affairs, we alone have the authority 
and the power to determine what shall be done. 



[27] 



QUEZON MEMO RTaT rOMMyTn Pvi. ^^===^=^^ 



Justice 

The law must be the same for the pov/erful and for the weak, 
for the rich and for the poor. 

The success of an enlightened government depends to a large 
extent upon its administration of justice. 
Labor 

The time has arrived when the poor workers in the fields and 
factories in the Philippines must be given their due, for if they are 
not, it will not be long before we will see repeated in the Phihppines 
what we see in so many countries of the world today. 

To pay good wages to our laborers is to give them proper nou- 
rishment, and proper nutrition means health. A healthy laborer can 
do more and better work than one who is sickly and underfed. 

No one is more desirous than I to see that there is work for 
every man and contentment and happiness for all, and I shall leave 
no stone unturned until I have myself seen the realization of this 
program of government. 

One of the most unjust, and even cruel, practices of employers 
that has been called to our attention is that of not paying their em- 
ployees and laborers on the date that theix salaries or wages are due. 
This practice compels the employees and laborers to become victims 
of usurers and, as I am told, some of the employers themselves indir- 
ectly lend money to these employees and laborers with interest, while 
on the other hand they are withholding unduly their pay or wage. 

As we reduce the burden that is being unduly placed upon the 
masses of our people, on the one hand, and then the wage that they 
are entitled to earn, on the other, we shall ultimately raise the stand- 
ard of living as we reduce its cost, and thereby increase the purchas- 
ing power of the wage earner. 

We will prevent monopolies by the rich so that the poor will 
have equal opportunity. We will see to it that the man who works 
in the fields or in the factory gets the proper return for his work, 
and will not let anybody exploit him like a beast. 

If property owners want to enjoy the benefit of their hard labors 
and enjoy their savings of many years so that they and their child- 
ren's children may also get the benefits of their wealth; if property 
owners want to conserve their wealth, they should think of the poor, 
treat them right, and not abuse them or strangle them to death, by 
placing upon their door all kinds of hardships and difficulties. 





GENERAL MACARTHUR VISITS PRESIDENT QUEZON SHORTLY AFTER HIS WEDDING ANNIVERSARY 

CDECEMBER 17. 1941) 



[30] 



QUEZON ME M O^TaT" TOMMtttfi^ =1 



It is of utmost importance that industry and commerce be given 
such stability as to insure their progressive growth and at the same 
time allow the laborers to earn adequate wages, considering the con- 
ditions that now obtain, so that they may meet their essential neces- 
sities and those of their dependents. 
Leaders/lip 

There must be leadership in the government, and leadership is 
not incompatible with the principle of the separation of powers. 
Where there is no leadership, the result is chaos. In the United 
States, sometimes the leadership is in the executive, when there is a 
president like Roosevelt, or Woodrow Wilson. Sometimes it is in the 
senate. When Representative Joseph Cannon was speaker of the 
house the leadership was in the house. In the Philippines the consti- 
tution wanted the chief executive to be the leader. 
Love of Country 

God has been so generous to the Filipino people that He has 
given us one of the most beautiful, one of the richest countries upon 
the face of the earth. I have been around the world many times, 
but never have I seen a land so beautiful as this country of ours. Are 
we going to let anybody take from us that which has been given us 
by God? 

People no longer long for a country simply because they were 
born there. They must see and feel that in that country they en- 
joy a happy life, that they have every opportunity to improve their 
lot. 

Loyalty of Citizen 

Every Filipino citizen owes loyalty to this government not only 
as his legal duty for living under it, but also as one who must abide 
by its lav/s and respect the authorities constituted under those laws. 
Moral Values 

The true measure of moral values as they refer to personal or 
official conduct is the conviction and sincerity with which we act. 
National Defense 

Self-defense is the supreme right of mankind, no more sacred to 
the individual than to the nation, the interests of which are immeas- 
urably of greater significance and extent. A threat against the na- 
tion involves not alone the life of one individual, but of millions; not 
the welfare and fortune of a single family, but of all. And above 
everythmg else, depending upon the exercise of the right of national 
self-defense is freedom itself, the most precious reward from Heaven 
to the worthy. The immutable principle is firmly incorporated in 
our Constitution— the Magna Charta of Philippine Liberty. 



[31] 




Any completely defenseless nation is invariably compelled to 
conform to the wishes of any other nation that employs the thi-eat of, 
and can effectively appeal to, forceful aggression. 

The ultimate bulwark of liberty is the readiness of free citizens 
to sacrifice themselves in the defense of their country. 
National Dignity 

If we want to be a free country, if we want the Filipino people 
to be considered a progressive people, if we want to be able to raise 
our heads in the presence of any body and consider ourselves their 
equals, if not superior, it is necessary for us to make sacrifices, sacri- 
fices of fortune, so that those coming after us may live a life worthy 
of free men and women. 

National Freedom 

National freedom now stands before us as a shining light — the 
freedom that for many years gleamed only as a fitful candle in the 
distant dark. We shall make ourselves ready to grasp the torch, 
so that no predatory forces may ever strike it from our hands. 

National Greatness 

Show me a people composed of vigorous, stui^dy individuals, 
of men and women healthy in mind and body; courteous, brave, in- 
dustrious; self-reliant; powerful in thought as well as in action; im- 
bued with sound patriotism and a profound sense of righteousness; 
with high social ideals and a strong moral fiber; and I will show you 
a great nation that will emerge victorious from the trials and bitter 
strifes of a distracted world, a nation that will live forever, sharing the 
common task of advancing the welfare and promoting the happiness 
of mankind. 

National Policies 

I propose to follow only safe and trodden paths, those which by 
our own experience and the experience of other countries impress 
themselves as the wisest and most advantageous course. 

National Strength 

National strength can be built only on character. A nation is 
nothing more or less than its citizenry. It is the people that make 
up the nation, and, therefore, it cannot be stronger than its component 
parts. 

Patriotic Service 

The energy of the youth of the land should be conserved for the 
nation, and its intelligence disciplined into an attitude of patriotic 
service to the nation. 

29824 3 



[33] 



Patriotism 

No liar can be a patriot because when he speaks of patriotism he 
is lying. A selfish man cannot be a patriot, because patriotism de- 
mands self-denial, the surrender of hopes for personal glory to the 
greater good, for the advancement of his fellowmen, his community, 
and his country. 

Peace 

I am a firm and strong believer in peace. I believe in a peace- 
ful, quiet and undisturbed humanity, striving for progress and 
achieving its higher destiny under the panoply of the arch of peace. 

Progress is impossible without peace. No country can grow with- 
out peace . . . Peace is the basis of every good thing in life, and 
peace, in order to be permanent and enduring, should be and must be 
based not on the bayonet but on the contentment of the people. 
Peop/e's Interest 

The interest of the people should be placed over and above the 
welfare of the party. 

Prophecy 

I have a haunting feeling that I shall not live to see Philippine 
independence. I only wish my son shall not experience the humiha- 
tion which I have undergone . . . 
Public Education 

Our system of public education must be inspired in Filipino pa- 
triotism and consecrated to the formation of citizens of high moral 
character and civic virtues. We must also provide every child of 
school age the opportunity to receive primary instruction. 

Public Officials 

Public officials deserve more respect and deference from the peo- 
ple in a democracy than in any other form of government, for the au- 
thority of these officials emanates from the people themselves. 
Public Opinion 

Public opinion in the Philippines is not only unsuppressed, but 
vocal and militant. We have two parties and they must be careful to 
learn what the people want. Our electors do not vote by ethnographic 
group, nor by language or dialect, nor according to their re^ligion. 
They vote according to the dictate of their hearts and minds, according 
to what is right and good for the country. 



[35] 




[36] 



^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ I ^ C O M M I T TEE 



Public Service 



A person who declines a post with high honors and substantial 
compensation, solely because he considers it incompatible with his sin- 
cere convictions, offers the highest example of public decorum, inte- 
grity, and mdependence. 



Rizal 

The memory of Dr. Rizal became dearer to the hearts of the peo- 
pie as the fatal day of his death became more remote. The occasion 
of the celebration of his birthday should serve to awaken the people 
to the ideals for which this illustrious patriot laid down his life. 

Sodcl Justice 

Social justice is far more beneficent if it comes as a matter of 
sentiment and not of law. 

Spain 

We owe to Spain the principles of Occidental education which she 
implanted in these islands, according to the modes and standards 
found in Latin countries. But above all, we owe to Spain the pres- 
ervation for the benefit of our own people, of the soil of our country, 
as well as the laying down, by means of religion and education, of 
the foundations of our national unity. 

State University 

The country looks up to the University of the Philippines for 
the technological leadership which it needs in our efforts toward eco- 
nomic development upon the most efficient and scientific basis. 

Taxes 

Taxation is imposed in the interest of the nation; to keep peace 
and maintain order; to repel invasion; to improve the living condition 
of the people; to educate them; to promote agriculture, industry and 
trade. 

Teaching 

Teaching is not a profession but a mission. And like other noble 
missions it does not give the material return it rightly deserves. I 
am proud of the Filipino teachers who are willing to make sacrifices 
for the sake of public instruction. 

Unity ^. ■ . 

It is encouraging to see that there are times when there are no 
Colectivistas, Nacionalistas and Democratas among us but only pa- 
triotic Filipino citizens. 

[37] 



War 

The Pacific Ocean may be a scene of the next war— a war which 
perhaps will be more destructive and more cruel than the last world 
war. Now, then, if such a war ever breaks out whoever may be the 
belligerents and whatever may be the cause, America will necessarily 
take part in it. And if at such a time we should still be under the 
Stars and Stripes, we would not be mere spectators from a long dis- 
tance as we were in the last war, but our soil will certainly be the 
scene of the war. Then we would see reproduced in the beautiful 
plains and valleys of the Philippines the devastation brought about 
in Belgium, and all the wealth we accumulated for years would be 
destroyed in a short time. 

War and strife are the natural enemies of prosperity and hap- 
piness — they breed poverty, privation, and suffering. The first duty 
of a sovereign government is to give its citizens assurance of protec- 
tion against interference by violence, from any source whatever. 

Women 

The Filipino woman is the equal of the best in the world and there 
is no reason why she should not enjoy all the rights and privileges 
of women in more progressive cotmtries. 



[38] 



INAUGURAL ADDRESS OF PRESIDENT MANUEL L QUEZON 
DELIVERED ON THE OCCASION OF HIS ASSUMPTION OF 
THE SECOND TERM OF OFFICE AS PRESIDENT 
OF THE COMMONWEALTH, CORREGIDOR, 
DECEMBER 30, 1941 



ON NOVEMBER 15, 1935, I took my oath of office as first Pres- 
ident of the PhiHppines under the most favorable auspices. 
The PhiHppines was at peace and the Fihpino people were happy and 
contented. At the inaugural ceremonies held in the city of Manila, 
there were present high dignitaries of the Government of the United 
States, and a vast multitude of Filipinos deeply grateful to America 
and thrilled with the vision of a bright future. 

"Today I am assuming for the second time the duties of the Pres- 
idency under entirely different conditions. We are in the grip of 
war, and the seat of the government has been temporarily trans- 
ferred from the city of Manila to a place in close proximity to the 
headquarters of our armed forces, where I am in constant touch 
with General Douglas MacArthur. All around us enemy bombs are 
dropping and anti-aircraft guns are roaring. In defenseless cities 
and towns air raids are killing women and children and destroying 
century-old churches, monasteries, and schools. 

"Six years ago, there was every reason to beheve that the Fili- 
pino people would be able to prepare themselves for independence in 
peace and without hindrance. In my first inaugural address, I out- 
lined a program intended to lay the foundations for a government 
that will, in the language of our Constitution, promote the general 
welfare and secure to the Fihpino people and their posterity 'the 
blessings of independence under a regime of justice, liberty, and 
democracy.' 

"Our task of nation-building was in progress when suddenly, on 
December 8, 1941, the Philippines became the victim of wanton 
aggression. We are resisting this aggression with everything that we 
have. Our soldiers, American and Fihpino, under the leadership 
of General Douglas MacArthur, one of the greatest soldiers of our 
time are fighting on all fronts with gallantry and heroism that will 
go down in history. In the face of frequent air raids which are 



[39] 



much death, suffering, and destruction, our civilian pop- 
causing so ^gi^^gi^i^g ^Y,eir morale. Despite the enemy's tempo- 
ulation 3[ .^j.ity in the air and on land and sea, we have been able 
rary snp^. rapid advance of the invading armies. America and the 
to check t ^ ^gjj pj.Q^j q£ ^Yie heroic struggle that our forces 

Philippi"^ against the invader, 

are putti'^t' 

the present time we have but one task— to fight with America 
"^^ ,jca and the Philippines. To this task we shall devote all 
for Amei^^^^ materials. Ours is a great cause. We are 

our resoU^^ human liberty and justice, for those principles of indi- 
fightmg ^j^^ which we all cherish and without which life would 
vidual ^'^^j.jh living. Indeed, we are fighting for our own inde- 
not be jj. -g maintain this independence, these liberties and 
pendence^^^^^g^ banish fear and want among all peoples, and to 
these ^ j-eign of justice for all the world, that we are sacrificing 
estabhs ^ ^-^at we possess. The war may be long-drawn and 

our l^^^^^j^^^ but with the determination of freedom-loving peoples 
hard-f oJJb^ stamp out the rule of violence and terrorism from the 
every w ^^ earth, I am absolutely convinced that final and complete 

f^^^ ill be ours, 
victory ^'^^ 

n a^^^^ outbreak of the war, I received a message from 
t Koosevelt expressing admiration for the gallantry of our 
Preside ^-^^ courageous stand of our civilian population. Yes- 
soldieis ^^^^ President of the United States issued a proclamation 
terday, ^ ^^^^ ^^j.^^ ^-^-^ hearten our fighting men and thrill the soul 
eW Ai^^^^^^^ Filipino in this land. This is the proclama- 
^^*^<iv[eWS oi your gallant struggle against the Japanese aggres- 
Vi'iS elicited the profound admiration of every American. As 
P .^^ -dent oi the United States, I know that I speak for all our peo- 
^his solemn occasion. The resources of the United States, of 
h Bi-it'^^'^ Empire, of the Netherlands East Indies, and the Chinese 
T? ^ blic have been dedicated by their people to the utter and com- 
1 te defea* oi the Japanese War Lords. In this struggle of the 
Pacific the loyal Americans of the Philippine Islands are called upon 
^'^^ay "^^^y have played, and they are playing to- 

night theii' part with the greatest gallantry. As President I wish 
to express to them my feeling of sincere admiration for the fight 



[40] 



Q U E Z 0 N ME MORIAL COMMITTEE 



they are now making. The people of the United States will never 
forget what the people of the Philippine Islands are doing these days 
and will do in the days to come. I give to the people of the Philip- 
pines my solemn pledge that their freedom will be redeemed and 
their independence established and protected. Tlie entu-e resources 
in men and materials of the United States stand behind that pledge. 
It is not for me or for the people of this country to tell you where 
your duty lies. We are engaged in a great and common cause. I 
count on every Philippine man, woman, and child to do his duty. 
We will do ours. I give you this message from the Navy: The Navy 
Department tonight announces the Japanese Government is circu- 
lating rumors for the obvious purpose of persuading the United States 
to disclose the location and intentions of the American Pacific Fleets. 
It is obvious that these rumors are intended for, and directed at, the 
Philippine Islands. The Philippines may rest assured that while 
the United States Navy will not be tricked into disclosing vital in- 
formation, the fleet is not idle. The United States Navy is following 
an intensive and well-planned campaign against Japanese forces 
which will result in positive assistance to the defense of the Phil- 
ippine Islands.' 

*'My heart, and I know the hearts of all Americans and Filipinos 
in this country, are filled with gratitude for the reassuring words 
of the President of the United States. My answer, our answer, to 
him is that every man, woman, and child in the Philippines will do 
his duty. No matter what sufferings and sacrifices this war may 
impose upon us we shall stand by America with undaunted spirit, 
for we know that upon the outcome of this war depend the happiness, 
liberty, and security not only of this generation but of the generations 
yet unborn. 

''Mr. High Commissioner, may I ask you to convey to the Pres- 
ident of the United States our profound gratitude for the noble 
sentiments expressed in his proclamation. The Filipino people are 
particularly grateful for his abiding interest in our welfare and for 
his pledge to assure and protect our freedom and independence. 

''General MacAiihur, there are no words in my language that 
can express to you the deep gratitude of the Filipino people and my 
own for your devotion to our cause, the defense of our country, and 



[41] 



the safety of our population. I trust that the time will come when 
we may express this sentiment to you in a more appropriate manner. 

"To all Americans in the Philippines, soldiers and civilians alike, 
I want to say that our common ordeal has fused our hearts in a 
single purpose and an everlasting affection. 

"My fellow-countrymen, this is the most momentous period of 
our history. As we face the grim reahties of war, let us rededicate 
ourselves to the great principles of freedom and democracy for which 
our forefathers fought and died. The present war is being fought 
for these same principles. It demands from us courage, determi- 
nation, and unity of action. In taking my oath of office, I make the 
pledge for myself, my government, and my people, to stand by Amer- 
ica and fight with her until victory is won. I am resolved, whatever 
the consequences to myself, faithfully to fulfill this pledge. I humbly 
invoke the help of Almighty God that I may have the wisdom and 
fortitude to carry out this solemn obhgation." 



[42] 



QUEZON MEMORTAT. roMMTTTFi^ ^= 



PROCLAMATION OF PRESIDENT MANUEL L. QUEZON 
ISSUED AT CORREGIDOR. JANUARY 3. 1942 

'\i ❖ 

iinpHE PEOPLE of America and your own countrymen have 
A been thrilled by the gallantry with which you have been de- 
fending our country. I am grateful and proud for the resistance you 
have offered against such tremendous odds. You have performed 
deeds of heroism and valor which will live in the history of these 
stirring days. The service that you are rendering to your people and 
your country, to say the least, is the equal of that rendered by our 
fathers who fought and died in the battles for our liberty. 

''The President of the United States, speaking for the Govern- 
ment and people of America, in a recent proclamation addressed to 
the people of the Philippines, solemnly pledged that the freedom of 
our country will be preserved and our independence protected. He 
asserted that behind that pledge stood all the resources of America 
in men and materials. You are, therefore, fighting with America 
because America is fighting for our freedom. Our salvation will 
depend upon the victory of American and Filipino arms. 

"America will not abandon us. Her help will not be delayed. 
The enemy's temporary superiority in the air, on land and on sea 
cannot last much longer. We must resist further advance of the 
enemy until assistance arrives and I trust it will be soon. The out- 
come of the battle of the Philippines will depend in a very large 
measure on your firm and unyielding resistance. 

'1 am aware of your sufferings, your privations, your sacrifices, 
and the dangers to which you are exposed. All these weigh heavily 
upon my mind, but I am consoled by the fact that I am sharing with 
you your trials and tribulations. Indeed, right now bombs are falling 
near me just as they must fall around you. But we cannot allow 
them either to daunt our spirit or weaken our determination to con- 
tinue fighting to the bitter end. We must stand by our plighted word, 
by the loyalty that we have pledged to America, and by our devotion 
to freedom, democracy, and our liberty. We are fighting that the 
Filipino people may be the masters of their own destiny and that 
every Filipino not only of this generation but of the generations to 
come may be able to live in peace and tranquility in the full enjoy- 
ment of liberty and freedom. Your duty — our duty — is to fight and 
resist until the invader is driven from our land. You must not give 
up a foot of ground when the battle joins. You must hold in place — 
and hold — and hold." 



[43] 




[ 44 ] 



^^^^ QUEZON MEM ORIAL COMMITTEE 



Some Messages of Condolence 

Received by Mrs. Quezon 

From Franklin D. Roosevelt — 

I have heard with a deep sense of personal loss of the 
sorrow which has been laid so heavily on you. To you and 
to all who mourn with you I offer this assurance of heartfelt 
sympathy. 

From His Holiness, Pope Pius XII — 

By His Eminence, the Cardinal Secretary of State, I have 
been instructed to convey to you the august condolences of 
His Holiness, Pope Pius XII, on the death of your distinguished 
husband. With these condolences goes the Apostolic Bene- 
diction of the Sovereign Pontiff, as a pledge of divine comfort 
and solace in this hour of trial for you and your bereaved 
family. His Eminence, Cardinal Maglione, has asked me to 
tender you likewise the assurance of his own personal sym- 
pathy in your loss. (Sgd.) S. G. Cicognani, Aichhishop of 
Laodicea, Apostolic Delegate. 

From General and Mrs. Douglas MacArthur — 

Our grief like yours is overwhelming. We loved him well 
and his part of the world will seem empty indeed without him. 
All of our devotion and sympathy go out to you and yours 
and we pray that a merciful God in ways known only to Him 
may help to assuage your sorrow. 

From Admiral C. W. Nimitz — 

I want you to know of my profound sorrow in the death 
of your husband. He was a true statesman, admired by all 
who respect men of unselfish convictions and the courage to 
fight for them. The American people will miss his leadership 
and his loyalty to the cause of freedom. 

He kindled in the hearts of his people a love of freedom 
which lives on, defiant both of armed aggression and poisonous 
ideology. 

It is regrettable that President Quezon did not live to see 
the day when liberation comes to his people. It is good that 

[ 45 ] 




i QUEZON MEMQRIA L COMMITTEE 



he did live to see proof of our unshakeable resolve to effect 
that liberation in the shortest possible time, and he must have 
left us knowing that this nation will not lay down arms until 
the Japanese are driven from the Philippines and the repre- 
sentative government he believed in once more restored. 

❖ 

From Vice-President Sergio Osmena — 

I have no words to express to you and family my profound 
sorrow at the passing away of our beloved President. I had 
planned to be there on his birthday and inquire personally 
about his health and if possible give my felicitations. God 
has decreed otherwise and so we bow our heads in resignation 
and pray for the repose of his soul. 

In this trying hour, permit me to send you and family my 
deepest sympathy together with a request that you allow me 
to offer you any service that under the circumstances I may 
be able to render. 



From General Dwight D. Eisenhower — 

I join with great host of friends of your illustrious husband 
in offering to you and your family my condolences and sym- 
pathy. The President was an inspiration to and a symbol of 
the cause of liberty throughout the world. 



From CoRDELL Hull — 

I am so distressed to learn of the passing of your dis- 
tinguished husband whom I held in the highest esteem. He 
was my friend for a great many years and I have a real appre- 
ciation of his splendid qualities of leadership and devotion to 
the interests of his people. His was a record of outstanding 
accomplishments and achievements. 

Ji: 

From Henry L. Stimson — 

Am greatly distressed by the news of your husband's 
death. I mourn the passing of a dear friend and faithful 
associate and send you my deepest sympathy. 



I 47] 



QU EZON ME MORIAL COMMITTEE 



From Harold L. Ickes— 

In the death of your husband a great man has gone whom 
the world could ill spare as it stands at the threshold of an 
era, as we hope, of reconstruction in peace. 



From Edward R. Stettinius, Jr.— 

I wish to extend to you my deepest sympathy in your 
great bereavement. Your husband's loyalty to his people, his 
devotion to the principles of democracy and his advocacy of 
right and justice caused him to be held in the highest esteem 
at home and abroad. His passing is a real loss to all who 
cherish liberty. 



From James A. Farley— 

In common with my millions of fellow-American citizens, 
I was saddened indeed to read the accounts of your husband's 
death. President Quezon's passing takes from our world one 
whom we can ill afford to lose. He gave to the Philippine 
Nation and to the world at large, enduring hope and courage. 



From Frank C. Walker — 

My deepest sympathy to you in the loss of your distin- 
guished husband who has been a symbol to the world of the 
aspiration and the bravery of the Filipino people. 

❖ ❖ :|: 

From James Forrestal — 

On behalf of the United States Navy and for myself per- 
sonally I should like to express the deepest sympathy in your 
sorrow. We join with the Philippine people in mourning the 
loss of their great and beloved leader. 

29824 4 



[49] 




PRESIDENT QUEZON AND HIS ELDEST DAUGHTER ( 1942) 



[50] 



Q U E Z O N~lrE~M~Cr^^Y^. n ^ ^ r^rj, ^ J. 



From James F. Byrnes— 

I want you to know that today I am thinking of you and 
sharing your sorrow. I was associated with Manuel when he 
served in the House of Representatives. I admired him then 
and through the years that admiration increased. 

I have often said that in 1916 he made the most eloquent 
speech I heard made by any man in the House of Represent- 
atives He was pleading for the liberties of his people and 
i shall always remember that wonderful address. 

Through mutual friends I have kept myself informed as 
to his health and for some time have realized that we could 
not hope for his recovery. This does not lessen in any way 
our sorrow. He was a great leader of a great people and I 
know will always be remembered by them as he will be 
remembered by me. 



From General G. C. Marshall — 

The news of President Quezon's death is most distressing 
and I extend my deepest sympathy. The President exemplified 
in his person the courage and fighting spirit of the Philippine 
people. I deplore his passing as the hour approaches for the 
restoration of the Government of the Philippine Commonwealth. 



From General H. H. Arnold — 

On behalf of the Army Air Forces I send you deepest 
sympathy. 

During his vigorous and full life President Quezon devoted 
himself untiringly to his people and to his Country. The last 
few years, I know, have been particularly difficult, but his 
spirit and determination have been an inspiration to those who 
have fought and are continuing to fight for the ideals he so 
highly cherished. 

It is our sincere hope that you will gain some comfort know- 
ing your husband's name will long be revered by the people 
of our countries and that his work will not soon be forgotten. 



[51] 



Q ^ ^ Q 3ir^rE~Ivro"Rj~X~L COMMITTEE 



From Lt. General George Grunert— 

May I offer my heartfelt condolence and sympathy in this 
your hour of grief. 

President Quezon was my friend and I had a great admi- 
ration for him and his accomplishments. 

He has written a great page in Philippine history and has 
contributed most generously to one now being written in the 
history of the world. 

Mrs. Grunert and I share your grief and stand ready to 
be of assistance to you on call. 



From Major General Norman T. Kirk— 

I wish to express to you my sincere sympathy in your hour 
of bereavement. 

President Quezon was my friend, but more important the 
friend of his beloved Philippines, in whose behalf he worked 
so unceasingly and tirelessly. His fight for the liberation of 
his people has won the admiration of America and it is regret- 
table that he did not live to witness this liberation which 
appears so close. 

When final victory comes— as come it must— President 
Quezon's indomitable spirit will stand as an inspiration to his 
country to carry on the high principles for which he so 
valiantly fought. 



From Brigadier General C. A. Willoughby — 

It was with a profound shock that all your friends here 
have heard of your great loss; you are assured of my pro- 
foundest sympathy. Don Manuel was a great statesm.an and 
gentleman. I recall our days together in Manila and Corre- 
gidor and deeply regret that the President was not able to 
return triumphantly to his homeland. Nevertheless, he will 
always be remembered as the man who forged Philippine 
Independence, and secured it through his skill, tenacity, intel- 
ligence and patriotism. It may afford you a measure of com- 
fort, to know that GHQ and many of your personal friends 
here were present at the Pontifical Requiem Mass conducted 
in Brisbane. I enclose some clippings and the program of 
the Mass. 



[ 53] 




PRESIDENT QUEZON AND FRANCIS JOSEPH CARDINAL SPELLMAN 



[54] 



QUEZON We m o r I a l CO M M I t^TeIe^ 



From D. Card. Dougherty — 

Learning, on my return home, the sad news of the death 
of your beloved husband, I beg to send you and all your 
family the expression of my deepest sympathy with you in 
your great loss and sorrow. 

It will have been a consolation to all of you that Mr. Quezon 
had time to prepare for a good death. 

You may be sure that he and all of you will be remem- 
bered in my Masses and prayers. 

This opportunity is taken to thank you again, my dear 
Mrs. Quezon, for your extraordinary kindness to my party and 
myself on the occasion of the Manila Eucharistic Congress. 
Your hospitality on that occasion could not be surpassed; and 
it is my trust that God will reward you for it by bestowing on 
you and your immediate family His choicest gifts for body 
and soul. 



From Father Thomas B. Cannon, S. J, — 

My sincere and heartfelt sympathy on the death of Pres- 
ident Quezon. He was one of the world's greatest men. He 
has gone home to God and a great reward he will plead for 
the Philippines before God's throne as so often he pleaded 
before Congress. My Mass tomorrow will be for his dear soul. 



From Senator Robert F. Wagner — 

I learned with profound sorrow of the death of your dis- 
tinguished and beloved husband and the friend not only of 
his ov/n people but of all Americans. Through his untiring 
and patriotic labors the People of the Philippines gained their 
independence. We are all sorry that he did not live to v/itness 
the climax of his patriotic efforts. He will be a shrine and a 
symbol to the People of the Philippines and a beacon to liberty 
loving people all over the world. He will be sadly missed 
and his death is a regret to all of us. 





PRESIDENT QUEZON MAKING LAST MINUTE CHANGES IN HIS RADIO SPEECH IN 
WASHINGTON ON THE FIRST ANNIVERSARY OF THE U. N. DECLARATION 



[ 56 ] 



^ - QUEZO N M EM O RIAL COMMITTEE ^m ^^^^ 



From Senator Henry Fountain Ashurst — 

Friends of liberty throughout the world mourn with you. 
Great wings of sympathy encompass you and your children. 

From Ambassador Joseph C. Grew — 

I am profoundly distressed at the death of President 
Quezon. His passing is a heavy loss to the United States, the 
Philippines, and the World for he was a statesman of the 
highest calibre. It is sad indeed that his life could not have 
been spared to see the soil of his country rid of the enemy 
and the way prepared for the independence of his land for 
which he had worked so long and so gallantly. His passing 
deprives me personally of a long time friend for whom I had 
the highest admiration and respect. 

From Ambassador Wei Tag Ming— 

We are deeply grieved to hear of the demise of President 
Quezon. In leading his country in the struggle for independ- 
ence, Mr. Quezon has given stirring inspiration to all peoples 
who are fighting for freedom. His death will, therefore, not 
only be a personal loss to you but to all the peace-loving 
nations of the world. 

From T. V. Soong— 

Deepest condolence to you and family. It will ever be a 
lasting regret to President Quezon's friends that he was not 
spared to witness the Uberation of his country now drawing 
so near. 

From H. H. Kung— 

Am grieved to learn about departing your distinguished 
husband. President Quezon. Please accept my sincerest con- 
dolences and take consolation in the fact that he has given 
his life unstintedly to the service of his nation and for the 
cause of international righteousness. 



[57] 



THE CASKET BEING BORNE OUT OF ST. MATTHEWS CATHEDRAT RY ir q 
TO ITS TEMPORARY INTERMENT IN ARLINGTON NATIoLl CEMFTFPV ^.^xf;.^^'^^^ PREPARATORY 
HIGH OFFICIALS OF THE PHILIPPINE COMMONWEALTH AND hTgH opftp,.,^^^ ™^ ^^''^''^ 

OF AMERICA. '^'^^ OFFICIALS OF THE UNITED STATES 



[58] 




QUEZON M E MO R lAL COMMITTEE 



From Wang Hsiao-Lai— 

May I extend to you my heartfelt sympathy and condo- 
lences on your bereavement. President Quezon's death is not 
only a severe blow to the Philippines and the United States 
but also a great loss to China and China's business world in 
particular. 



From Minister Robert Brennan of Ireland — 

On behalf of my Government and myself, I beg to offer 
you very sincere sympathy on the death of your husband, a 
great patriot and statesman. 

:\: :|: :|: 

From Roy Howard — 

Please accept this expression of the love and sympathy 
of Peg and myself for you and the children. You need no 
words from me to tell you of my sense of personal loss. One 
of the world's truly great champions of freedom and democ- 
racy has passed, but his work will live so long as Filipinos 
love that for which he lived and died. 



From Bernard M. Baruch — 

It was with very great regret that I found myself unable to 
join you in paying the last respects to your departed President. 
The Philippine Government has lost a splendid leader and 
America has lost a great friend. 



From Francis Burton Harrison — 

Inexpressibly shocked by announcement death of President 
Quezon. 



[59] 



Q U E Z 0 N E M 0 R lAL COMMITTEE -^^^^^^ 



From J. Edgar Hoover — 

I was shocked at the news today of the passing of your 
husband. There is so httle that any of us can say or do in 
a time such as this, but if the sympathy and best wishes of a 
friend would help then you have an abundance of them in 
my heart. 

You have lost a good husband; I have lost a friend. He 
will live in the memories of all Americans as a symbol of what 
our country stands for. 

From Claude A. Buss — 

At such a moment as this, words seem entirely inadequate. 
My mind sweeps back over those vast days in Manila when 
in life your husband was the inspiration of his people and the 
mainspring in their action. I remember his utter disregard for 
himself while he endured the hardships and horrors of Corre- 
gidor, and then in my mind's eye I see again his eagerness 
to learn of the welfare of his people when he greeted me on 
my return from Manila. 

The plaudits of the world for his achievements I don't 
suppose will ever fill the vacancy which exists in your home 
and heart, but I hope that in this hour of grief it will help 
just a little bit to know that there are those who love him just 
for the man he was rather than the martyr he will always be. 



[61] 



HONORS AT WASHINGTON 



PRESIDENT MANUEL L. QUEZON, patriot and statesman, died 
at Camp McMartin, Saranac Lake, New York, in the morning of 
August 1, 1944. At eight in the evening of the following day, his 
mortal remains were brought to Washington, D. C, by special train. 
At the railroad station in Saranac a very large crowd was at hand. 
Among the most prominent were former Philippine High Commis- 
sioner Paul V. McNutt and Senator Millard Tydings. 

The special train bearing the remains of the late President was 
met at the Union Station in Washington, D. C, by President Sergio 
Osmena and his Cabinet, representatives of the U. S. Department of 
State and Department of the Interior, as well as friends and admirers. 
Eight armored cars of the U. S. Army and a formation of motorcycle 
cops escorted the casket to St. Matthew's Cathedral where it lay 
in state until the next morning. Members of the U. S. Army took 
turns in keeping vigil. In mourning for the departed leader, foreign 
embassies in Washington flew their flags at half-mast. 

Never had so many flowers been seen as those at St. Matthew's 
Cathedi-al, sent by Chiefs of State and friends not only in the United 
States but also in other countries, particularly the South American 
Republics. 

After the high mass on August 4th, the funeral cortege left the 
Cathedral for Arlington National Cemetery where the body was to 
be interred temporarily until it could be brought home to his native 
land. The casket, draped with both American and Filipino flags, 
was borne by a caisson, drawn by six white horses. Platoons of 
U. S. marines and other soldiers led the cortege as guards of honor. 
There was deep silence as they marched in unison at the head of the 
procession. 

Joining the cortege as pallbearers from the Cathedral to Ar- 
lington Bridge were high officials of the United States Government 
mcludmg Department Secretaries, Justices of the Supreme Court' 
Senators and Congressmen, and top commanders of the U S Army' 
Navy and Air Force. From Arlington Bridge to the National Crypt' 
President Osmena, members of his Cabinet, and friends of the de- 
ceased acted as pallbeai^ers. As the mortal remains passed through 
the gates of Arhngton National Cemetery, a nineteen-gun salute was 
fired m tribute to the departed leader, followed moments later by 
the mournful sound of Taps— and our great and beloved President 
was laid to rest side by side with the immortals of the United States 

ttini e;;^:r" ^^-^'-^ '» '"^ '-'^ 

[62] 



"^^^^m QUEZON MEMOR I A L C 0 M M I T T E F ^^^^bI 



HONORARY PALL-BEARERS IN WASHINGTON 



The funeral services held in St. Matthew's Cathedral in Wash- 
ington in the morning of August 4 were attended by high-ranking 
American mihtary and civil officials and members of the Diplomatic 
Corps. 

President Franklin Delano Roosevelt, in his absence from 
the capital, was represented by General George C. Marshall and 
Admiral Ernest J. King. 

The following were the honorary pall-bearers: 
Gen. George C. Marshall, Chief of Staff, U. S. Army. 
Admiral Ernest J. King, Commander in Chief, U. S. Fleet. 
Hon. Henry A. Wallace, Vice-President of the United States. 
Hon. Samuel Rayburn, Speaker of the House of Representatives. 
Hon. Cordell Hull, Secretary of State. 

Hon. Frank Murphy, Associate Justice of the U. S. Supreme 
Court. 

Hon. Henry L. Stimson, Secretary of War. 

Hon. Harold L. Ickes, Secretary of Interior. 

Hon. Millard E. Tydings, Member, U. S. Senate. 

Hon. Jasper C. Bell, Member, U. S. House of Representatives. 

Hon. Edward R. Stettinius, Jr., Under Secretary of State. 

Hon. Abe Fortas, Under Secretary of Interior. 

Hon. Paul V. McNutt, Chairman, War Manpower Commission. 

Hon. Francis B. Sayre, Department of Interior. 

Hon. Weldon Jones, Bureau of the Budget. 

Col. J. K. Evans, War Department Liaison Officer to PhiHppine 
Commonwealth. 

Hon. Francis Burton Harrison, Former Governor of the Phil- 
ippines. 

Hon. Dwight F. Davis, Former Governor of the Philippines. 
Dr. Benvenuto Dino, Personal Physician to the late President 
Quezon. 

Dr. Andreas Trepp, Personal Physician to the late President 
Quezon. 

Lt. Col. E. Cruz, PA Medical Corps. 

Hon. A. D. Williams, Former Director, Philippine Bureau of 
Public Works. 

Col. Arthur Fischer, Former Director, Philippine Bureau of 
Forestry. 



[63] 




[64] 



QUEZON MEMQR I A L C 0 M M I T T E E 



HONORS AT SAN DIEGO, CALIFORNIA 

The mortal remains of the late President Quezon were accorded high honors 
while in San Diego City, California, as shown hy accounts 
published in San Diego newspapers 

MANUEL QUEZON GOING BACK 

TO HIS BELOVED PHILIPPINES 
Marine Honor Guard Stands Watch 
Over Body in State on North Island 

Manuel Quezon is going home. 

The body of the gallant little man who as first president of the 
Philippine Commonwealth led his nation through its darkest days of 
the war, lay in state in the North Island chapel today following arrival 
by train yesterday from Washington. 

Watched over by a Marine Guard of Honor, the body will be 
placed aboard the aircraft carrier Princeton tomorrow for transpor- 
tation to his beloved Islands for final burial on Aug. 1, second an- 
niversary of his death. 

The body of the Philippine hero had rested in a vault at Arling- 
ton National Cemetery since his death at Saranac, N. Y. 

Accompanying the body to the Philippines are Supreme Court 
Justice Frank Murphy, former Governor General of the Philippines; 
Col. Manuel Nieto, who was Quezon's senior military aide, and Lt. 
Col. Joy Dow, U. S. Army. 

Prayer services were conducted yesterday by the Most Rev. 
Charles F. Buddy, Bishop of San Diego, in the North Island chapel. 
High navy officials and nearly 100 members of the local Filipino colony, 
headed by E. E. Baradi, president of the Philippine County Council, 
attended. 

Also present was Miss Aurea Labrador, Quezon's personal nurse 
from 1939 until his death. She, with Col. Nieto, was among those 
who fled by submarine from the Philippines early in 1942. 

Vice Adm. J. B. Oldendorf, 11th Naval District Commandant, 
Vice Admiral Frederick C. Sherman, 5th Fleet Commander, and Cap- 
tain John Hoskins, Princeton commanding officer, were among those 
who met the train. 

The casket, covered with a Philippine flag, was lowered from the 
train and placed in a Navy ambulance by eight Navy enlisted men, 
while eight Chief Petty Officers formed an honor column. 

29824 5 

[65] 




A procession of Navy cars accompanied the body to North Is- 
land by way of the Coronado strand. A 19-gun salute was fired by 
the cruiser Vicksburg as the body neared North Island. The Prince- 
ton band played the Philippine National Anthem as the casket was 
carried to the chapel and was placed on a catafalque. 

Comdr. Joseph T. O'Callahan, chaplain hero of the carrier Frank- 
lin disaster, assisted Bishop Buddy in the services. Fr. O'Callahan 
is chaplain aboard the Princeton —San Diego Journal, Jidij 2, 1946. 
QUEZON'S BODY REACHES S. D. 

Flanked by two marines, the casket bearing the body of Manuel 
Luis Quezon, wartime president of the Philippines, today rested be- 
fore the altar in the Naval Air Station chapel, where it was placed 
with reverent ceremony yesterday following arrival by train from 
Washington. 

Tomorrow the casket will be taken aboard the aircraft carrier 
Princeton, which then will sail for Manila, returning the late leader s 
body for burial in his native land. 

Frank Murphy, associate justice of the supreme court and former 
governor general of the Philippines, who will accompany Quezon's 
body to the islands, arrived aboard the train from Washington, which 
was met at the Union depot by an official party headed by Vice 
Adm. J. B. Oldendorf, commandant of the 11th Naval district. 

OFFICIALS MEET TRAIN 

Besides a throng of several hundred spectators gathered at the 
depot, the assemblage included the Most Rev. Charles F. Buddy, D. 
D., Bishop of San Diego, Vice Adm. Frederick C. Sherman, com- 
mander of the Fifth fleet, and officers and members of San Diego 
Filipino organizations. 

Here from Los Angeles was Miss Aurea Labrador, Quezon's 
nurse, who fled beleaguered Corregidor by submarine with the sick 
president when he was evacuated in 1942. She also was with him 
when, at 66, he died at Saranac Lake, N. Y., in August, 1944. 

Draped with the flag of the Philippines, the heavy casket bearing 
Quezon's body was removed from the train by eight seamen from 
the Naval Training station. A navy band played Chopin's funeral 
march. 

VICKSBURG FIRES SALUTE 

The body was taken to North Island station in a motor cortege 
via the Coronado strand. As the procession of cars entered the 
Naval Air station, the cruiser Vicksburg, at anchor in the bay, fired 
a 19-gun salute. 



[67] 





[68] 



Q U E Z O N_^^E M O R fTh C 0 M M I T T E E 



The depot party was met at the chapel by several naval flag 
officers. The carrier Princeton's band played softly as the casket 
was carried to the altar. Bishop Buddy conducted the brief service. 
He was assisted by Comdr. Joseph T. O'Callahan. chaplain of the 
Princeton who won the Congressional Medal of Honor for heroism 
aboard the stricken carrier Franklin.— San Diego-Tribune-Sun 
July 2, 1946. 

BODY OF QUEZON LIES IN STATE 

AT NAVAL AIR STATION CHAPEL 

Following brief liturgical services conducted by the Most Rev. 
Charles F. Buddy, bishop, of San Diego, and attended by Supreme 
Court Justice Frank Murphy and high navy officers, the body of 
Manuel Quezon, first president of the Philippines Commonwealth, lay 
in state last night in the chapel of the Naval Air station. North Island. 

The body, which arrived here by train yesterday from a vault 
at Arlington National Cemetery, will be placed aboard the aircraft 
carrier Princeton tomorrow for transportation to Manila, where fun- 
eral services are to be held August 1. 
IN VALTLT SINCE 1944 

Quezon's body had lain in the vault since his death at Saranac 
Lake, N. Y., on Aug. 1, 1944, while he was heading the Philippine 
government in exile. 

President Truman designated Justice Murphy to accompany the 
body and represent the United States at the funeral. Murphy was 
serving as U. S. governor general when the commonwealth was set 
up in 1935, and remained in Manila until 1936 as the first U. S. high 
commissioner. The small party traveling with Murphy includes Col. 
Manuel Nieto of the Philippine Army, who was Quezon's senior mili- 
tary aide, and who fled with him by submarine when the Philippines 
fell early in 1942, and Lt. Col. Joy Dow, of the U. S. Army. 

Quezon's wife and three children returned to Manila last Novem- 
ber, but one close friend of the Quezon family was present yesterday. 
She was Miss Aurea Labrador, a pretty slight woman of 48, who had 
been Quezon's personal nurse from 1939 until the time of his death, 
accompanying him and his family on the flight from Corregidor. 

Miss Labrador remained in Washington as a volunteer Red Cross 
worker after Quezon's death, and is now employed in a Los Angeles 
hospital. She came here alone by train yesterday, and sat quietly 
weeping during the chapel services. 

OFFICERS MEET TRAIN 

Vice Adm. J. B. Oldendorf, commandant . of the 11th Naval Dis- 
trict, and Vice Adm. Frederick C. Sherman, Commander of the Fifth 



[69] 



fleet, headed the party of navy officers which met the train bearing 
Quezon's body on its arrival at Union depot at 2.30 p. m. While the 
Naval Training center band played Chopin's "Funeral March," the 
casket, covered with the Philippines flag, was carried from the train 
to a hearse by eight blue jacket pallbearers. 

About 50 members of the local Filipino colony, headed by E. E. 
Baradi, of Oceanside, president of the PhiHppine Council of San Diego 
County, and Chris Canta, commander of Leyte post, American Le- 
gion, were at the depot, and rode to North Island by navy launch 
while Quezon's body was being taken to the chapel by a motor cortege 
which traveled via the Coronado strand_^ 

A 19-gun salute was fired by the cruiser Vicksburg, flagship of 
the Fifth fleet, as the cortege entered the Naval Air station and pro- 
ceeded to the chapel. The Princeton's band played the Philippine 
anthem and a funeral march as the casket was removed to a catafal- 
que in the chapel. 

A marine corps guard of honor was stationed beside the casket 
following the services, to be maintained continuously until the body 
is placed aboard the Princeton tomorrow morning. The carrier, es- 
corted by the destroyer Stickell, is scheduled to sail at noon. — San 
Diego Union, July 2, 1946. 




[70] 



THE STORY OF THE USS PRINCETON 



A big crowd was on hand at Pier 13 and gave the USS Princeton, 
which brought back the remains of the late President Manuel L. Que- 
zon to Manila, warm send-off. The great flat-top lifted Anchor at 8 
o'clock this morning, headed for her permanent station in Guam via 
Saipan. 

Captain Jose Artiaga, 62-year old Manila harbor pilot chief, was 
at the bridge with Captain Hoskins. Captain Artiaga guided her safely 
out in the bay. 

The US aircraft carrier in its six day sojourn in Manila accommo- 
dated more than 3,000 visitors. 

It was disclosed that the mission undertaken by the USS Princeton 
cost the US government around Pl,344,880. 

The expenses for the trip were distributed as follows: for the 
carrier's complement of 210 officers and 1,500 men, five tons of food 
costing around P3,000 every day; for fuel oil, 48,000 gallons costing 
P60,000; for the 105 Corsair and bomber planes, 40 of which made an 
average flight of three hours a day, P54,000 worth of high octane gas- 
oline; for the upkeep of the ship when stationary about Pl.OOO a day, 
or a total of P10,000 for the four day stop in Honolulu plus six days 
in Manila; for the pay envelope of the crew, Pl,050,000. 

Only four officers of the Princeton which sank near Leyte dur- 
ing the battle off Leyte Gulf have been assigned to the 5th successor; 
Captam John M. Hoskins, who holds the honor of bemg the only one- 
T?%^ ^ftP^^ °^ ^ carrier; Comdr. W. L. Curtis, air officer; Lt. Comdr 
H E. Stebbms; Lt. Comdr. Guy R. Strickland, PRO and communic- 
ation officer. 

Five Filipinos have always been with the new Princeton since it 
was launched. They are: Ck. 2nd Class Ignacio Tongol, 42, of 918 

StTwarfsrTri^'^r Yi^'^T ^^^^^^ of'sSB Cruzada! 

Steward 3rd Class Ca almo de Dios, 20, of San Marcelino, Zambales 

canvas. It was commanded by cStrPn^f f ^t^,''^"^''^ 
of Princeton, New Jersey after wwf.^ Stockton, a native 

was named. This sh p saw duTv °^ ^^^^^^t^"' California, 

Mediterranean. She wa" fed"in'r84l)'^'"'"' 

The second USS Princetmi ^ o „ 
guns, was launched in Boston^n 1851 "^^'^^^^ ''^^"^'^^ 
decessor, although using the sam« t' f^^'^htly larger than her pre- 

mg me same engme, she measured 178 feet 

[72] 



overall and displaced 990 tons. She served for a time as flagship of 
the Eastern Squadron. She was used as a receiving ship in Phila- 
delphia during the Civil War, and was sold in 1866. 

The third USS Princeton, also a screw-propelled steamship, was 
built at Camden, New Jersey. She was commissioned at the Phila- 
delphia Navy Yard on May 27, 1898. A gunboat of 1,000 tons, she 
was 168 feet long and had a top speed of 12 knots. Although she 
was rigged as a Barkentine, her sails were seldom used. She served 
in the Atlantic during the Spanish American War, saw duty in the 
Mediterranean and in the Pacific, where she was used as a station 
ship at Tutuila from 1911 to 1915. She was sold in 1919. 

The fourth USS Princeton was built in Camden, New Jersey. 
She was commissioned at the Philadelphia Navy Yard on February 
25, 1943. She was named after the battle of Princeton, January 3, 
1777, in which the forces under General Washington defeated the 
British. The fourth Princeton was one of nine ships converted into 
carriers from light cruiser hulls. Her original name as a cruiser was 
to have been the Tallahassee, named after the capital of Florida. 
She displaced 13,000 tons and was 610 feet overall. Reaching the 
Pacific in August, 1943, the Princeton participated in the following 
engagements: occupation of Baker Island and the Tarawa, Makin 
raid of September, 1943, Buka-Bonis strikes, Rabaul raids, Gilbert 
Island occupation of November, 1943, Marshall Islands operation of 
January-February, 1944, Palau-Yap raid of March-April, 1944, 
Hollandia operation and the second Truk strike of April, 1944, the 
capture and occupation of Saipan, Guam and Tinian and the battle 
of the Philippine Sea of June and July, 1944, the capture and 
occupation of the Southern Palau Islands and the assaults on the 
Philippine Islands of September, 1944, the Okinawa and Formosa 
attacks and the battle of Leyte Gulf of October, 1944, where she was 
hit by a bomb from an enemy dive bomber. After a seven-hour 
battle against fire and explosions, she was finally scuttled. 

On December 13, 1945, the fifth Pnnceton, which is next in size 
and power to the carriers Roosevelt and Midway, got under way 
under her own power for the first time. She is named to honor the 
light carrier Princeton which was lost in combat on October 24 1944 
in the battle of Leyte Gulf. The present carrier displaces 27 000 tons 
and has an overall length of 850 feet. She is an improved version of 
the famed Essex class. The keel of the present vessel was laid on 
September 14, 1943, and the ship was christened on July 8 1945 bv 
Mrs. Harold W. Dodds, wife of the President of Princeton University 
who also sponsored the fourth USS Pnnceton (CVL-23) 

On July 3, 1946 the fifth Princeton was assigned the task of 
bringing back to the Philippines the remains of late President Manuel 
L. Quezon.— The Evening News, August 2, 1946. 



[74] 



Q U E Z 0 E M O R I a L COM MITT ^izzzzizi l 



U. S. NAVY BULLETIN 

(Mimeographed) 

From 

ELEVENTH NAVAL DISTRICT Detail of Plan 

Public Information Service 
(San Diego) 

ARRIVAL OF BODY OF LATE PRESIDENT MANUEL QUEZON 
AT SAN DIEGO, CALIFORNIA, FOR EMBARKATION 
ABOARD V.S.S. PRINCETON FOR MANILA 



Monday, 1 July 1946 

1415 — Body arrives on Train 74 at Santa Fe depot, San Diego. 
Accompanying: Hon. Frank Murphy, Associate Justice of the U. S. 
Supreme Court; Col. Manuel Nieto, Philippine Army; Lt. Col. Joy 
Dow, U. S. Army, et al. 

Note — Body to be removed from train when official party as- 
sembles with Vice Adm. J. B. Oldendorf, USN, Commandant, Ele- 
venth Naval District, and be placed aboard Navy ambulance. Eight 
body bearers and eight honorary pallbearers present with Naval 
Training Center band music. 

1430 — ^Party departs Santa Fe depot via Harbor Drive, Coro- 
nado Silver Strand, Glorietta Boulevard, Pomona Avenue, Fourth 
Street for Naval Air Station Chapel. 

1515 — ^Party arrives at Main Gate, U. S. Naval Air Station. 

Note.— U. S. S. VICKSBURG, flagship of Vice Adm. F. C. Sher- 
man, USN, fires 19-gun salute during passage of party from Main 
Naval Air Station gate to chapel. 

1520 — Party arrives at Naval Air Station Chapel. 

Note. — Body is removed from Navy ambulance and borne with- 
in chapel. U. S. S. Princeton band present. Dirge music while body 
is being transferred. Philippine Hymn when body is lowered to Ca- 
tafalque within Chapel. Eight body bearers and eight honorary 
pallbearers present from Santa Fe station. The Most. Rev. Charles 
Francis Buddy, D. D., Catholic Bishop of San Diego, and Comdr. 
Joseph T. O'Callahan (ChC), USN, officiating. 



[75] 



AUTOMOBILE ORGANIZATION PLAN 

En route from Santa Fe depot to the Naval Air Station Chapel, 
the following automobile procedure will be followed: 

Car No. 1. — California Highway Patrol escort, Captain Harry 
Clodfelter, CHP and Captain E. Robert Anderson, USNR, in charge 
of arrangements. 

Two Marine Corps Motorcycles 

Car No. 2. — Hon. Frank Murphy, Associate Justice of the U. S. 
Supreme Court; Vice Adm. J. B. Oldendorf, USN, Commandant, 
Eleventh Naval District; Vice Adm. F. C. Sherman, USN, Command- 
ing Fifth Fleet, and Lt. Comdr. S. L. Johnson, USN, aide to Com- 
mandant, Eleventh Naval District. 

Car No. 3.— The Most Rev. Charles Francis Buddy, D. D., Cat- 
holic Bishop of San Diego, and Comdr. J. T. O'Callahan, (ChC), USN. 

Car No. 4. — Navy Ambulance with body of the late President 
Manuel Quezon. 

Car No. 5.— Commodore L. S. Fiske, USN; Col. Manuel Nieto, 
Philippine Army; Captain John M. Hoskins, USN, Commanding Of- 
ficer, U. S. S. Princeton, and Lt. Col. Joy Dow, USA. 

Car No. 6. — Miss Aurea Labrador, former private nurse to Pres- 
ident Quezon, with escort. 

Car No. 7. — Secretaries. 

CHP Motorcycle— Rear traffic control. 

GENERAL INFORMATION 

Distinguished group of Philippine and American citizens will at- 
tend ceremonies at Santa Fe depot and then proceed to Naval Air 
Station Chapel via Navy boats and automobiles under escort of Comdr 
T. W. South, II, USN. 

Joining the party for ceremonies at the Naval Air Station Chapel 
will be the following: ^ 

r f^^^^^^'^'i"^- HaRRill, USN, Commander Air Fleet, West 
Coast, FPO San Francisco 

Rear Admiral C. T. Durgin, USN, Commander Naval Air Bases, 
JN. A. b. ban Diego 

Rear Admiral A. D. Struble, USN, Commander AmnhihimK, 
Forces, U. S. Pacific Fleet, FPO San Francisco Amphibious 

Rear Admiral L.F. Reifsnider, USN, Commander Training Com- 
mand, Amphibious Forces, Pacific Fleet FPO San Francisco 

Captain L. E Gehres, USN, Commanding Officer U S Naval 
Air Station San Diego, California (N. A. S. San Dieg;) 

[76] 



QUEZON MEMORIAL COM M I T T E E 



HONORS AT PEARL HARBOR 

The mortal remains of President Quezon were accorded high honors at 
Pearl Harbor as shoion hy accounts published in 
Honolulu newspapers 

QUEZON REMAINS DUE 

ON CARRIER TUESDAY 

The aircraft carrier Princeton carrying the remains of Manuel 
Quezon, late president of the Philippines, will arrive at Pearl Harbor 
Tuesday enroute to Manila. 

The FiHpino patriot's body is being taken to Manila for final 
burial. — Honolulu Star Bulletin, July 8, 1946. 

BODY OF QUEZON AT P. H. 
^^Princeton^^ Taking Remains to Manila 

The body of Manuel L. Quezon, former president of the Philip- 
pines, arrived in Honolulu at 11 a. m. today aboard the carrier USS 
Princeton, en route to the Philippines for final burial ceremonies. 

Accompanying the body as official representative of the U. S. 
government was Frank Murphy, associate justice of the Supreme 
Court, former governor general of the Philippines and later high com- 
missioner there. 

Two Navy bands played, one aboard ship, as the Princeton 
nestled to its berth at Pearl Harbor. 

A host of dignitaries were on hand to pay their honors, includ- 
ing Gov. Stainback, Vice Adm. John L. Hall, Jr., Vice Adm. A. E. 
Montgomery, Vice Adm. L. D. McCormick, Rear Adm. E. W. Hanson, 
Cayetano Ligot, former labor commissioner to the Territory, Dr. and 
Mrs. Jose Gonzales, Capt. Rafael Cisneros, Benjamin Ayson, Mr. and 
Mrs. Lino Buenconsejo, the latter the late President Quezon's niece, 
Constantino Gorospe, the late President's god son and Mr. and Mrs. 
C. R. Gorospe. 

OFFICERS PAY RESPECTS 

Military dignitaries who were on hand to pay their respects when 
the Princeton docked included: 

Vice Admiral John L. Hall, Jr., commandant of the 14th naval 
district; Vice Admiral L. D. McCormick, deputy commander in chief 
of the Pacific fleet; Vice Admiral A. E. Montgomery, commander of 
Pacific air forces; Rear Admiral E. W. Hanson, commander of the 
Pearl Harbor navy yard. 



[77] 



Q U E Z Q_N_M_j: M 0 rTXT C O M M I t t f" 



Representatives of the Honolulu Filipino community, whose two 
wreaths were taken aboard to be presented officially at Friday morn- 
ing ceremonies, included: 

Cayetano Ligot, former labor commissioner to the territory; Dr. 
and Mrs. Jose Gonzales, Capt. Rafael Cisneros, Benjamin Ayson, Mr. 
and Mrs. Lmo Buenconsejo, Mr. and Mrs. C. R. Gorospe, their son, 
Constantino Gorospe. 

FILIPINOS HERE PAY HOMAGE 
TO MANUEL QUEZON 

More than 200 members of Honolulu's Filipino community 
gathered aboard the aircraft carrier Princeton at Pearl Harbor 
Wednesday to pay homage to the greatest Filipino of them all — 
Manuel Luis Quezon. 

Memorial services for the late president of the Philippine com- 
monwealth were conducted on the hangar deck of the Princeton by 
the Most Rev. James J. Sweeney, Catholic bishop of Honolulu. 

In his sermon Bishop Sweeney declared that Mr. Quezon "per- 
sonified for his people life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.'' 

The Japanese invasion of the Philippines "extinguished the torch 
of liberty physically," the bishop said, "but Manuel Quezon had done 
his work well" and not even Japanese oppression could "quench his 
countrymen's love for liberty." 

Bishop Sweeney was assisted in the service by Comdr. Joseph 
T. O'Callahan, winner of the Congressional Medal of Honor for he- 
roism aboard the carrier Franklin, who is accompanying Mr. Que- 
zon's body to Manila as escort chaplain. 

Present for the service was Justice Frank Murphy of the U. S. 
Supreme Court, first high commissioner to the Philippines and close 
friend of the late Filipino patriot. Justice Murphy is accompanying 
the body to Manila as the U. S. government's chief representative. 

Mr. Quezon's body lay in a plain wooden copperbound box cov- 
ered with the flag of the Philippine republic. The box was decorated 
with floral wreaths from the Filipino Community Council and friends 
and relatives. 

BODY OF QUEZON ARRIVES HERE ON 

CARRIER PRINCETON, MANILA BOUND 

The body of a little man with a great heart rode into Pearl Harbor, 
Tuesday aboard a very large carrier, the brand new Princeton. 



[79] 



The U. S. government, which only five days ago granted the Phil- 
ippines their independence, is sending Manuel Luis Quezon, father of 
the Philippine republic, home in style. 

Aboard the Princeton is the man who helped the late president 
of the Philippines realize the dreams he never lived to see take place. 
The man is Frank Murphy, first high commissioner to the Philippine 
commonwealth and now a justice of the U. S. Supreme Court. 

Justice Murphy will accompany the late president's body to Manila 
and see it laid in its final resting place there. 

He is making the trip at the request of the Quezon family, which 
he helped take care of after Mr. Quezon's death, and Philippine 
President Manuel Roxas, who was Quezon's choice as his successor. 

Mr. Quezon died August 1, 1944, at Saranac, N. Y., more than 
a month before Gen. MacArthur returned to the Philippines. He was 
buried in Arlington national cemetery, and now his body is being 
returned to his homeland. 

Two delegations of Filipinos were on hand to meet the Princeton. 
One, headed by C. R. Gorospe, was composed of friends and relatives 
of the late president. Another was headed by President Modesto C 
Salve of the Filipino Community Council of Honolulu. 

This afternoon at 3 a memorial service will be held aboard the 
Princeton by Bishop Sweeney of the church of Our Lady of Peace 
At that time Filipino community leaders will pay homage to the late 
Fihpmo patriot. 

The Princeton will sail Friday for Manila. 

On hand to greet Justice Murphy, were Governor and Mrs. Stain- 
llt\ r""^'' ^ Isenberg zur Helle and a group of high ranking 

thl utlT r^'f •''.^ l-'^ ^^^^'^^ -^^^^ K^"' commandant of 
the 14th naval district; Vice Admiral Lynde D. McCormick deputy 
commander of the Pacific fleet; Vice Admiral A. E. Montgomery 
commander of air for the Pacific, and Rear Admiral E. W Hanson' 
commandant of the Pearl Harbor naval base. nanson. 

Governor Stainback and Justice Murphy are friends of 10 vears 
standing. Justice Murphy plans to spend som"^ time wUrthe govem Jr 
while here.-HoNOLULu Star Bulletin, July 10, ^^^'^^ 8°^^^°^ 



[SO] 



M QUEZON MEMORIA L C O M M I T T F 



RADIO GREETINGS FROM COLONEL MANUEL NIETO BROADCAST 
UPON ARRIVAL AT THE PIER, 9:30 A. M., JULY 27, IN 
RESPONSE TO THE INVITATION OF RADIO 
STATIONS IN MANILA 

* * * 

Hello, Manila! 

There are no words to express the emotion of being back in this 
city so dear to our recollections and where we have lived the best 
years of our lives, even though our eyes can hardly recognize any- 
thing of her former beauty. This speaks of your sufferings— suf- 
ferings that I want you to know were all the time the sorrow of 
President Quezon, the nightmare that went down with him into his 
grave. President Quezon had only one aim, which he made his civil 
religion — the liberation and happiness of his people. 

Let us be grateful to America, this fabulous country, thanks to 
whose gentleness and generosity he has been brought back to us with 
the dignity of a king. Let us be grateful to Justice Murphy, who 
could not give the Filipino people a better proof of his friendship and 
understanding than to accompany the remains of our beloved Pres- 
ident to our land. Let us finally be grateful to this gallant crew of 
the U. S. S, Princeton, Captain Hoskins, Commander Booth, Earn- 
shaw, Dose, and many others — heroes in war, for their gallantry, and 
in peace for their gentleness. America could not have chosen better 
ambassadors of her goodwill to the Filipino people. 

29824 6 



[81] 



ME MORIAL COMMITTEE 



EULOGY ON THE LIFE OF THE LATE PRESIDENT MANUEL L 
QUEZON BY PRESIDENT MANUEL ROXAS BEFORE THE 
JOINT SESSION OF THE CONGRESS, JULY 28, 1946 

WE DO NOT gather here to grieve or weep. Time has stanched 
our tears. The sorrow now in our hearts is not alone for him 
who lies in blissful sleep before us, but also for ourselves, the living, 
who yearn still for the strength and comfort of his presence. 

This was a man whom we loved with all devotion; this was a man 
whom we honored with all the gifts at om^ command. Today we pay 
formal tribute to his mortal remains. Today om^ nation, the Repubhc 
of the Philippines, enshrines him as a hero on the altar of om- love and 
gratitude. 

Manuel L. Quezon has at last returned to his native land. For 
him, it has been a long voyage home. But as we prepare to yield his 
body to the good earth which first nurtured him, we know that we will 
not inter, we cannot inter, the essence of his being. That essence is 
as much a part of us as the free air we breathe. We are a free people 
and a free nation, in large part, because of him. This Republic, its 
Government and its institutions are as much his works as they could 
be of any single man. These are his perpetual monument. Across 
the trackless and virgin territory of time, Manuel Quezon's wisdom 
led the way, through four critical decades, through two great world 
wars, to victory and finally to independence. 

The entire world is similarly in his debt. To him it owes a por- 
tion of that flaming spirit of leadership which guided mankind through 
the valley of evil and darkness to salvation and redemption. In this 
larger sense, we cannot claim him for ourselves alone. This death 
took both a father from his country and a leader from the world. The 
pain of loss is felt wherever men are free. .In our sorrow we are one 
with all mankind. 

The sad bugle notes of death sounded for Manuel Quezon even 
as the forces of world freedom gathered for their final forward thrust. 
The critical battles had been fought; his work was done. His strife 
had ended. Victory lay soon ahead. But the leader of his people, 
the captain of our hosts was not to see the moment of triumph. In 
an alien but spiritually native land, in the land where he had helped 

[83] 




^ Q UEZQN MEMOR I A L C 0 M M I T T E E WM ^^^^ 



arouse the legions of redemption, he died. On the beautiful vvooded 
shores of Lake Saranac in New York, heartland of the nation he had 
learned to love second only to his own, the great soul which had 
clung so long to a frail and hard-spent body, joined the immortals of 
all ages. 

Perhaps the Almighty, in His surpassing goodness, saw fit to claim 
the life of Manuel Quezon, after his great work was ended, that he 
might be spared the trial and pain of seeing the cost his countrymen 
were to pay for liberty. Perhaps the Divine Mercy was extended 
that he might one day return home in glory, beloved and mourned, 
but blissfully blind to the scars of ruin spread across this grotto of 
tropic beauty, the land whose grace and charm he loved so well. 

In this critical epoch, he was the first of the mighty leaders of 
liberty to pass from the world scene. Eight brief months later, Manuel 
Quezon's great and good friend, Franklin D. Roosevelt, joined him 
in death, on the very eve of those final triumphs which brought peace 
to mankind. But Franklin Roosevelt lived long enough to see the 
redemption of the pledges he had made to the Filipino people, to see 
MacArthur's men return in irresistible power to wrest Manila and 
the Philippines from the enemy. From Franklin Roosevelt, from that 
weary body, too, the mantle of life slipped away. 

These two men, fast and devoted friends, had ascended beyond 
the limits of race and nation and reached the blinding heights of 
universality . . . one an American, one a Filipino. They were of the 
chosen race of benefactors of mankind. 

It is difficult to evaluate the works of Manuel Quezon at this 
short space from death, because all of our present is in a sense a 
product of his past. The record of that past is a contmuous canvass 
of our history in this century. By recalling his life, we recall the 
story of the modern growth of our nation. His climb to fame and 
leadership is a tale which must be told to all our generations. The 
impetuous spirit which broke the bonds of personal poverty, which 
hurdled every obstacle because there was none great enough to stay 
him, is one of the proudest products of our race. His name is truly 
a glittering ornament of this nation. 

In Baler, that storied seacoast town of Tayabas, steeped in his- 
toric lore and crossed by all the currents of his time, Manuel Quezon 



[85] 




[86] 



m QUEZON MEMORIAL COMMITTEE ^^^^^ | 

grew to manhood in the typical atmosphere of the Spanish era. His ; 
rebellious soul declined to bear the indignities of alien rule and na- ; 
tional inferiority. Scholarly in spirit, hungry for knowledge, and am- i 
bitious, yet he bridled angrily at the plight of his people. With the f 
frank eyes of youth, he learned to distinguish the dignity of worth I 
from the trappings of authority. Although bound to in-action by ' 
parental pledge, he was spiritually one with Rizal, with Bonifacio, 
with del Pilar, and the other great patriots of that day. When the 
armies of revolution took the field in 1898, he was quick to join the 
struggle for liberty. When the antagonist became not Spain but Am- 
erica, when it was feared that the Republic across the seas came but 
to replace the former tyrant, Quezon fought while there was yet hope, 
and in the jungles of Bataan suffered privations and dangers which 
40 years later he had new occasion to know. But it was not until 
American deeds and American policies had received the basic doubts 
in the questioning mind of Major Quezon that he obeyed his orders 
to surrender. 

Suddenly clapped into an American military prison and held 
without charge for four long months, and then as suddenly released, 
Manuel Quezon was not conditioned to trust or love the new rulers 
of his land. The more credit to him, then, and to America, that in 
the vista he observed in the following years he comprehended in the 
detail of events the firm pattern of basic benevolence; he saw im- 
ported from America not only economic goods for sale but the price- 
less wares of liberty, of justice and of democracy. He saw American 
soldiers build hospitals and roads and bridges. He saw schools spring 
up, and Americans teaching the ways of freedom in them. He saw 
American judges dispense the law impartially between American and 
Filipino. He perceived the cult of fair play being preached and prac- 
ticed by the conqueror. He heard from an American Civil Governor, 
William Howard Taft, that the PhiUppines were to be governed for 
the benefit of the Filipinos. A former revolutionist, Quezon was 
named prosecutor, then Governor of his proud province. 

Elected to the first Philippine Assemhly, an avowed advocate of 
immediate and absolute independence, Manuel Quezon revealed for 

the first time the great talents endowed him the lightnmg speed 

of thought, the briUiance of intuition, the unerring judgment of deci- 



[87] 



sion, the unswerving devotion to principle and ideal, and the keen 
incisiveness which enabled him to distinguish between truth and il- 
lusion, between appearance and reality, between honesty and pretense 
These were the faculties in rare and multifold combmation which 
marked Manuel Quezon for the role of leadership among his people. 

In 1912, having already spent some years in the United States 
Congress as Resident Commissioner and having mastered for this pur- 
pose the American language, he helped secure from the Democratic 
Party a firm pledge of Philippine independence. By a scholarly pre- 
sentation of the Philippine position, he won President-elect Woodrow 
Wilson to his side, and through personal persuasion, gained the in- 
terest and intercession of Representative Jones of Virginia. The his- 
toric product of those labors was the Jones Act of 1916 which promised, 
to the great wonder of the world, independence to the Philippines as 
soon as the Filipinos were ready to govern themselves. 

In the blazing glory of that accomplishment, Manuel Quezon re- 
tiurned to his homeland to receive a hero's welcome such as few have 
ever witnessed. In triumph he was elevated to the supreme leader- 
ship of his party and of his people, a leadership he never lost in the 22 
remaining years of his life. Seldom if ever has one man attained 
such power and influence among his people and held it unchecked for 
so long. Yet it was not power held through force or intimidation; 
there was no Gestapo to retain him in his rule. It was a leadership 
exercised by the prestige of his person, by the stature of his accom- 
plishments, by the dominating proportions of his talents, and by the 
imswerving loyalty of his followers. Few men in all history, im- 
clothed in the purple of royalty, have equalled Manuel Quezon's tenure 
as a people's leader. It has no counterpart anywhere in the world 
in our time. How did he use this authority, this power, this influence? 
That is the stateman's test, perhaps the answer to his greatness. He 
used it mUdly, carefully and skillfully in the interests of his people, 
in the interests not of vested wealth which sought his favor, not of 
the socially elite, who courted him, but in the interests of the great 
trusting mass of people, inarticulate, plain and poor. To them he was 
devoted. For them he was a spokesman and a champion. In their 
name he espoused, against the opposition of intrenched wealth and 
power, the cause of social justice. We, today, carry forward with 
renewed and steadfast resolve the program he so nobly advanced .... 

[88] 



Q U EZON MEMORIAL COMMITTEE 



the struggle against the inhumanity of man to man. We pledge in 
his name that we will not falter on the path he blazed so well. 

He feared no man; often he dared defeat; he was unimpressed by 
danger. Quick in his anger, and quick to forgive, warmly loving and 
cordially hating, enjoying ease, yet indefatigable in labor, stern and 
soft by speedy turn, sentimental yet realistic, the unquestioned master 
of the spoken word, loving people so much that he hated solitude — 
this was the man behind the statesman. This was the sum of things 
which added up to that magic and unforgettable personality. This 
was the presence which inspired his followers, which awed or won 
over his enemies, which impressed presidents and kings, which de- 
lighted friends, which made him the tender husband and the loving 
father that he was throughout his life. 

Manuel Quezon was no ordinary man. He was beloved by Pro- 
vidence. In his later political career, his decisions were occasionally 
inscrutable, but almost always right. Through the flat decade of 
the twenties, when the vessel of independence was becalmed in a 
sluggish sea, he kept up the flagging will of his countrymen, con- 
tinued to beat the drums of freedom, and never once lost sight of his 
goal. 

As the tempo of events quickened in the world, Manuel Quezon 
was ready. With enthusiasm undimmed by a quarter century of 
public life, with energy apparently undiminished by the drain of the 
dread illness which was so common among our people, he plunged 
into the crisis of his lifelong battle for independence. That battle, 
too, he won. 

It was in 1935 and an exulting people voiced an overwhelming 
wiU that Manuel Quezon be the first President of the Phihppmes. 
It seemed that he had reached the high plateau of his career. He 
toyed indulgently with the thought of retiring at the end of his term 
in office, to tend his health, to take his ease, to travel, to spend his 
reclining years in the warm and comforting circle of a devoted and 
cherished family. 

In his first historic term, he set the new Commonwealth well on 
the road to freedom. He obtained frona President R-^-f^I^^^^^^^ 
of special economic concessions after independence. He dreamed and 
des?ied the construction of a magnificent capital city, the crownmg 

[89] 



jewel of the fame that was to outlast him. He made a good-will trip 
to Cuba and to Mexico, and in accents which rang clear in those lands, 
he told of his faith in America, in democracy, and in world unity. 

Then, from a narrow strip of land called the Polish Corridor, 
there burst the lightning of war. Guns grew louder; throughout 
Europe freedom was vanquished; a new tyranny ran rampant over 
the ancient seats of western civilization. In the Orient, deep out of 
the north China Sea, there rose the menacing clouds of war. Closer 
and closer they drew to the Philippines, still only a mark in the sky, 
but to the wise and practiced eye of Manuel Quezon, they tokened 
danger. 

The time for retirement of the leader was not yet come. This 
new danger had to be met. In the United States, ideologically pledged 
to the support of the western allies, Frankhn D. Roosevelt was elected 
for an unprecedented third term. In the Philippines Manuel Quezon 
was chosen for his second. In the few remaining lands of freedom 
and peace, men girded their loins for battle. Our leader called on 
his countrymen to rally without question to the cause to which the 
United States was pledged — the sacred cause for which he had fought 
all his Ufe, for justice and liberty. The youth who had fought Amer- 
ica with desperate fury in 1898, poured out his eloquence and spent 
his magnificent spirit in support of that nation now. 

The rest of the story of Manuel Quezon is the history of Philip- 
pine participation in the war. When the mailed fist of Japan struck 
without warning, first at Pearl Harbor and then at Manila, Quezon's 
choice was already made. It was not an easy choice. It was a choice 
previously faced by Norway, Denmark, Bulgaria, Hungary, Greece, 
Siam, and Malaya. It was a choice between resisting for the sake of 
principle, or yielding for the sake of relative safety. Not all these 
nations made the same choice. At that time the issue on which hung 
the future of the world was in grave doubt. The forces of evil were 
on the march; there were many men of impartial mind who thought 
the age of bai-barism had already won. But the lion heart of Manuel 
Quezon would admit neither doubt nor despair. He threw, not with- 
out question but without hesitation, the force of eighteen milhon Fili- 
pinos mto the struggle on the side of right, on the side of the United 
States. In a major sense, of course, Manuel Quezon's choice was 



[90] 



gathered from the hearts of his people. There was no question in 
their minds. There was no unwilhngness on their part. The die was 
cast. And when the time came, when he was asked to leave his be- 
loved land, and to wage the fight from afar, he acceded, but with 
painful sorrow. His heart ached at the thought of leaving his people 
to face their fate alone. First from Australia and then from Wash- 
ington, he urged his countrymen to resist, to keep high their hopes, 
to maintain intact their faith in the eventual triumph of liberty. 

He plunged with all his heart and soul into his new task ... on 
the one hand as supreme leader of the forces of resistance, and on 
the other as the eloquent advocate, for the gathering and launching 
of the offensive against Japan, for the rescue of our people from 
their brutal bondage. 

The flickering flame of physical vitality burned lower now that 
he was drawing from unseen reserves the last elements of energy for 
his final work. The fragile body which supported with so much strain 
the explosive energy of a dynamic mind served its fatal warning. But 
death was no stranger to Manuel Quezon. Often it had beckoned, 
never perched far distant from him. The sultry veil which those who 
live call death because they cannot see beyond it, drew closer to him. 
Still he fought it, refused it. But as to all, even so to Manuel Quezon, 
death finally came. The essential tasks accomplished, his glorious 
achievements lying in brilliant array behind him, the great soul, with 
the strong surge of the upward flying eagle, wrenched itself from 
its mortal house. This life was ended. 

The American nation and the American people mourned him 
as one of their own. The leaders of state of many lands paid him 
tribute. The muffled drums which sounded as the funeral cortege 
wound its way through Arlington National Cemetery reverberated 
across distant waters. They were heard in the Phifippines, and 
the millions here wept in unison. 

I remember that day. I was at morning mass in the House of 
God when the tragic news was spread. Choked with grief, I prayed 
with all my heart for the repose of his soul, for the solace of his 
widow and his children, for the salvation of our people, smitten 
anew with this irreparable loss. 



[91] 



THE HEMAINS OF PRESIDENT QUEZON LYING IN STATE IN 

malacanan palace 

Now the storm and terror of the recent past are ended. The 
dark and angry clouds which long enveloped us are rolling away. 
The golden fingers of the new day's light rest with healing touch upon 
the pain and wounds which this, our people, suffered. Strong and 
willing hands rebuild that which is destroyed. This rich, kind earth 
renews itself; the blossoms of tomorrow will hide the scars of yester- 
day. ^ 

Now the body of our leader returns to rest. From the voiceless 
hps of the unrep ying dead come reassurance, courage and hope. The 
spirit of Manuel Quezon, which never left us, soothes with gentle 
balm our heavy sorrow. In the Night of Death in which he dwells, 
our love can hear the rustle of a wing, and the seraphic song of angels 

Ln h.Tpf. ; rX:!"' *° b^i^g peace. Let there 

a.e« mZ Z ' f he belongs to the 
dfed IV^I T7 f^-^^l^ich he lived and in whose name he 
died . . . Liberty, Justice and Democracy . . . exult in eternal triumph! 

[92] 



Q U EZON MEMOR lAL COMMITTEE l^EiEEEZl 



SPEECH DELIVERED BY HON. ELPIDIO QUIRING, VICE-PRESIDENT 
OF THE PHILIPPINES, DURING THE NECROLOGICAL 
SERVICES HELD AT THE CHAPEL OF THE 
UNIVERSITY OF SANTO TOMAS, 
JULY 31, 1946 

* * * 

THIRTY yeai's ago I met the man who today is the object of the 
highest tribute of the nation. He was then entering his thirty- 
eighth year — an extraordinarily handsome man, dashing and virile, 
agile and intellectually alert, with a name and a reputation already 
made — which explained the ease and the poise with which he carried 
the name "Mr. President." He was then President of the Philippine 
Senate and from that high position he was to dominate the body 
politics of his people, leading them from one victory to another 
victory in their struggle for political emancipation and freedom. So 
I addressed him when I met him for the first time, and, "Mr. Pres- 
ident", — thus I addressed you all the time, everywhere, within the 
confines of our native land or across the seas when you and I used 
to travel in different lands. 

Thus I addressed you always during my continuous association 
with you these last three decades. Thus I address you for the last 
time before your mortal remains mix with the sod of the land you 
have bravely fought and died for in a lifelong struggle both in peace 
and in war that it might know real freedom and independence. 

I last saw you, Mr. President, ten days before the national elec- 
tions of 1941. I still have a vivid picture of our parting when you 
wished me good luck and godspeed. Those beaming eyes of victory 
and the warm grasp of a friend, I still see and feel. Since then I 
have only heard your faint voice over the radio when, for the last 
time, you addressed your people at home from your sickbed far away 
across the ocean that they might keep up their morale and continue 
hoping that they will be liberated. No, I prefer not to see your mor- 
tal remains because I refuse to believe that you are not alive, and so 
that I may forever keep fresh in my memory that radiant face of 
health, of vigor, of triumph that I know. Even the faint voice I 
last heard over the shortwave radio during the enemy occupation 
when you exhorted your countrymen to continue the fight for their 



[93] 



QUEZON M Ell ORIAL COMMITTEE 

liberation and inspired them with the people of final redemption, I 
wish to forget. I prefer to keep ringing in my ears your numberless 
thunderous denunciations of what you considered wrong and unjust. 

No, you are not dead. Your pervading presence in every living 
minute of your people, in our lives and in our hearts, must endure. 
We see in every handiwork that surrounds us your courageous heart 
and creative mind. We see you ever alive in the product of your un- 
faltering hands and high vision, from everywhere, out of the depth 
of human wisdom and the breadth of your sympathies. Your pul- 
sating ideas of righteousness, of justice and the love for the common 
man now dominate our daily life. This Republic of the Philippines, 
born scarcely a month ago, is greatly the result of your labors and 
dreams and is, therefore, the vibrant symbol of your life. 

No, you are not dead. Only yesterday, it seems, you emerged 
from the mountain fastnesses of Bataan as a revolutionary leader to 
surrender voluntarily to the American Army and continue the fight 
for the cause which your country failed to achieve by force of arms 
and which now you wanted to attain by peaceful means. You are 
not dead, when only yesterday, it seems, you were pleading before 
the halls of the Congress of the United States for the enactment of 
the Jones Act which gave your people greater political freedom. You 
are not dead when only yesterday, it seems, as I stood beside you, 
you fought for the enactment of the Tydings-McDuffie Independence 
Act — the Charter of Philippine freedom. 

One sweltering day, exactly two years tomorrow, a day as bleak 
and as grim and as desolate as all the days have been under the 
harsh and cruel enemy occupation, from across the seas and over the 
air, we heard that Manuel L. Quezon died on the beautiful shores of 
Saranac Lake in the State of New York. The whole nation was struck 
with grief by this stunning news. But grief-stricken as we were, 
we could only express our bereavement in loneliness and in whispers, 
fearing that the least sign of outward sorrow wcjuld bring imme- 
diately to our doors the sound of the steps of the despicable Kem- 
petai, or agents of the Japanese Military Police. All of us remember 
that only a year before then, on the occasion of his birthday, some 
friends of our departed leader who were celebrating the day in Manila 
were surprisedly rounded up by the enemy and eventually killed for al- 



[95] 



leged hostile acts. And later we learned with poignant feeling that 
the townsfolk of a certain municipality of Tayabas, his home prov- 
ince, who dared wear the black armband to attend a church service 
the day they learned of his death, suffered the indignity of being ar- 
rested and imprisoned. Thus, many wept but could not reveal the 
cause of their tears; many grieved but with suppressed tears in their 
hearts. Even our prayers for his soul had to be concealed. If there 
has been a nation so grief-stricken that it could not express itself 
in words or in tears or even in prayers — that nation was no other 
than the Filipino people in those dark unforgettable days. 

For two long, long years, we have kept that grief in our soul. 
We have experienced tragedies, torment, and have seen death in its 
ugliest and darkest moment during the massacre, butchery and in- 
human ordeal in the intervening years of Quezon's natural death and 
our deliverance from the Japanese rule. Ah, we certainly suffered 
as no other people have suffered during that period, and witnessed 
as perhaps no other people had witnessed with their own eyes the 
dead falling brutally mutilated beside us — our children, our brothers, 
and sisters, our parents and our wives! Yet above all this, I know, 
you know, that the heaviest sorrow that the country had to bear 
and the deepest grief that was graven in our hearts as a nation was 
the news of the death and loss of our beloved leader and friend, the 
benefactor and the father of his people — Manuel L. Quezon. But 
his death we have never seen! 

As one who suffered most in that darkest hour of our history, 
I like to think that such an incomparable sorrow has its reward and 
its own meaning. I like to think that in the equation of human ex- 
perience, as it is in the law of the natural forces, the deeper the sor- 
row the higher is its reward. I like to think that God who was so 
lavish in givmg His gifts to Manuel L. Quezon and Who was not so 
sparing m giving him disappointments and difficulties, having so 
ended his life as to have permitted us and the whole world to render 
him the highest tribute that can be paid to any of His creatures, has 
some priceless bounty in stope for his still suffering people. 

My friends, let us take solace in the thought that out of the 
profound grief that we felt for this brave and singular man— a higher 
promise of destiny now beckons to us. Not only now have we 



[96] 



..mm 'QUEZON MEMORIAL COMMrTTi^i. -:=^^^m 



imourned over the loss of one so great. In earlier years, our people 
tfett with tears the sad death of martyrs, such as Burgos, Gomez, 
^nd Zamora. Out of our grief over their martyrdom came a quick- 
ened national life. After them, we mourned over the unjust fate of 
Jose Rizal, that immortal man of Philippine freedom and liberty. 
His death further quickened our life and inspired a deeper sense of 
mational consciousness. Then came the turn of the revolutionary he- 
roes — Bonifacio, Del Pilar, Lopez-Jaena, Mabini and Luna, and out 
of the tragedy of their lives, our nation moved still higher toward its 
destiny. We are today what we are because of the noble examples 
.sxA sacrifices of these great men of our race. And only after their 
<death do we justly realize their beneficent influence upon theh- coun- 
rtry and people. Manuel L. Quezon, who in himself embodied all 
rthe vigors, all the ideals, all the fighting spirit of this long line of 
gallant martyrs and heroes, by his death has brought the nation not 
<©nly to a higher level of life, but to the final redemption which we 
IhaTO long awaited, dreamed of, labored and fought for— the Republic 
of th« Philippines. Never in our history as a people has death so 
funited us in grief over one who has departed as in the passing away 
iOf our national leader — Manuel L. Quezon. In our centuries of 
struggle for libc^rty and unity, Rizal was the idealistic legend, Quezon 
.the breathing power and driving force. 

The Republic of the Philippines may be the only inheritance that 
Quezon, by the will of our Almighty God, has bequeathed to us. This 
Hepublic will be but an empty shell if we were to cherish it only in 
2ia.ine and in form. Manuel L. Quezon lives and he is still with us 
"because of the examples that he has left behind, by the handiwork 
ie has sculptured before our eyes, and by the lofty thoughts which 
^re ever-ringing with a clear-cut voice admonishing us that, if we 
(desire to see this Republic live and endure as the proud legacy of our 
irace in its transitory travel across the vast space of time to the final 
□redemption of mankind where justice, hberty, deraocracy, happiness 

peace dwell eternally and rule as one, we should live by the prin- 
«2iples for which he labored and work indefatigably at every moment 
(of our life, instead of sitting immovably and quietly in awe and wrapt 
cattention before the image of the Republic that he has wrought with 
ihis own hands. He was idle not for any single moment, so we too 
must act to be worthy of his heritage. 

2.9 S21 7 



[97] 



For his contribution to human advancement and peace, the great 
and noble American people in whose midst he died, honored Presi- 
dent Quezon with a temporary repose in the hallowed burying ground 
of their national heroes as if he were their native kin and son. Then 
with signal distinction, they put his mortal remains aboard one of 
their mightiest and newest carriers, the USS Princeton for his 
voyage home to the Philippines, across the Pacific and under the vigil 
of their own marines and with the tender care of a special envoy, 
Frank Murphy, a great American citizen, and a devoted loyal friend 
of the Filipino people. No man could have asked for more in tribute 
and in homage such as has been liberally and generously extended to 
the mortal remains of our beloved dead by the people of the United 
States and by the rest of the world before he returned to the proud 
land of his birth. 

We, his own people who truly love, respect, and honor him, can 
conceive of no greater honors to add to those which have already 
been paid to him here and abroad. Ours is merely the sad and solemn 
duty to provide his final resting place. But while we attempt to 
construct the most magnificent mausoleum that is within our means 
and power to erect, while we try to surpass ourselves in lavishing rites 
and rituals for his final repose, we know that no matter how we strain 
ourselves to render him the highest outward honors we can give him, 
we cannot — we shall not — be able even to reflect half of the consecrated 
inner tribute with which we individually have enshrined him in 
our hearts. Poor and futile, indeed, is all the homage that at this 
moment we can show him. At best such a homage is only the form 
and shadow of the passing moment, while deathless and timeless is 
the homage with which we have canonized him at the altar of cher- 
ished hopes. 

And as time travels away from us through the inscrutable ways 
of Destiny to we know not where fate will lead us, I seem to see 
Quezon steadily growing in stature before the eyes of his people as 
he goes farther as a shadow from us, but nearer to the torch of liberty 
that has been beckoning us from the distant past. I seem to see side 
by side with Rizal's, Quezon monuments erected in every public plaza 
throughout the length and breadth of the Archipelago that he loved 
so much, for there is nothing more endearing to his people than to 
see his figure in the midst of communities where the poor used to 

[ 98 ] 




walk with him. I seem to read his name inscribed in numberless j\ 
streets, squares and parks. I seem to contemplate happy homes and % 
numerous schools and hospitals and other eleemosynary institutions ] ' 

erected to perpetuate the memory of Quezon, the benefactor. I seem 

to see new municipalities, beautiful cities and provinces established $ 
to carry to realization the encompassing vision of the constructive 

leader Quezon. I seem to see distributed in all schools, colleges and Ji 
universities abundant books containing the biography and pen pic- 

tures of the work and achievements of Patriot and Statesman Quezon. ]l\ 
I seem to contemplate proudly waving amidst the flags of the greatest 
and powerful nations of the earth the beautiful flag of the Republic 
of the Philippines in international conventions and conferences where 
Quezon made it respected even before his country became a sovereign 

nation. I seem to hear from the lips of the lowliest people in the ;\ 
barrios, in the far-flung communities, and even in the mountain fast- 
nesses, the name of Quezon as the by-word and synonym of social 
justice and amelioration. And in a moment of crisis, of calamity or 
adversity, or another war, when the Filipino people will need en- 
couragement to fight valiantly for the liberty of this nation, I seem to :.j 
see the whole populace rise as one man, impelled by the unifying 
spirit of Quezon's undying influence and patriotic fervor. There can 
be no greater tribute to a man who walked with us in the highways 
of a turbulent life than now to find himself seated at the side of our 
Creator as the life and soul of his people — the Filipino people. 



[99] 



M L Q 




[100] 



^m~Q U E^_N_M E MO R~^^ 



ORATION OF JUSTICE FRANK MURPHY AT THE NECROLOGICAL 
SERVICE HELD BEFORE THE JOINT SESSION 
OF CONGRESS ON SUNDAY, 
JULY 28, 1946 



IT IS my sad but grateful errand to greet you on the occasion of 
the death of your beloved hero, Manuel L. Quezon. The Gov- 
ernment of the United States deeply mourns this occasion dedicated 
to the memory of a great man. We never had a better friend, or 
one who struggled harder to achieve independence and self-gov- 
ernment for his people. He never violated his oath to the people 
of the United States and, in obedience to that oath, he came to our 
land, and perished in exile. One thing he never would tolerate 
would be the slightest hint of violating his oath of office. One could 
not say a word to add to the stature — intellectual and spiritual 
stature — of Manuel L. Quezon. That is an impossibility. We might 
as well attempt to retouch a masterpiece done by an immortal. His 
life should be preached from every pulpit, will be taught in the schools 
and colleges. Every editor will write about it. It will be known to 
every citizen whether in the rural areas or in the urban communities 
of this land he loved and for which he perished. 

We cannot let the occasion go by without mentioning his history 
from childhood until that moment when death took him lightly by 
the hand. It reflects what is written in the Good Book that *'life is 
a continuous warfare." He never knew for a moment, release from 
that duty of struggling for his people in order that they would achieve 
their goal of complete independence. We also notice this about him — 
that he never would tolerate for a moment the idea of his people not 
being the equal of any people on earth. And then something of the 
spirit of America went into him. My country grew to be great be- 
cause people from every race or every religion came together. They 
could not forget it. They would not be separated. That made Amer- 
ica's might, America's greatness. Enemies, of course, hoped that 
that would cause disunity and division. I want to point out too that 
they had very few material possessions— they were the dispossessed. 
But they knew something of natural law. They knew that natural 



[101] 



law was born of divine law, and so in the declaration of independence 
it was made clear that all peoples were equal and that they have 
certain rights given to them by their Creator. Cicero knew that, 
Aristotle knew it, Blackstone, Abraham Lincoln knew that. And so 
it was with Manuel L. Quezon. He prepared his people. He knew 
that his people under divine law were entitled to their rights, while 
at the same time recognizing a duty to their country. We saw his 
fragile body, we saw his noble wife beside him during those critical 
days. He never flinched for a moment. Spirits like Manuel L. 
Quezon's just don't die. The structure passes on but the sipirit will 
struggle on forever. 

The world, my friends, enters a new era. The hope of man is 
this: that the principle of morality and justice cannot and will not 
fade. These principles of morality and justice must be the motivating 
force of our lives. They are problems that require deeper insight 
and a more profound instinct than that of war. 

So the life of your great President for whom I had the greatest 
personal admiration should serve as an example to Americans and 
E'ilipinos alike. If the youth of this impoverished land were to take 
a faltering step, I hope they would think first of the life of Manuel L. 
Quezon and be reawakened to your responsibility, to your sense of 
industry, to your sense of duty, to your sense of tenderness and kind- 
ness that makes a nation great. I hope God will keep and bless you. 



[102] 



ESTADISTA Y PATRIOTA 

Oracion ftinehre pronunciada por el Senador M. JEStlS CVENCO en la sesion necroUgica 
celehrada por el Senado y la Cdmara de Representantes, dedicada a la 
memoria del Presidente Quezon el 28 de julio de 1946 



NACIDO en humilde cuna y desprovisto de bienes materiales, 
el insigne estadista cuyos mortales despojos tenemos ante no- 
sotros, llego mediante sus propios esfuerzos a ser jurisconsulto emi- 
nente. Su genio, su espiritu combativo y la popularidad inmensa de 
que siempre gozo, hicieron de el fiscal, gobernador, representante, 
comisionado residente, Presidente de la Camara Alta, y, por ultimo, 
Presidente del Commonwealth. En todos esos cargos, brillo como 
estrella de primera magnitud; en todos ellos, realizo una labor lu- 
minosa que la historia patria registra en sus aureas paginas. 

Desde su infancia, la libertad e independencia de nuestro pais 
fueron la obsesion y el anhelo constantes del Presidente Quezon. 
Empuno las armas en la revolucion, y cuando se convencio de lo 
esteril que seria continuar luchando contra un adversario grande- 
mente superior, se acogio a la legalidad para continuar, al amparo 
de la paz, laborando por la consecucion de nuestros ideales. 

Como comisionado residente, el Presidente Quezon consiguio la 
aprobacion de la Ley Jones, que constituyo la primera conquista de 
nuestras luchas libertarias bajo la dominacion norteamericana. No 
solo con la Ley Jones se establecio un gobierno autonomo, sino que, 
mediante la promesa de independencia, clara y terminantemente con- 
signada en el preambulo, se colocaron las bases del Commonwealth 
primero, y de la Republica, despues. En el recinto augusto de la 
Camara de Representantes de Estados Unidos resono el verbo calido 
y elocuente de nuestro paladin, que al exponer nuestras ansias liber- 
tarias con habilidad y maestria, conquisto las simpatias y el apoyo 
del pueblo norteamericano y de sus caudillos. La rara habilidad del 
Presidente Quezon fue la que alisto a favor de Filipinas el valioso 
apoyo del Presidente Wilson, del ex-Presidente Theodore Roosevelt 
y demas dirigentes de la politica norteamericana. 

El gobierno autonomo establecido por la Ley Jones, lejos de 
colmar los anhelos de emancipacion del Presidente Quezon, consti- 
tuyo nuevo acicate, y ora por medio de resoluciones de la Legislatura 



[103] 



filipina, ora por medio de Misiones, en Filipinas y en la antigua 
metropoli, continuo demandando nuestra independencia plena y ab- 
soluta. La Ley Tydings-McDuffie, que establecio el gobierno del 
Commonwealth, previo a la proclamacion, despues de diez anos, de 
nuestra repiiblica, fue la culminacion de nuestras luchas y de nues- 
tros esfuerzos por el total reconocimiento de nuestro derecho de so- 
berania. La sabiduria, el tacto y la singular habilidad con que el 
Presidente Quezon dirigio los destinos de la nacion bajo el Common- 
wealth, dieron lugar a que, dos anos antes de la fecha fijada por la 
Ley Tydings-McDuffie, el Presidente Roosevelt obtuviera del Congreso 
de Estados Unidos autorizacion para proclamar y establecer la Re- 
publica filipina en cuanto lo permitiese la situacion creada por la 
guerra mundial. 

No se sustrajo a la perspicacia del Presidente Quezon la inmi- 
nencia y proximidad de la agresion japonesa, y tanto para asegurar 
una accion energica de Estados Unidos como para acelerar la victoria 
final, el obtuvo para Filipinas los servicios del General MacArthur, el 
genio militar por excelencia. Decir que sin el General MacArthur, 
Estados Unidos no hubiese ganado la guerra, seria una temeridad; 
pero afirmar, como hoy lo hago, que la estrategia maravillosa de 
MacArthur abrevio en varios anos nuestra esclavitud bajo la ferula 
del Nipon, y con ello se han ahorrado miles de vidas y billones de 
pesos, no seria mas que recordar una verdad por todos aceptada. 

No obstante haber empeorado su salud, por muchos anos deli- 
cada, el Presidente Quezon, dirigiendo el gobierno fihpino refugiado 
en Washington, estuvo ocupado en urgir nuestra liberacion y la con- 
cesion de una ayuda monetaria suficiente para nuestra rehabilitacion. 
Dos billones de pesos de ayuda a Filipinas prometio el Presidente 
Roosevelt al Presidente Quezon, y de no haber fallecido ambos pre- 
maturamente, la rehabilitacion economica de Filipinas hubiera sido 
mas rapida y mas completa. 

Cuando el Presidente Quezon partio para Estados Unidos, dejo 
entre nosotros su alma y su corazon. Condoliendose con nuestras 
amarguras y sufrimientos, estuvo enviando radiogramas y cartas a 
Kangleon, Peralta, Fertig y demas jefes de la resistencia contra la 
tirania japonesa. Lehnos con devocion aquellos mensajes de vibrante 
patriotismo, dignidad y pundonor. El caudillo ausente siempre ex- 
hortaba a morir con honor, y no vivir con vihpendio. 



[104] 



QUEZON MEMOR lAL COMMITTEE 



Los filipinos convienen en que el Presidente Quezon fue el compa- 
triota mas grande en la presente epoca. Para mi, el fue uno de los 
estadistas mas insignes del mundo. Como parlamentario, podia figu- 
rar honrosamente en cualquiera Camara deliberativa; y como artifice 
de pueblos y naciones, no estaba a la zaga de los grandes estadistas 
de Europa y America. Como campeon de la libertad humana, su 
nombre figura al 'lado de Washington, Rizal, Bolivar, Kosciuszko, 
Guillermo Tell y otros adalides de los pueblos oprimidos. 

En todas sus luchas, Quezon siempre salio triunfante. Jamas 
conocio la derrota o el fracaso. Y aun al morir, el Presidente supo 
triunfar, porque siendo la sinceridad y la alteza de miras la norma 
constante de sus actos, desde mucho antes de presentir el termino de 
su peregrinacion por el mundo, estuvo frecuentando los sacramentos, 
y sus horas de vagar las empleaba en la lectura de las Escrituras, de 
la Imitacion de Cristo y demas libros que purifican el alma y nos acer- 
can a Dios. La muerte cristianisima de Quezon ha sido la pagina 
mas gloriosa de toda su vida de triunfos y de laureles. iDichosos son 
los que, como el, mueren en la paz del Sefior! Y mientras, piadosa- 
mente pensando, el alma del Presidente Quezon mora en la mansion 
de los predilectos, su nombre vive perennemente en el amor y en la 
estimacion de los filipinos y de los amantes de la libertad. 



[ 105 ] 




[106] 



Q U EZON MEMORIAL COMMIT T E E ^ 



MESSAGE OF GENERAL OF THE ARMY DOUGLAS MACARTHUR 
READ AT THE NECROLOGICAL SERVICE HELD IN 
THE HALL OF CONGRESS, JULY 29, 1946 



IT IS a source of deepest regret that my duties in the occupation 
of Japan at this critical moment have not permitted me personally 
to be present reverently to pay homage at the final rites over the 
bier which contains the mortal remains of President Quezon. He 
was my dear friend of long years, and it was my privilege to share 
with him many of the varying conditions which have beset human 
life during our age. And in this tragic moment, as we close the 
scroll of his life and works and hearken to their profound and 
controlling influence upon the destiny of his people, I attest to and 
join in the applauding judgment of history of the path of duty 
he strode upon this earth. 

Of all men of all time, none more truly merited the appellation 
of patriot-statesman. Few could, as he, replace the uniform of the 
soldier with the mantle of statescraft, yet maintain with voice and 
pen in undiminished vigor the crusading fight in the self-same cause 
for which he had fought by the violence of arms. 

Throughout his long years of public service, never did he com- 
promise the principle which he thus espoused — never did he divert 
his gaze from the goal which he thus resolutely sought. That he 
lived to bring its realization in full sight bespeaks the unconquerable 
determination with which he endowed his lofty purpose. That his 
native land now stands as one of the free and independent nations 
of the world is responsive, more than to all else, to the indomitable 
conscience of his people a firm belief in their destiny as a race, and 
an unshakable conviction that they lacked not the capacity fully to 
support independent sovereignty once attained. 

Two years ago, while preparing to join in the final blow for his 
people s liberation, death forever closed his lips and stayed his pen, 
but the immortal spirit which sustains his soul remains forever a do- 
minant influence upon the destiny of the Republic for which he gave 
so much. 



[107] 




[108] 



QUEZON MEMORIAL CO MM I T T E E 



His hours of life were full — hours of peace and hours of war — 
of anguish and of joy — of defeat and of victory — and, as with all men, 
of failure and of success — the rattle of musketry as he fought through 
the uncharted mountain wilderness to seek by war what he later won 
by peace — the bitter gall of defeat and surrender — the University 
cloisters where he learned of Christianity of Western culture, of tradi- 
tion, and of the law — the shifting fortunes of political struggle as he 
rose steadily to the fame of position and power — those great crusades 
he conducted beyond the seas — his advocacy and his success in the 
cause of Philippine independence — the clouds of war spreading over 
the Orient — the swirl of enemy bombers — the crash of death and 
blood and disaster — again the bitterness of defeat— then the exulta- 
tion, with the rising tide of victory, as he saw our armies standing on 
the road back six hundred miles from Philippine soil — followed by 
still waters and silence. . .. 

His soul being before the seat of Almighty God, Judge of all 
men and of all things, Manuel Quezon's mortal remains are now com- 
mitted to the tender care of the people he loved so deeply and 
served so well — his cherished own. Father of this infant Republic, 
which he planned but never saw, he has returned — he has come home 
forever. 




[109] 



ORATION DELIVERED BY MAYOR VALERIANO FUGOSO AT THE 
NECROLOGICAL SERVICES HELD AT THE CHAPEL OF THE 
UNIVERSITY OF SANTO TOMAS, JULY 30, 1946 



T THIS solemn hour, we render homage to a man who, in life, 



-^^^ was the shining symbol of our national soHdarity, the pattern 
and standard of our faith. 

He has come back to commune with us even in death, so that 
we may in all humihty embrace and sanctify the memory of his 
greatness. He has come back to us to fulfill the pledge which death 
has deprived him of the glorious privilege to perform, the pledge to 
return and redeem us from the oppression of a blood-thirsty enemy. 
And today we pay tribute to his unconquerable faith in the ultimate 
triumph of democracy and justice, his unfailing devotion to freedom 
and his steadfast loyalty to God and country. 

We have not lost Manuel L. Quezon. We only miss him. We 
miss the nobility of his character, the bigness of his heart, the depth 
of his love and the radiance of his personality. We miss Quezon the 
man, Quezon the leader, Quezon the proletariat, Quezon the patriot, 
Quezon the statesman and Quezon the soldier. 

Yes, our man of destiny is still with us. Death has only en- 
deared him more to us. If in hfe we respected and worshipped him, 
in death we revere him. 

Our regret is that the dream of his lifetime, the independence 
of the Philippines, came only within a short time after he crossed 
the Great Beyond. Our deep sorrow is that fate had not been kind 
to him, for just as the forces of freedom and righteousness were 
roaring and pushing back to death and destruction, the hordes of 
barbarians, who would rule the world by force of arms, the angels 
came and bore him away from us on the silver wings of eternal peace. 

But he has come back nevertheless, back from a long and ar- 
duous mission, the reward of which is our liberty, but for which he 
paid with the supreme sacrifice. 

Manuel L. Quezon is a monument to peace, a beacon to all 
liberty-loving people. In the Filipino national consciousness his spirit 
will linger on as long as there is a song of freedom on their lips. 

Illustrious and beloved leader: Your people are here with a cloud 
of sadness on their brows, weeping at your feet. They are not alone 
in their grief. The world mourns your passing. And we are proud 
of it, proud of you as the embodiment of Filipino loyalty and courage 
that stood the test of the recent Armageddon. 

In the words of the poet, when the journey is over, there will 
be time enough to sleep. Manuel L. Quezon merely sleeps in the 
grateful hearts of his people, in the warm and gentle bosom of his 
motherland. He is not dead. 




[110] 




ANTE LOS RESTOS MORTALES DE 
MANUEL LUIS QUEZON 

Oracion funebre pronimciada por el Sr. CLARO M. RECTO en la funcion 
necTologica dada por la Provincia de Tayabas en la tarde del 29 de 
julio de 1946, en la capilla de la Universidad de Santo Tomds 



N7iestras vidas son los Hos 
que van a dar en la mar, 
que es el morir; 
alli van los sehorws 
derechos a se acabar 
y consiimir . . . 

ACUDEN sin pena a la memoria estas coplas inmortales del poeta- 
filosofo frente a los despojos de Manuel Luis Quezon, aquel 
Gspejo de patr iotas que consagro su peregrino entendimiento y su 
pasion por la libertad a la causa del bienestar y honor de su pueblo; 
aquel moderno argonauta que, tras azarosas aventuras, capto el vello- 
cino de oro del poder y de la gloria para ofrendarlo a la patria, la 
dama de sus quimeras; aquel espiritu fino y galante, como un cardenal 
del renacimiento, que lo mismo apuraba hasta las heces la copa de la 
vida que fiaba en arrebatos misticos las querellas de su alma al Dios 
de las misericordias. 

''Nuestras vidas son los rios que van a dar en la mar, que es el 
morir/" Pero el rio de aquella vida plenamente lograda no fue a dar 
en el oceano de la muerte, para confundir sus aguas caudales con las 
de otros rios, vulgares y anonimos, en el deposito comiin del olvido y 
de la nada, no. Mas alia de la muerte, mas alia del termino de ese 
viaje de donde no se vuelve, la vida reivindica sus fueros, pactando 
alianza con la inmortalidad, cuando ha sido vivida a plenitud para el 
logro de los fines de una elevada vocacion. Y fue asi que la Fama 
rindio parias a Manuel Luis Quezon labrandole un nicho en el panteon 
de los elegidos, para gloria de su patria, y guia, inspiracion y ejemplo 
de futuras generaciones. 

La Providencia, en sus designios arcanos, le senalo a Manuel Luis 
Quezon tierra donde nacer y medio peculiar en que vivir y desen- 
volverse para cumplir el mandate prefijado de su destine. 

No fue obra del acaso que Filipinas fuera su patria, donde, en el 
tiempo en que vio la primera luz, sobre los fueros del espiritu y los 
tesoros de la tierra pesaba una interdiccion de siglos. No fue un 

[111] 




hecho casual que desde los dias de su infancia diesen a su alma el 
sello que le habia de distinguir como excelso paradigma de humana 
grandeza, no las blandas y letales brisas de la conformidad con lo 
existente, sino las vivificantes rafagas de rebeldia que comenzaban a 
sacudir desde entonces los puntales de la vieja institucion colonial. 

Ni fue capricho del azar que Manuel Luis Quezon llegara a la 
adolescencia cuando la tempestad de la revolucion, desencadenada 
por el verbo de Rizal y Del Pilar, bramaba por los cuatro costados 
del Archipielago, mientras el bolo de Bonifacio proyectaba rojas 
fulgencias sobre el horizonte patrio y el grito de Balintawak mul- 
tiplicaba sus ecos a traves de montanas y coUados, llevando hasta la 
ultima cabana su mensaje redentor. 

Y no fue en vano, finalmente, que muerta en la infancia, arrollada 
por el torrente de una fuerza superior, aquella primera Republica 
que el mismo habia contribuido a fundar, militando en las huestes 
libertadoras de Aguinaldo, fiel a sus numenes y atento a las voces de 
su destino, Manuel Luis Quezon, con Sergio Osmena y otros jovenes 
patriotas, se lanzara de nuevo al campo de la lucha, trocando su 
fusil de soldado por el verbo del tribuno y la pluma del estadista, 
para salvar el decoro patrio del caos y la ignominia del vencimiento, 
rescatando para siempre del olvido, de la desercion y del abandono el 
ideal sacrosanto de la revolucion, a fin de seguir enarbolandolo, como 
labaro de libertad, prenda de estimacion propia y simbolo de protesta 
contra la dominacion del extranjero. 

Naciera Manuel Luis Quezon bajo otro cielo, fuera otra la fisono- 
mia de sus varias epocas donde le fue dado volcar el caudal de sus 
energias y encender el fervor de su patriotismo, y no hubiese sido el 
egregio caudillo que fue de su pueblo, ni seria su nombre, hoy y para 
siempre, como el de Rizal, Washington, Bolivar y Kosciusko, santo y 
sena para todas las razas oprimidas que anhelan y porfian, y viven 
y mueren, por su libertad. 

Como todo el que viene al mundo ostentando en la frente el signo 
de los elegidos, como todo el que nace predestinado a conducir y 
acaudillar hombres y pueblos, Manuel Luis Quezon recibio del Sumo 
Dispensador de bienes el don inapreciable de la percepcion clara e 
mstantanea del sentido y filosofia de las cosas. La psicologia de los 
mdividuos y de las multitudes no guardaba secretos para su mente 



[ 112 ] 



g^M; QUEZON MEMOR lAL COMMITTEE ^^ ^^=^ 



zahori, y por eso era inmenso e irresistible su poder de proselitismo. 
Era, en verdad, un iluminado y lo que otros alcanzan a comprender 
merced a la meditacion y el estudio el lo percibia por intuicion. Los 
grandes proyectos y las ideas creadoras, la interpretacion de hechos 
contemporaneos y la intencion de los hombres, lo mismo amigos que 
enemigos, se le revelaban al punto como si hubiese descendido sobre 
su cabeza la lengua de fuego del Paraclito. 

Ejercio sus privilegios de hombre, en toda la integridad del con- 
cepto: espiritu y materia. Consciente de la dualidad de su natu- 
raleza, dio al barro lo del barro y al alma lo que es del alma patrimonio. 
Amo todo lo que es digno de ser amado, sublimandolo todo en lo que, 
para el, es en la tierra el compendio de todos los amores: el amor 
patrio. Y porque su alma estaba poseida por las inquietudes del siglo 
y comunicaba al siglo sus propias inquietudes, y porque su corazon 
era polo imantado al cual convergian las ansias populares, puso en 
todos sus actos aquella pasion inextinguible de su espiritu, aquel teson 
indomenable de su voluntad, que hizo de su vida una eterna adoles- 
cencia y un continuo batallar por los mas bellos y sublimes ideales, 
Unas veces por la gloria y el placer del triunfo, otras por la sola nece- 
sidad de luchar, buscandose las dificultades cuando ellas mismos no 
le salian al paso, para darse la satisfaccion de vencerlas; en todas, por 
la posesion y conquista de aquel bien supremo que era el puro y cons- 
tante anhelo de su corazon: el honor y la felicidad de su pueblo. 

Sintio come ningun compatriota suyo el orgullo de ser y de 11a- 
marse filipino en el seno de sociedades cosmopolitas mas incurable- 
mente enfermas del prejuicio de una pretendida superioridad racial. 
Y nos dejo la leccion y el ejemplo de ese santo orgullo, que no es la 
arrogancia del batracio fanfarron de la fabula, sino la ausencia de todo 
rasgo de servilismo y adulacion en nuestra conducta, y la serena 
dignidad fundada en el convencimiento de que no existen razas su- 
periores ni razas inf eriores sino solamente grados de cultura y periodos 
de civilizacion, que unas y otras avanzan o retroceden o se estancan 
segun las condiciones que el medio politico ofrece, y que asi como 
hemos producido un Rizal, un Del Pilar, un Luna, un Mabini, un 
Quezon, un Arellano, un Anacleto del Rosario, y otros ejemplares 
magnificos de grandeza humana, en las artes, las ciencias, la politica 
y el derecho, asi tambien llegaremos a donde otros pueblos ban Uegado 

29824 8 



[113] 



si desde ahora nos hacemos conscientes de que somos nacion y tenemos 
un alto destino que realizar, y de que nuestro adelanto no sera obra 
de la benevolencia extrana sino del esfuerzo propio, la confianza en 
nosotros mismos y nuestra fe y esperanza en un porvenir mejor. 

Manuel Luis Quezon busco los halagos de la gloria, se adueno de 
los resortes del poder y amo las pompas mundanas, pero se engafiarian 
quienes creyesen que su movil era solo el satisfacer su vanidad per- 
sonal. Todo aquello era el aparato externo, la aureola de esplendor, 
la deslumbrante apoteosis, de que tenia que rodearse para adaptarse 
al medio ambiente y preparar debidamente el escenario de la accion. 
La justa era en el siglo, y entre hombres del siglo, para el logro 
de objetivos humanos, y en torneo semejante no podia presentarse 
el justador vistiendo sayal de penitente y recitando versiculos del 
Eclesiastes. 

Las luchas que en Estados Unidos libro Manuel Luis Quezon 
por nuestra independencia constituyen una de las mas grandes 
epopeyas en la historia de todos los pueblos por la conquista de su 
libertad. Lidio con la palabra y con la pluma, en los escafios del 
Congreso, en las convenciones de los partidos, en los salones de con- 
ferencias, en las columnas de la prensa, en las asambleas populares, 
en los despachos de personajes politicos, hasta en los boudoirs de 
la gracia femenina. Formo su circulo de amigos y admiradores 
entusiastas, alistandolos en su noble cruzada patriotica, y vivio con 
el boato de un prmcipe oriental y se hizo arbitro de la elegancia para 
que vieran en el, y no en el salvaje con taparrabos, la personificacion 
del pueblo que representaba. 

Y asi, bajo el hechizo de su personalidad y al conjuro de su 
palabra, surgieron unos tras otros esos jalones historicos que fueron 
marcando los progresos de nuestra Jornada hacia nuestra tierra de 
promision: primer o, las clausulas de independencia en las plataformas 
de los partidos politicos; luego, la Ley de Autonomia, en 1916; mas 
tarde, en 1934, la Ley de Independencia, la Constitucion y el Com- 
monwealth; y finalmente, la Repiiblica que el 4 de este mes de Julio 
nacio a la vida internacional. 

Manuel Luis Quezon fue dejando girones de su vida a lo largo 
de ese camino de azares y de gloria, hasta inmolarla por completo 
lejos del suelo patrio, sin ver el termino de la contienda que le habia 



[114] 




lanzado a remotas playas, sin recibir el mayor galardon que hubiera 
deseado para si: ver, mientras sentia ahogarse el corazon en un tur- 
bion de emociones, como se izaba majestuosamente la bandera patria 
para ondear en los espacios libre y soberana, su sol y tres estrellas 
aun mas refulgentes que los del mismo firmamento, albergando en sus 
pliegues las ansias etemas de un pueblo expresadas en aquellos in- 
mortales versos del himno nacional: "Los invasores no te hollaran 
jamas . . ." 

Que dolor mas tajante, que angustia mas opresora, debio ser 
para Manuel Luis Quezon ver irrealizado su ensueno, el que todos 
acariciamos y Rizal inmortalizara en sus versos, de morir bajo el 
cielo de la propia patria, donde son dulces las boras y donde es grata 
la muerte! Que regocijo debe sentir ahora su espiritu al ver desde 
las Serenas moradas donde habita que sus despojos van a dormir en 
su encantada tierra el sueno de la eternidad! 

Vuelve el egregio caudillo para recibir el calor de esta tierra 
de sus amores y del afecto y devocion de sus compatriotas. Pero solo 
ve cuadros desoladores de muerte y miseria; diezmada por la guerra 
la poblacion, la hacienda publica en quiebra, el comercio en manos 
extraiias, los campos agricolas en barbecho, destruidas las industrias, 
la paz y el orden perturbados, amenazado el patrimonio de nuestros 
hijos, rota la unidad nacional, dividido el pueblo entre tirios y troyanos, 
las antiguas virtudes en bancarrota, y, como dijo el desterrado de 
Dapitan, "deshecha la morada, la fe vendida a otros, y ruinas por 
doquier ..." 

Ve, noble caudillo, descansa en la paz de tu sepulcro, y no la 
turbe el espectaculo de tanta dolencia moral y tanta miseria fisica 
como nos abate y aflige, sordidos despojos de la resaca tras la ultima 
tempestad que la ambicion de los imperios desencadeno sobre nuestro 
suelo Somos, dicen, un pueblo de heroes, pero toda la nacion es una 
vasta necropolis. Hemes sido libertados, pero en nuestras cmdades 
y pueblos no queda piedra sobre piedra. Somos independientes, pero 
mendigos del favor ajeno; ciudadanos de una republica, pero aun con 
habitos y mentalidad de colonos. Decir "Bataan" es decir gloria, 
lealtad y heroismo. y desengaiio de los pregonados altruismos y de las 
promesas fallidas. Visten luto nuestros hogares. pero no es solo por 
los muertos de la guerra, sino tambien por los que viven. Y el des- 

[115] 



aliento atenaza nuestros corazones y nubia nuestras inteligencias frente 
a los graves cuidados de nuestra generacion y las apremiantes interro- 
gaciones del porvenir a las que no hallamos respuesta. 

Manuel Luis Quezon, artifice de nuestra libertad y padre de 
nuestro pueblo: 

''este nmndo es el camino 
para el otro que es morada 
shi pesar;'' 

pero mientras lo cruzamos, plegue al Omnipotente darnos tu fe, tu 
pasion y tu coraje; que sintamos el mismo santo orgullo que sentiste 
de tu solar y de tu raza, para amarnos los unos a los otros frente a los 
rencores de la humanidad; que nuestro caudillo del presente, en quien 
reconocemos a una de las glorias de esta generacion, a quien juz- 
gaste un dia emolu de tu ingenio y en quien vislumbraste al digno 
continuador de tu noble empresa, acierte el rumbo que debemos seguir 
en todas las crisis que hemos de atravesar; y que nuestra indepen- 
dencia y nuestra Republica, mas que en la ley y en las proclamas 
oficiales y en la retorica de los banquetes, vivan, con visceras pal- 
pitantes, en nuestra conciencia y conducta y en la conciencia y con- 
ducta de los otros, a fin de que nuestros martires no tengan que 
volver a este mundo para un nuevo holocausto de sus vidas. 

Manuel Luis Quezon! No importa que tus despojos reposen 
bajo tierra! Tu pueblo no te buscara entre los muertos! Tu vives 
en la muerte! 




[117] 




€xcerptsJ jFrom ©tfjer ©rations^ 



QUEZON THE STATESMAN 

A/TANUEL QUEZON the statesman, with the possible exception of 
Rizal, was the greatest born to the Malayan race. As Pres- 
ident of the Philippines, it is hard to tell which to admire more — 
whether the rapidity of his conception or the speed of his action. 
The undebated truth is that he had a power of execution in a high 
degree that rarely combines with the philosophical circumspection of 
a deep thinker that he also was. The thinker and the doer in him 
were so ideally combined as to produce the great statesman that lived 
radiantly and led dynamically. Indeed, if each one of the statesmanly 
works and achievements of Quezon were inscribed on a leaf, we would 
need all the wilderness of Glorious Bataan. If each of the statesmanly 
thoughts and ideas of Quezon were inscribed on a rock, we would re- 
quire the mountain ranges of the Himalayas to contain them all. As 
a member-founder of the Nacionalista Party, he was a partisan that 
fought for his party as no one else did. But when the interests of 
his party and those of his country came to the parting of the ways, 
he never hesitated a moment to terminate his party loyalty. In other 
words, his politics ended where his statesmanship began. He was a 
patriot rather than partisan. He would be true to his country oftener 
than loyal to his party. As a statesman, Manuel Quezon went deepest 
in thought, farthest in vision and quickest in action, and so, as a 
leader, he was reliable as the attraction of gravitation. — Senator Car- 
los P. Garcia. 

AN INSPIRATION FOREVER 

TVT ANUEL L. QUEZON, the undaunted soldier, the peerlees legis- 
•^^-^ lator and parliamentarian, the great president and leader of 
the Filipino people and the father of their independence had an- 
swered the call of his Maker, the Supreme Arbiter of our Destiny. 
He is no more, but his great ideals shall forever live to inspire us. 

I seem to see him now as he was addressing his people on a me- 
morable occasion when he said: 

"We shall he a floioing stream^ a lippling brook, a deep and roar- 
ing torrent, jidl of life, of hope, of faith and of strength. Through 

[118] 



QUEZON MEMO ]0"TT COMMITTEE 



self-discipline we shall harness all our energies, so that our power, 
spreading over the length and breadth of this Land, will develop its 
resources, advance its cidtiire, secure social justice, give puissance 
to the Nation, and insure happiness and contentment for all the 
people, under the aegies of liberty and peace. 

''Other peoples of the world are straining themselves to attain 
higher levels of progress and national security. We shall not, we 
must not, lag behind. 

''The Filipino people are on the march, towards their destiny, 
to conquer their place in the sun!'' 

God grant us the strength and valor to live up to the ideals of 
Manuel L. Quezon . . . 

— Floor Leader Raul T. Leuterio 



THE SPIRIT THAT WILL ALWAYS LIVE 

SENTIMENT impels us to mourn his passing, but upon reflection, 
we become aware that his spirit will always live with us and be 
the guiding star of our future conduct and that of our posterity. 
From on high, he doubtless would wish nothing better to honor his 
memory than to emulate some of his outstanding virtues. Let us 
then, here and now resolve, individually and collectively, never to 
depart from the norms of conduct that his glorious life has left us as 
an eternal heritage. Let us place the love of country and faith in 
God, as he did, above all else. Let honesty and industriousness be 
the motto of our everyday doings. Let us so shape our behaviour 
as to maintain the exalted position to which he placed our race in 
the council of nations. Our devotion to the interest and welfare of 
the common people should be no less than his concentrated efforts 
in that direction. Let a rigid self and national disciphne mould our 
actions to the end that we may faithfully comply with our individual 
and national obligations, while at the same time be unrelenting in the 
assertion and recognition of our national rights from the entire world. 
Let us draw a barrier on partisanship at the very point where our 
loyalty to country begins. Let the practices of a true democracy be- 
come a reahty within our country's bounds, in the way exemplified 
by his Hfe. Let us fashion our national character in the high intellec- 
tual and moral pattern designed by him for us. Finally, in foreign 

[119] 



affairs and other matters affecting the whole nation, let the same 
unity of purpose and of action preached and practised in life by our 
departed leader be our guiding rule. Thus, may we fulfill the legacy 
of his great ideals —Ex-Resident Commissioner Francisco Delgado. 

FATHER AND BENEFACTOR 

TRULY he was a great father and benefactor to all of us. As such, 
he may be likened to a man who planted in his orchard, daily 
toiling, caring and watching, until the trees he nurtured so well with 
his every strength, nay with his own very life, were in full bloom. 
Just when he was about to reap the fruits of his labors, fate inter- 
vened and with an unrelenting hand took him away to the Great 
Beyond. We, his children bereft, are left with a great inheritance, 
the fruit of his lifetime's labor— a free Philippines. To him, there- 
fore, we owe the freedom we now enjoy. To him we owe what the 
Philippines is today, the Pearl of the Orient, the leading civilized 
country this side of the East, respected by the world all over. 

— Governor Hilarion R. Yanza of Tayahas 

FUENTE PERENNE DE INSPIRACION 

MANUEL LUIS QUEZON es de los hombres que verdadera- 
mente enoblecen y dignifican a su raza, con el prestigio de su 
cargo y el tesoro de su inteligencia ha sabido, durante el trayecto no 
interrumpido de cuarenta y cuatro anos de su carrera publica, conducir 
la nave de su pueblo hacia los insondables derroteros del progreso 
y la civilizacion. Esta es la razon porque todos nosotros le venera- 
bamos. Esta es la suprema causa y el movil porque el pueblo fihpino, 
desconsolado y triste, pero lleno de gratitud y reconocimiento, llora 
hoy la irreparable perdida causada por su muerte, orando al propio 
tiempo a Dios por su reposo eterno. 

La muerte de Manuel L. Quezon no significa para nosotros el 
completo olvido o destruccion total de lo que fue y de lo que hizo. 
Su vida constituye un libro de hechos y ejecutorias, en donde su 
pueblo podria aprender las sabias ensenanzas que encierra. El 
sello de sus servicios patrioticos que, en vida, prestara a su pais, 



[120] 



Q U E Z O N ME MORIAL COMMITTEE 



en los periodos mas criticos de su existencia nacional, ha quedado 
estampado y grabado para siempre en la mente popular, de tal ma- 
nera que nosotros, los que afortunadamente continuamos en el duro 
bregar de la vida, sabremos aprovecharnos de los frutos de su saber 
y de los sabios principios de filosofia que atesora toda la labor 
maestra que el ha ejecutado, con excepcional habilidad, durante su 
larga y provechosa existencia. 

Habiendo ya dejado el escenario de la vida, Manuel L. Quezon, 
ya entonces no nos es dable resucitarle y llevarle de nuevo al pinaculo 
de su gloria para que nos sirva de consejo y de guia; empero, ante 
la creencia cristiana de todos de que aquel ser, de que aquel hombre 
de imperecedero recuerdo esta hoy gozando de una vida inmortal 
en el seno de su Creador, nos consolamos alegres, puesto que recibi- 
remos de el, determinacion, fortaleza y felicidad; determinacion para 
emular sus virtudes acrisoladas y adoptar el ejemplo de sus mas 
nobles ejecutorias; fortaleza para saber sobrellevar la labor ardua 
que el nos ha dejado y consuelo para convencernos de que podemos 
ir por la senda que el nos ha trazado en la interminable Jornada de 
la vida humana. Verdad es que su vida ejemplar y sus actos como 
padre y redentor de su pais han de constituir una fuente perenne 
de inspiracion para todos sus compatriotas asi como para los extranos, 
tanto en la presente como en las futuras generaciones. — Sixto An- 
tonio, Gohernador Provincial de Rizal. 



THE SUCCESS OF HIS ADMINISTRATION 

THE INTANGIBLE effects of his administration are to my mind 
the most lasting. The morale of our people was strengthened; 
there was a feeling of security and contentment among the masses 
which enhanced their determination to improve themselves rather 
than remain stagnant without hope or chance of ameliorating their 
lot as in the past. As a result of President Quezon's solicitude and 
deep concern for their welfare, their future wellbeing was assured 
and their faith in the government as an agency fortified; fear and 
apprehension on their part were eliminated; suffering was alleviated 
and a feeling of confidence predominated among the common tao. 

We are honoring him now as a sincere friend, as a fearless leader, 
as a true patriot, as a proletariat, as a brave soldier and as the peer 



[121] 



of all Filipino statesmen second to none. As Filipinos, we thrill 
with pride at the thought of his greatness, honored, loved, respected 
and held in high esteem and regard not only by his countrymen, but 
also by our brother Americans across the Pacific. 

— Manuel de la Fuente, President of the Manila Municipal 
Board. 

T) RESIDENTE QUEZON, ngayon ay patay ka na, nguni't buhay ka 
sa puso ng 18,000,000 pilipino na nagmamahal sa iyo. Buhay 
ang iyong mga ginawa at kailan man ay di na namin malilimutan. 
Katulad ni Rizal, Bonifacio, Mabini at iba pang mga bayani, ang iyong 
pangalan ay matititik ng gintong talata sa kanilang mga puso, at ang 
iyong bantayog ang siyang laging magpapagunita sa mga pilipino ng 
isang Quezon na Ama ng katarungang panglipunan na katulad ni 
Lincoln na Ama ng Demokrasya. Mananangis sa harap ng iyong 
bantayog ang mga mahihirap na maaapi, at sasabihin sa kanilang 
sarili na kung si Presidente Quezon ay buhay ang mga kaapihan namin 
ay dagling malulunasan. 

Presidente Quezon, sa iyong pagpanaw ay nawalan kami ng isang 
dakilang lider, ng isang tapat na lider ng lahing kayumanggi. 

— AuRELio S. Intertas, Chairman^ National Commission of Labor 
and Peasants. 

HIS LOVE OF COUNTRY 

TTIS LOVE of country was so great that infirmities, opposition, 
^ noncooperation and other difficulties did not deter him on his 
firm march to independence and prosperity— the goal of his ambi- 
tion for his countrymen, thus exhibiting a power of endurance, for- 
bearance, and patience unheard of in the history of our country. 
These virtues of Manuel L. Quezon were not innate in him but ac- 
quired in the difficult task of serving his people. This vast power 
of endurance, of forbearance, of patience, and performance, is only 
acquired by continued exercise of all the functions, like the healthful 
physical human vigor, like the individual moral vigor. 

— Judge Manuel Camus 



[122] 



QUEZON MEMORIAT. COMMITTEE 



INVOCATION BY MONS. JOSE N. JOVELLANOS AT THE 
NECROLOGICAL SERVICE HELD IN THE HALL 
OF CONGRESS, JULY 28, 1946 

ALMIGHTY and Merciful God, Sovereign Lord of Heaven and 
Earth, Whose Only Begotten Son, through the Blessed Virgin 
Mary became Man for the redemption of Mankind, so that all may 
attain the true life which is "To know Thee One true God and Jesus 
Christ Whom Thou hast sent." 

We, therefore, through Jesus, Our Lord and Redeemer who 
said: "I am the resurrection and the Life; whoever lives and believes 
in Me shall not die forever"; humbly pray Thee, that the soul of Thy 
faithful servant Manuel Luis Quezon may repose in peace, attain 
eternal relief and reach everlasting life. 

In this national mourning and bereavement, here, before the 
mortal remains of our late President, in the presence of High Repre- 
sentatives of Great America, the whole Philippines with its Govern- 
ment and people, all together lift our eyes to Thee; deign to hear our 
prayers, let our cries come unto Thee, for and in behalf of the soul of 
him who during life did so much for his country in spite of numerous 
and unsurmountable trials and difficulties encountered and had strug- 
gled so bravely for its welfare and freedom we now fully enjoy. 

Grant us, oh Lord, that, we may be ever inspired by his loyalty 
and love of country, that we may consecrate all our efforts to attain 
his noble and patriotic ideals; the unity and peace, the welfare and 
happiness of our Phihppine Repubhc which have ever been the 
dreams and ambition of Thy beloved servant 

May the Eternal Light shine upon him and may he, through Thy 
Mercy, rest in peace. Amen. 




FUNERAL ORATION BY THE REV. F. PACIFICO A. ORTIZ, S.J., 
DELIVERED AT THE CHAPEL OF THE UNIVERSITY 
OF SANTO TOMAS, AUGUST 1, 1946 

:i: :|c 

"i have fouffht the good fifihl, I 

have finished the course, I have 

kept the faith:'— 2 Tim. 4, 7. 

TO HIS dying day this was his cherished dream: to come back to 
the PhiUppines and to see her free. He is back with us at 
last — back from his last, his finest mission — back to be gathered to 
us and to our forefathers forever. That he was a patriot and a 
leader, no one can deny. But I am sure I speak for every Filipino 
when I say that in our hearts there is more than mourning for the 
passing of a leader, there is a deep sense of personal loss for the 
passing of a well-loved friend. 

This is the true test of greatness: when people love you, not for 
what you can do for them, but for what you are. President Quezon 
did much for our country, did more perhaps than any other man, 
living or dead. That alone would make him our hero, but it takes 
more than that to make him our friend. It takes more than that to 
make us feel, as we do feel today, a deep sense of personal loss. It 
was the man himself that we loved, the man with a heart so generous, 
so loyal, so forgiving; the man with a spirit so noble, so fearless, so 
magnificent. Not that he possessed no faults or failures. He had a 
human share of them. But he was brave enough to admit it. There 
was nothing sham or shallow about this man. You could see the 
depths of his soul through his eyes, and you knew exactly how you 
stood with him. 

In the shifting world of pohtics, he held fast to a strange code 
of honor. He was consistently attacked by his pohtical opponents. 
He was consistently accused of every sort of crime and failure under 
the sun. He always enjoyed a good fight— but he fought clean. He 
never threw back mud and derision at anyone. He was a plumed 
knight. Such was his regard for his fellowman. 

It was perhaps this trait that made him the undisputed leader 
of his people, this trait which enabled him to make friends of political 
foes, and turn seeming defeat into victory, this trait that united the 
country, as never before, under his leadership. For despite his explo- 
sive temper, there was enough Christian humility in his heart that 
made for meekness, and it is written: ^'The meek shall possess the 



[124] 



Q U EZON MEMO rTTTT pom M I T T E E 



It was surely this trait— his love for his neighbor— that made 
him what he was: the champion of the poor, the friend of the work- 
ingman. No man has ever been blessed with more shining qualities 
of body and mind; no man has ever been showered with more honors 
and distinctions at home and abroad. But this man who walked 
with kings, never lost the common touch; this man whose words were 
listened to in the highest council of nations, never forgot his own 
father's parting words: "Son, be good and just to your fellowman. 
No matter how high your station in life may be, never forget that 
you came from poor parents and that you belong to the poor/' 

Yes, he belonged to the poor. As a young lawyer he started his 
career by defending the poor freely, without charge. As a prosecut- 
ing attorney he protected the poor from the greed of the rich. Later, 
as President of the Commonwealth, he championed their cause — the 
cause of Social Justice. And his crusade for social justice was no 
mere lip-service, no mere vote-getting slogan. It meant action. It 
meant giving the peasants a chance to own a home and a piece of land 
they could call their own. It meant creating economic opportunities 
on the plains of Isabela, in the valleys of Koronadal, and all over the 
land. It meant fighting for a just minimum wage for the laborer. 
It meant preaching the gospel of work and the dignity of labor. It 
meant above all, building up a strong, hard-working middle class, 
and broadening the base of our economic structure — for he was con- 
vinced that no democracy can succeed where the few are too rich, 
while the many are too poor. 

Today we are facing the same old problems. The war has only 
made them worse. But we can still solve them, not the bloody, com- 
munist way, — not the high-handed, socialist way,— but the Christian 
way, the democratic way, the way so nobly raised by our departed 
leader: with mahce toward none, with charity for all; dispensing 
justice to the poor and to the rich alike, to labor and to capital 
alike— but always holding high the battle-cry of the common man— 
''Human rights above property rights." 

He did not hve long enough to give full substance to his dream. 
That too often is the tragic fate of those who blaze the trail. But that 
too is the other test of greatness: whether one's work, one's life-dream 
can survive long after the dreamer is gone. In this sense also, this 
man was great., The noble causes for which he so gallantly spent 
his life: the cause of freedom, of social justice, of equality before the 
law, of devotion to country, this our infant Republic, this our Phihp- 
pines-these things for which he fought so nobly and so well, these 
things will not perish with his remains. They are sparks of his eter- 
nal spirit, and they will light the way for generations yet unborn. 

[ 125 ] 



It is perhaps too early to pass judgment on the full future of 
this man. But I am sure that as generations come and go, and the 
long years loom in perspective, as new men and new leaders rise up 
and walk the stage of history — I am sure there will be two men, 
forever towering above the shifting scene, twin sentinels of our 
destiny, unequalled peaks of Malayan grandeur; Rizal and Quezon. 
Rizal's death made us one, Quezon's spirit made us free. To them 
as to no one else, we owe what we are today — a united nation, a 
free nation. 

As we mourn and pray over his mortal remains, it may be well 
for us to search into the hidden well-springs that made his life so 
rich, so noble, so beneficent. He loved freedom and he fought to 
make his country free. The secret of it all was his deeply christian 
spirit. That is why in his Autobiography, to imperialists who thought 
it was a dangerous experiment to ''shoot'' democracy into the fabric 
of Oriental minds, he could say: ''You overlook the fact that more 
than three hundred years before, the Spaniards did "shoot"' and 
successfully, the Christian religion into the souls of the Filipinos, and 
that Christianity had prepared us for democracy, since Christ's teach- 
ings are indeed the essence of democratic ideals and principles." 

He worked hard, he fought bravely, suffering and disease could 
not hold his spirit down. We wondered from what hidden source 
he drew the strength to face the war. The secret of it all was his 
faith in prayer. "Ask and you shall receive, knock and it shall be 
opened unto you." Doubts often assailed him, and even fear, when- 
ever he had to make the great decisions of his Hfe. So it was when 
he had to leave for Corregidor. So it was when he had to leave for 
Australia. So it was when he had to leave for America. But he 
always triumphed with the strength and the light from above. And 
he was never alone in prayer, there was his wife always, and his 
children — sharers of his joys and of his sorrows unto the end. 

There is a glow as of eternal sunrise about the evening years of 
this man — the glow of Faith recaptured and re-lived. As he served 
Mass in the tunnels of Corregidor and in his chapel in Washington, 
as he received Holy Communion with his wife and children every 
morning, as he prayed the rosary with them when the Hghts were 
low, I wonder if ever for a moment, his mind which knew no rest, 
travelled back to the days of his childhood Memories. 

Memories!— of the boy who left Baler to face life without any- 
thing but the heritage of Faith and the courage of his ancestors. 
Memories!— of the impetuous youth fighting in the hills of Bataan for 



[126] 



Q U E Z O N ME MORIAL COM 



the freedom of his people. Memories!— of the gallant speaker plead- 
ing for his country before the Congress of the United States. Me- 
mories! — of the statesman placed at the helm of the infant Common- 
wealth to chart and guide the destiny of his race . . . These were 
the memories that kept him company as he put up a gallant fight for 
his life. They were no empty memories. They were the warp and 
woof in the fabric of our history. They w^ere the pattern of our age- 
old struggle. A struggle, which as he lay in bed those last fifteen 
months, was still an unfinished dream. That is what made it so hard 
for him! But it is well for us to know that he fought the good fight 
unto the end, and that his last thought was for us. ''Turn on the 
radio," he signalled to his doctor. That morning, over the radio 
came the news that MacArthur had landed on Sansapor, six hundred 
miles from the Philippines. ''Six hundred miles" he famtly, very 
faintly whispered — and for a moment, joy like a dying ember sparkled 
in his eyes. So near and yet so far! It was too much for his old 
heart to bear. He had a hemorrhage — his last. Shortly after, 
without much suffering, comforted with all the Sacraments of the 
Church, he gave up his soul to God. 

Any nation could be proud of such a leader. Any country would 
love to claim him as her own. And he is ours forever!— My Friends, 
as we commit his body to the land which saw his birth and which he 
served so well, let it be with the prayer and the resolve to carry on 
the work to which he devoted his life: social justice, respect for the 
law, national unity. And in his memory, let us strive to bind the 
nation's wounds, let us close ranks behind our newly chosen leader. 




[127] 



ISILENCIO! I PAS A QUEZON . . ! 



For "El Soldado" 



Me cogio las nueve de la manana del primer dia de agosto en el 
boulevard Quezon. En la esquina de Espana y P. Noval, me encuen- 
tro un amigo de la casa Elizalde y me dice que no tenian ohcma aquei 
dia. Era entierro del Presidente Quezon y la casa ordeno a todos sus 
empleados a presenciar el mencionado entierro del gran caudillo 
Filipino . . . 

Charlamos un rato. Faltan pocos minutos para el desfile triste, 
lugubre. Mucha gente se ve en ambos lados de la calle. El sol son- 
reia alia en lo alto, en su jornada a traves de los cielos. La gente no 
hablaba. No comentaba nada. Se miraban en silencio . . . 

— Ya viene, — me dijo el amigo . . . 

Es verdad. En la lejanfa se oia la banda del ejercito entonar una 
marcha funebre. Comienza la procesion. Tristemente, silenciosa- 
mente. La calle se llena mas. No sabemos de donde habia venido 
tanta multitud. Hombres y mujeres. Ancianos y ninos. Y hasta 
los ninos no hablaban. Contemplaban mudamente aquella escena, 
para ellos incomprensible. Miraban a todos, en silencio. Una vieja 
se secaba los ojos. Los ninos padecian . . . 

Pasa la policia montada. Despues soldados, muchos soldados. 
Paso marcial, funerario. Todos en silencio. "Jeeps" cargados de 
ametralladoras. Los Veteranos de la Revolucion, con sus piernas 
temblorosas, paso inseguro. Acompaiiando a su camarada de atano, 
aun quieren ser soldados. Volver a series. Sus pasos vacilan. 
Los heroes de la Revolucion estan cargados de aiios y miserias. Pero 
van orgullosos acompaiiando a su camarada del '96. Ya quedan po- 
cos Veteranos de la Revolucion. La Tierra ya ha reclamado a muchos 
de ellos. Duermen en su ultima mansion . . 

Se aproxima el feretro. Una mujer detras de nosotros se ha 
puesto de rodillas con sus hijas. Elevan una plegaria al Altfsimo 
Lloran, hasta las chicas. No les importaba el lodo de la calle donde 
iban a posar sus rodillas. No miran el carro. Rezan y . lloran 
Llegamos a saber mas tarde que son de Tayabas 

Un ninode unoscinco aiios habla a su padre. iSilencio! iPasa 
Quezon! ... El mno se le queda mirando largo rato como recor- 
dando algo que sabia, algo que habia oido antes . 

Detras del carro, el Presidente Roxa<? In forv,ii; jit-, 
Quezon, McNut., Mu.-phy . otros JZ^t fila tfe^S: 

[128] 



de coches. iAcaba de pasar el entierro del Presidente Manuel Que- 
zon! La preciosa tierra filipina le guardara, le acariciara con ternura. 
La gente vuelve a sus casas tristemente, silenciosamente 

Le oimos al nino de cinco anos preguntar a su padre; 

— ^No ha muerto ya Quezon, papa? ^Por que dices que pasa? 

—Quezon no ha muerto, hijo. Acaba de pasar camino a un 
mundo mejor. Desde alia, seguira guiando los destinos de nuestro 
pueblo, i Quezon no ha muerto! , . . 

Se fueron andando, lentamente, silenciosamente, el padre con su 
hijo . . . 

El nino le mira. Una pregunta muda, misteriosa, se dibujaba 
en su rostro . . . 

— ^Voz DE Manila, 6 de agosto de 1946. 

29824 9 



[129] 



THE RECEPTION AND THE BURIAL 

(A REVIEW) 

UNDER an overcast tropical sky, the United States Aircraft 
Carrier Princeton bearing the remains of the late President 
Manuel L. Quezon, sailed into Manila Bay early in the morning of 
Saturday, July 27. Justice Frank Murphy of the U. S. Supreme 
Court and Col. Manuel Nieto, an old friend of President Quezon, ac- 
companied the body. The arrival was announced by a 21-gun salute. 

In order to insure the appropriate reception and burial of the 
mortal remains of President Quezon, President Manuel Roxas issued 
an administrative order as early as June 8, creating a Committee on 
Arrangements composed of fifteen members. He also issued later two 
proclamations: one declaring a period of national mourning and an- 
other designating four days of solemn memorial services. 

A brief ceremony was held in the afternoon on board the 
Princeton^ attended by high government officials, representatives of 
foreign nations, and members of the Committee on Arrangements. 
Mrs. Quezon and her children, and Teodorico Molina, elder brother 
of President Quezon, were present. 

At about 3: 00 in the afternoon, with the U. S. marines at atten- 
tion, the casket was gently lowered to the ground at Pier 13 (for- 
merly Pier 7). At 3:30 the funeral cortege left the Pier for Mala- 
canan. 

Over a hundred thousand people lined the streets from the wa- 
terfront to Malacanan to see the coffin of the man who, to them, spent 
his life in the struggle for their freedom. Thirty-two planes kept 
roaring overhead as the funeral cortege led by a military escort and 
a platoon of uniformed police moved slowly from the Pier. 

Following the funeral hearse in their respective cars were the 
President and the Vice-President of the Philippines, Justice Frank 
Murphy, Mrs. Quezon and her children, Teodorico Molina, Col. Manuel 
Nieto, ranking officials of the Republic, foreign representatives, and 
members of the Committee on Arrangements led by Ex-Speaker Jose 
Yulo. Representatives of the different departments of the government 
accompanied the funeral hearse as pallbearers. 



[130] 




The cortege arrived at Malacanan at exactly four o'clock. Four- 
teen non-commissioned officers lifted the casket and bore it up to 
a special chapel prepared for the purpose on the east side of the 
Palace. 

Between half past four and half past six ranking officials of the 
Republic and close relatives and friends of Mrs. Quezon paid their 
homage to the President and expressed their condolence to the mem- 
bers of the family. 

High officials and friends of President Quezon including Don Ra- 
mon Avancefia, Don Rafael Alunan, Dr. Jorge Bocobo, Don Vicente 
Singson Encarnacion, Senator Eulogio Rodriguez, Congressman To- 
mas Morato, Ex-Speaker Jose Yulo, Don Claro M. Recto and others 
took turns of two hours each watching the body through the night. 

Justice Murphy was guest of President Roxas during all the 
time the body was lying in state in the Palace. 

With Mons. Jose N. Jovellanos officiating, a low mass was celeb- 
rated at eight in the morning of July 28 at the special chapel, atten- 
ded by hundreds of high officials, foreign representatives, and 
relatives and friends of Mrs. Quezon. 

At 9:30 the remains were transferred to the session hall of 
Congress at Lepanto. Accompanying the funeral cortege as pall- 
bearers were members of the Senate and House and members of the 
Committee on Arrangements. 

Shortly before eleven the funeral cortege arrived at the Congress 
Building as thousands jammed the neighborhood to get a glimpse 
of the coffin. From eleven in the morning until one in the afternoon 
thousands and thousands of people from all walks of life streamed into 
the session hall of Congress to pay homage to the departed Chief. 

The popular homage was followed at three by a necrological 
service before a joint session of the Senate and House. Attending 
were high officials of the Government, foreign representatives, and 
relatives and friends of Mrs. Quezon. Orations were delivered by 
President Manuel Roxas, Justice Frank Murphy, Senator Jesus 
Cuenco, Senator Carlos P. Garcia, and Congressman Raul T. Leuterio. 
Mons. Jose N. Jovellanos delivered the invocation. A message from 
General of the Army Douglas MacArthur was read during the 
service. 



[131] 



There was popular homage again from five in the evening until 
seven the next morning. Throughout the night members of the 
Senate and the House took turns, watching the body as it lay in state 
in the session hall. 

At seven in the morning of July 29 the remains were transferred 
to the University of Santo Tomas Chapel. The people of Tayabas 
and the civic organizations of Manila took charge of the funeral 
cortege. With Rev. F. George Willmann, S. J., officiating, a high 
mass was celebrated at nine. 

A necrological service under the auspices of the Province of Ta- 
yabas was held at three o'clock. The speakers were Mr. Claro M. 
Recto and Governor Hilarion Yanza. The service was attended 
largely by the people of Tayabas. High officials of the Republic, 
foreign representatives, and relatives and friends of Mrs. Quezon were 
present. 

There was popular homage that day from ten thirty in the morn- 
ing until one in the afternoon and from five in the afternoon until 
midnight. Relatives and friends of Mrs. Quezon from Tayabas kept 
the vigil through the night. 

With Mons. Vicente Fernandez officiating, a high mass was cel- 
ebrated at the Chapel at eight in the morning of July 30. 

A necrological service was held at three in the afternoon under 
the auspices of the City of Manila, Province of Rizal, and other pro- 
vincial delegations. The speakers were Mayor Valeriano Fugoso, 
Governor Sixto Antonio of Rizal, and Mr. Manuel de la Fuente^ 
President of the Manila Municipal Board. 

There was popular homage that day from ten in the morning 
until one in the afternoon and from five in the afternoon until mid- 
night. Government officials of Manila, Rizal, and other provinces 
kept the vigil through the night. 

With Rev. Fr. Juan Ortega officiating, a high mass was celebrated 
at the Chapel at eight in the morning of July 31. 

At three o'clock a necrological service was held at the Chapel 
under the auspices of the government employees, labor, civic women's 
veteran's organizations, schools and colleges. The speakers were 
Vice-President Elpidio Quirino, Judge Francisco Delgado, Judge Ma- 
nuel Camus, and Mr. Aurelio Intertas. 



[ 132 ] 



QUEZON ME MORIAL COMMITTEE 



There was popular homage, for the last time, from ten thirty in 
the morning until one in the afternoon and from five in the afternoon 
until midnight. The vigil was kept by government employees and 
members of civic organizations. 

A large number of wreaths including one from the President of 
the United States were received at the Chapel. 

With H. E. Mons. G. Piani officiating, a pontifical mass was 
celebrated at eight. High officials of the Republic and representa- 
tives of foreign nations attended this last mass for the late President 
Manuel L. Quezon. The Chapel was packed to capacity. Hundreds 
insisted on entering as early as seven o'clock. The sermon was 
delivered by the Rev. F. Pacifico Ortiz, S. J. 

At ten the funeral cortege led by eleven motorcycle cops and a 
military escort left the University of Santo Tomas for the North Ce- 
metery. It was a bright August morning. Ranking officials of the 
Republic, foreign representatives, members of the bar, members of 
the press, veterans of the revolution, Philippine Army officers, com- 
manders of guerrilla organizations, the family physicians, and relatives 
and friends of Mrs. Quezon joined the funeral cortege as pallbearers. 
Hundreds of thousands of people lined both sides of the streets on 
Espana, Quezon Avenue, Azcarraga, Rizal Avenue, and Blumentritt to 
watch the funeral procession. 

The cortege reached the North Cemetery at about half past eleven. 
A large crowd was already at hand, gradually closing in on the mau- 
soleum from all directions as soon as the Caisson drawn by a hundred 
Filipino soldiers was approaching the Quezon lot. When the cere- 
monies were about to begin the skies darkened and a gentle rain fell 
from the Heaven above. 

Close to the grave with the bereaved family were President and 
Mrs Manuel Roxas, Vice-President Elpidio Quirino, Senate President 
and Mrs Jose Avelino, Speaker and Mrs. Eugenio Perez, Justice 
Frank Murphy, Ambassador Paul V. McNutt, Chief Justice Manuel 
Moran Ex-Governor General Francis Burton Harrison, Ex-Speaker 
and Mrs Jose Yulo, Colonel Manuel Nieto, General Rafael Jalandoni, 
Congressman Tomas Morato, Dr. Antonio G. Sison, and many others. 



[133] 



Before the tomb was sealed Mrs. Quezon, Maria Aurora, Zenaida, 
Nonong, and Teodorico Molina, laid flowers on the black casket. 
Mrs. Quezon stood up admirably under the strain, but Mr. Molina 
clung to the casket and had to be led away. 

Bishop Mariano Madriaga officiated in the last rites. There was 
deep silence as he intoned in Latin the prayers that accompanied the 
commitment to the earth of all that was earthly of Manuel L. Quezon. 

'1 am the Resurrection and the Life." 

The huge crowd around kept pressing to get a view of the soul- 
stirring event. 

''Who believes in Me, even though he is dead, will live, and all 
who live and believe in Me will not die forever." 

Three army planes flew over the cemetery and showered flowers 
on the spot. 

The Philippine Army Band played ''Nearer My God to Thee." 

A solemn benediction was administered by Bishop Madriaga. 

Four ruffles and four flourishes and then the National Anthem. 

After a 21-gun salute and three farewell shots, the casket 
was gently pushed into the crypt to the mournful sound of taps. 

It was moments before twelve. A great and beloved Man had 
returned to the Earth. — Filemon Poblador. 




[134] 



A REVIEW OF PRESIDENT QUEZON'S CONTRIBUTION 
TO ALLIED WAR EFFORT 



By Harry W. Frantz 
United Press Stajf Correspondent 



Washington — (UP) 

The late President Manuel L. Quezon of the Philippine Common- 
wealth, gave brilliant political aid to the United Nations before his 
death at Saranac Lake, N. Y., on August 1, 1944. 

As head of a government-in-exile at Washington during more 
than two war years, and as an intimate friend of the late President 
Roosevelt, the leader of the Filipino people was a frequent vehicle for 
fraternal statements or policy expressions helpful to the Allied cause. 

The Office of War Information and the Office of Inter-American 
Affairs frequently carried these statements by President Quezon on 
major political development, and his world-wide recognition as de- 
mocratic leader of a fighting small nation gave his expressions primary 
international importance. 

Scarcely one month after his arrival in Washington, the Philip- 
pine Commonwealth on June 24, 1942, signed the declaration of the 
United Nations. A few weeks later President Quezon became a mem- 
ber of the Pacific War Council. These steps meant to the world that 
the United States intended to fulfill its independence pledge, and sym- 
bolized this country's role as a champion of small and relatively de- 
fenseless nations. 

President Quezon's addresses and press statements, often pre- 
pared with high official collaboration, were broadcast to every country 
on the globe. Collectively, they served not only the war mterest of 
the Allies, but prepared world opinion for the establishment of the 
Philippine Republic, which actually became fact on July 4, 194b. 

Ready today, the messages reveal accurate Prophecies of the lib- 
eration of the Philippines, the defeat of J/P^-'/^^Vfc;/^^^^^^^^^^^ 
the United Nations and the fulfillment of the United States pledge 

of Philippine independence. 



[ 135 ] 



On May 19, 1942, President Quezon spoke to the South American 
republics from New York. RecalUng that the Phihppines had once 
shared the lot of the Latin American peoples as a province of Spain, 
he said: 

'1 am immensely grateful to learn that all the sister republics of 
this hemisphere have agreed to discuss and plan a program of common 
defense. I am confident that, if the Americans can maintain the true 
cause of democracy, all liberty-loving nations, sooner or later, will not 
only overcome the foreign yoke of oppression but will also enjoy peace 
thereafter." 

At the time when the world was electrified by the announcement 
of the Casablanca conference between President Roosevelt and Prime 
Minister Churchill, President Quezon stated: 

''As head of the government of the Philippines, and as a Filipino, 
I want to express both my admiration for the courage shown by Pres- 
ident Roosevelt and my eternal gratitude for what he has accom- 
plished. I feel certain that the liberation of my people is not far 
away. All of the enslaved nations must now feel that the hour for 
their redemption has struck." 

On November 9, 1943, President Quezon hailed the Moscow an- 
nouncement of a four-power pact as a recognition that the small na- 
tions would have a right to be heard when peace was declared. 

''The pact," he said, "is more than a pledge to win the war, and 
win it in a total way. It is a formal commitment of the leader-nations 
in the fight for freedom and democracy to see to it that after the war 
shall have been won, their strength and power will not be used for 
their own aggrandizement but to give security to a peace in which 
the large nations as well as the small nations will respect the principles 
of sovereign equality." 

Commenting on the Teheran conference. President Quezon said 
on December 6, 1943, "Germany and Japan will both be crushed and 
reduced to impotence, so they may never again disturb the peace of 
the world." 

"The peace that will follow will be enduring. The new world 
will be constituted by a world family of democratic nations— large 
and small alike-where tyranny and slavery, oppression and intoler- 
ance will have no place. For such world the sacrifices of all liberty- 
lovmg peoples will not have been in vain." 



[136] 



PqXe ZQN MEMOR I a L CO M M I T T E E 



President Quezon, on the occasion of the Austrahan Foundation 
Day, January 26, 1944, praised the reciprocal miUtary aid of the Phil- 
ippines, and the Southern Commonwealth during the war. *'This 
has shown that Austraha and the Philippines have sacred interests in 
common. I hope and confidently expect that these two democracies, 
Australia and the Philippines, will in the future coopei^ate with one 
another for the preservation of their liberties and the welfare of their 
peoples." 

On February 24, 1944, President Quezon in a broadcast to the 
Filipino people said: "The United Nations are defeating the enemies 
of freedom in every quarter of the globe. The day of justice and 
real Philippine Independence is drawing nearer. Keep your courage 
and faith. The United States of America will make good her pledge 
to establish and recognize the Philippine Republic." 

One of the last messages of President Quezon was that sent to 
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek on July 7, 1944, three weeks before 
Quezon's death: ''As China enters its eighth year of unwavering re- 
sistance against Japan the world must not forget that it was the 
Chinese people who seven years ago pioneered in the fight for demo- 
cracy against totalitarianism," he said. 

''Your courage and determination have made up for what you 
lacked in armed power and yours is a struggle for human freedom 
that will go down in history as one of the noblest exemplifications of 
a nation's unbending will against tyranny and oppression." 

"As the forces of liberation continue advancing everywhere, it is 
my hope, and I am sure it is that of all lovers of freedom, that your 
arms may soon achieve that victory which the brave Chinese people 
so rightly deserve."— The Evening News, July 27, 1946. 



[137] 



Pot Jesus Balmori 



Dios rompio el sexto sello con su mano sagrada 

Y aparto de la tierra su mirada de amor! 
Filipinas herida, madre miestra adorada, 
Santo caliz de sangre, fastigio de dolor. 
Para tu seno traen una caja luctuosa 

Los hombros de la gloria, las alas de la paz; 
Patria mia, arrodi'llate! En esa urna gloriosa 
Manuel Quezon reposa para siempre jamas! 
Manuel Quezon! La raza vuestros restos venera 
De su templo divino ante el gran facistol, 
Que el hablar a vuestra alma es alzar la bandera 
Mas alia de las nubes y mas alta que el sol! 
Escuchad, Manuel Quezon! La vida es transitoria 

Y el corazon del hombre se cansa de latir; 
Pero queda la patria, pero queda la historia 

Y en la historia y la patria nunca podreis morir! 
Estareis en la espiga de nuestro arroz primero, 
Estareis en las redes que se tiendan al mar, 
Estareis en la espada que se cilia el guerrero, 
Estareis en la citara con que canta el juglar, 

En el codigo indio de nuestro honor f astuoso. 
En el bianco rosario de sampagas en cruz, 
En el yunque encendido, en el telar ruidoso, 

Y en los dfas de fuego y en las noches de luz. 
En la ley libertaria que el destino nos traza 

Y en la oracion que alzamos cada maiiana a Dios! 
Vos estareis en todo, Caudillo de la raza, 

Porque todos nosotros estaremos con vos! 
Alma donde tejieron las tortolas sus nidos, 
Corazon perfumado con inciensos de Eden, 
Perdono al miserable, levanto a los caidos 

Y pudiendo hacer mal, solo supo hacer bien! 

Fue amado en las cabanas, ungido en los palacios 
Vi6 a su paso rendida ante el la humanidad, 

Y se jugo la vida subiendo a los espacios 
Para encender la estrella de nuestra libertad» 
Senor, dormid en paz! El cielo se colora 

Y al fin anuncia el dia tras negra cerrazon^ 
Filipinas caida de rodillas os llora, 

Y en lugar de su cruz, os da su corazon! 

— Voz DE Manila, 27 de jidio de 1946. 



[138] 




QUEZON MEMOR I A L CO M M I T T E E 



,4 



Cuando nos dejaste ayer 
tu patria estaba oprimida; 
mas fulguraba tu vida 
en medio del padecer. 

Pero jay! ahora al volver 
a esta tierra redimida, 
tu la encuentras dolor ida: 
iPerdio al Hi jo de Baler! 

No importa vengas inerte, 
destruida tu humana escoria. 
Te vencio, es verdad, la muerte 
mas fue breve su victoria. 
En tu pueblo, hoy libre y fuerte, 
vives con eterna gloria. 

— Emeterio Barcelon y Barcelo 
Manila, 28 de Julio de 1946. 



[139] 



Manual ICms (^nnon 



:i: 

He is not dead. 

I saw him only yesterday. 

Feet braced, brows bristling, looped in the eternal human question. 
He was always asking, always seeking. 
So I saw him, only yesterday. 

November gales, out of the sunflecked east that morning — 
(It could not have been much before yesterday) — 
Whipped his unruly hair. 

He waved and called to the window where we stood. 
High on a rise on Diliman. 

(Soon we again looked out — looking south. 

(Where oil-smoke columns reared skyward — and down to their re- 
flection in the Bay. 

(Looked up, where white death droned contemptuous. 

(Looked up where black smoke-puffs spread and faded futilely.) 

He can't be dead. 

Why, only yesterday he talked to me. 
Slight frame relaxed in brocaded chair. 

As always he talked, and questioned, and was so eager to tell and 
hear. 

And the restless hand plunged through unruly locks. 
And brows bristled and looped straightened 

As under them the eyes sought the answer to the eternal question. 
The question is not answered. So, 
He can't be dead. 

Why, I saw him, only yesterday. 

— Anonymous 

The Sunday Times, Juhj 28, 1946. 



[140] 



Q U EZON ME MORIAL COM M I T T E E 



3n iHlemoriam 



MANUEL L. QUEZON 

1878-1944 

YOU are not dead, 

not dead: 

for in the hearts 

of your people 

your memory 

will live 

forever ! 

Buried deep 

in our hearts 

will your noble name 

cjver whisper the meaning 

of your sacrifices 

for us whom Destiny 

ordained to honor 

O forever! 

O you whom Liberty 
remembers well 
we too, shall remember: 
remember gloriously 
who fought so bravely 
for freedom more . . . 

And while cold death 

had claimed your being 

from our anxious years, 

our memory of you 

shall always triumph 

for this Republic 

than whom few men like you, 

as Lapu-Lapu to Rizal, 

gave all to Liberty 

that we might live... 

And so: 

you are not dead, 

not dead! 

For in the hearts 

of your people 

shall live forever 

your ardent patriotism 

for God and Country! 



Manila, August 1, 1946. 



— C. M. Vega 



[141] 



fQ?adre y Schor! 



Padre y Sefior de nuestras heredades, 
que, dando al brazo maestria y tino, 
incrustaste en el dombo filipino 
tres estrellas y un sol de libertades! 

Paseaste, entre turbas y ciudades, 
tu labaro de ley; y en el camino 
fundaste una nacion, con un destino 
que pondra luz y envidia en las edades. 

Numen y voz en la amplitud asiatica, 

cultivaste la predica y la platica 

que hasta America oyo ... Y fue tu suerte, 

granadas tus quimeras intranquilas, 
entrar en los recintos de la muerte, 
cuajando Dios y Patria en las pupilas. 

— M. Bernabe 

Agosto 13, 1946. 



[142] 



i 



ij QUEZON ME MORIAL COMMITTEE 



T 



^ ^ ^ 



PAMBUNGAD 

Sa mabangong bulaklakan ng bayan mong sakdal dilag 
Angaw-angaw naming puso'y angaw-angaw na bulaklak 
Ng gunitang tuhug-tuhog, sama-sama't kwintas-kwintas, 
Na sa harap ng bangkay mo'y malungkot na nakahiyas; 
At sa lilim ng bandilang sa luha ay natitigmak . . . 
Itong Mutya ng Silanga'y luksang-luksa't umiiyak. 

Masdan ninyo ang panahon . . . lumulungoy . . . umiiulan 
Kagaya rin natin ngayong sakbibi ng pagdaramdam; 
Ito'y saksing magmula sa lumuluhang kalangitan . . . 
Sa iyo'y iwiniwisik ang bendiia ng Maykapal! 

I 

ANG BAYAN SA PANGULONG QUEZON 
Di ka namin malilimot . . . O Pangulong Manuel Quezon 
Pagka't ikaw ang kadluan ng dakilang mga layong 
Sa noo ng Inang Baya'y makita mong nakaputong 
Ang korona ng paglaya't ganap napagkakasulong. 
Ang lahat ng pangarap mo ay lubos nang katuparan 
Pagka't ngayon ang bayan mo'y may ganap na kalayaan; 
Sa lipunang pandaigdig . . . may sarili ng lukluka't 
May laya nang magsalita . . . tumutol at mangatwiran. 
Ang bandila ng bayan mo'y nag-iisa nang bandilang 
Mapalalong lumilipad sa sarili nating lupa; 
Sa harap ng sanlibuta'y matigas na nagwiwikang 
Sa bundok ng mga bangkay . . . sumilang ang ating laya! 
Nguni't ngayo'y naririya't lumuluhang nagtatanod 
Ang bandila ng paglayang sa bangkay mo'y nakabalot; 
Sa himlayang Inang Lupang sakdal bango sa pag-irog . . . 
Bandila rin natin iyan ang sa iyo'y ikukumot. 

II 

ANG PANGULO SA PAGGAWA AT PUHUNAN 

Hindi ka na magmamaliw sa aming diwa't alala 
Pagka't ikaw ang timbulan sa ligalig ng balana; 
Sa lahat ng habilin mo'y handa kaming tumalima't 
Sa daigdfg ng paggawa'y kikilanling bathala ka. 

[143] 



Sinabi mong sa digmaan ng Paggawa at Puhunan . . . 
Karapatang makatao y kailangang magtagumpay; 
Nasa bayang manggagawang maligayang nabubuhay 
Ang susi ng mapayapa't maayos na pamamayan. 

Bawa't dukhang magbubukid ay dapat na magkaroon 
Ng sariling mabubungkal na lupai't isang bubong; 
Ang malawak na asyenda ng palalong panginoon . . . 
Ay dapat nang bahagini't ipamudmod na sa ngayon. 

Nguni't ikaw ay kalaban ng pulaha't komunismo 
Pagka't dito y walang gutom at tayo ay hindi ruso; 
Ang lupamg walang Diyos ni Stalin ay impyernong 
Susunog sa kabuhaya't kaluluwang pilipino. 

Palibhasa'y sumilang ka sa kandungan ng dalita, 
Kay a laging minahal mo ang api at mga duklia; 
Sa salamm ng buhay mo'y itinuro mo sa madlang 
Ang pulubi y maaaring magmg Punong maharlika. 

Sa hangad mong ang paggawa'y dakilai't mapataas . . . 
Karapatan ng paggawa'y itinindig mo sa batas; 
Mga titik ng diwa mo . . . pag binago at kinaltas . . . 
Ang bayan mong manggagawa y nahahandang mangautas. 

Palibhasa, ikaw y isang tanging amang mapagmahal, 

Ang Puhuna'y di mo nais na mamatay kailanman; 

Sa bayan ng Demokrasya y tinungkol mong iwagayway . . 

Bandila ng simulaing ang lahat ay pantay-pantay. 

Ang Puhunang walang imbot at sa tubo'y di masakim . . . 
Sa aral mo y nararapat na buhayi't paunlarm; 
Subali't ang mga linta't dambuhalang mga pating 
Ay marapat na iligpit . . . parusahan at patayin. 

HULING GUNITA 

Kaya ngayon . . . kaming lahat sa harap ng iyong bangkay 

Sama-samang naririto't sama-samang nagbabantay; 

Sa diwa at alaala ay hindi ka mamamatay ... 

At hindi ka malilimot sa ngayon at kailanman; 

Sa malumbay na tugtugi't sa plegaryang malulumbay . 

Puso nami'y nananaghoy . . . dibdib nami y nagigimbaP 

Sa patak ng mga luha at ilaw na mapapanglaw, 

Lahat kami y mapayapa't taimtim na nagdarasal 

At sa harap ni Bathala y hinihinging walang humpiy* 

Na iakyat ka sa Langit ng Ligayang walang hanggan. 

lka-31 ng Huhjo. 1946. "Bawazah M. Villanueva 



[144] 



STquezon memoriat. c O M M I t 



Mula sa malayo, sa dako pa roon, sa ibayong dagat, 
Sa silong ng langit ng ibang lupain, ikaw ay nalagas; 
Sa sinapupunan ng di mo sariling baya'y napalagak; 
Hilling gunita mo't mga alaala . . . pagkasaklapsaklapl 
Malayo sa bubong ng sinilangan mong Baler sa Tayabas; 
Gayon din sa mutyang pinakaiibig: Inang Pilipinas! 

Naglakbay kang dala sa puso't damdamin ang isang pag-ibig, 
Sa kadakilaan ng mga mithiing pinapanaginip. 
Nilisan mo kaming puspos ng pag-asang walang kahiililip, 
At inasam naming Hindi malalao't sa iyong pagbalik, 
Taglciy mo sa kamay ang buong tagumpay na pinakanais; 
Nguni't sawing palad! Noong magbalik ka'y bangkay nang malamig! 

Pagkakingkotlungkot ng pagbabalik mo sa sariling bayan, 
Lalo't magunitang linisan mo kaming pnno ka ng buhay, 
Tandang-tanda ko pang wari'y kakahapon lamang na nagdaan 
Na ikaw ang aming maningning na sulo at tanging patnubay; 
Nguni't sawing palad! bangkay nang malamig nang ikaw'y dumatal, 
Kaya't kami nama'y may luha sa mata't sa puso'y may damdam. 

Sa pagkawala mo'y kasamang naparam sa aming pangmalas 
Ang isang bituing parating patnubay sa aming paglakad; 
Sa pagkamatay mo kami'y nangulila sa giting mong hawak 
Na sa aming dusa'y pang-aliw, sa hina'y isang pampalakas; 
Katulad ng araw sa katanghalia'y naglaho kang ganap, 
Binawi ng langit sa aming paningin ang iyong liwanag. 

Namatay ka, oo, linisan mo kami sa lupang ibabaw 
At bumalik ka na't umuwi sa WALA na pinanggalingan; 
Nguni't asahan mong Hindi malilimot ang iyong pangalan, 
Isusulat namin ng titik na ginto sa aklat ng buHay 
Ang laHat ng iyong mga simulain at kabayanihan, 
Mga alaalang pangHabang panaHon, walang kamatayan! 

At diyan sa puntod na kinaHimlayang malamig na lupa 
Ng maHal mong bangkay, inilagak nami'y masaganang luHa, 
Lakip ang dalanging taimtim sa puso sa Foong Bathala 
Na ang kalulwa mo, dakilang Bayani'y bigyan ng biyaya, 
Pagpalain Niya ikaw na nagsakit sa ikalalaya 
Nitong Pilipinas na sinilangan mo . . . Bayang minumutya! 

— FRANCISCA LAUREL 

Meykawayan, Bidakdn, Pilipinas 

29821- 10 



[145] 



(Ebttorlal ^ppraisalg 



MANUEL LUIS QUEZON 

He has truly died, but his memory is eternally emblazoned in the 
hearts and minds of his countrymen. 

President Manuel L. Quezon left the shores of the Philippines in 
the early days of February, 1942, more than two months after the 
Japanese overran the country, and sought refuge under the protec- 
tion of the United States to continue battling the enemy until final 
victory would be won. 

He left hale and hearty. His spirits were high. He was already 
ill, but his courage to vanquish the enemy in the end was indomit- 
able. He was very much alive and hopeful. 

He knew that the United States and her allies would finally come 
out victorious in the titanic conflict. 

The American people and government did not fail him. They 
came back and liberated the Filipinos from the brutal enemy. 

His people did not also fail him. They refused to yield to prompt- 
ings of the enemy either by persuasion or by violence. 

They kept their courage high and fought back whenever an op- 
portunity presented itself. 

The Filipinos were even more spirited in their resistance to the 
enemy when they could hear their leader through underground 
sources urging to keep faith with the United States and to continue 
fighting, for America will come back to liberate them. 

His war efforts did not fail. He ahnost came within seeing with 
his own eyes the liberation of his embattled people. 

But the Grim Reaper overtook him and in the fight that ensued 
he lost. 

Today, President Quezon retm-ned to his beloved country a life- 
less form. Only his worthy remains were left to be honored by his 
loving people. 

A grateful people welcome him. in the same spirit, although sub- 
dued, as if he were coming alive with new conquests for his people 
as in the days gone by. 

He is loved by his people, for they are conscious that whatever 
they enjoy now in the matter of social, political and cultural pro- 



[146] 



QUEZO N 



gress, has been largely due to the efforts of one of the greatest Fili- 
pmos that ever hved-Manuel L. Quezon.-THE Evening Herald. 
Saturday, July 27, 1946. 

* * 

MANUEL LUIS QUEZON 

The body that once upon a time housed the magnificent per- 
sonahty of Manuel Luis Quezon arrives today, but the restless, 
fighting spnut that animated it is forever gone to join the rest of the 
Immortals. 

It was bitter enough that Quezon died before he witnessed the 
liberation of his people from the invader's yoke; it was bitterer still 
that he died on alien soil. The tragic circumstances attending his 
demise, the picture of an extremely sick man valiantly struggling for 
a Httle time within which to survive so that he might be able to re- 
turn to the land of his birth, recall the last moments of Plaridel and 
Lopez- Jaena who died miserably far from the fatherland they so 
ardently loved and before the freedom for which they heroically 
worked was achieved. 

The nation has reason to lament Quezon's death. That he had 
failings cannot be denied; that during his lifetime he now and then 
committed acts which should never had been done at all may be 
conceded; but all these defects are now interred with his bones. Of 
him, as of other distinguished dead let only the good be said: ''de- 
mortuis nil nisi bonum." 

In the closing years of his life he tried his best to be of real 
service to the country. His actions were not those of a politician 
but of a statesman unselfishly dedicating himself to the common 
weal. 

His political influence is not ended. The present President was 
his protege. It is said of Jefferson's power that he practically in- 
fluenced the election of Madison, Monroe and Jackson as presidents. 
The same might be said of Quezon. Many voted for Manuel Roxas 
y Acuna because they felt that if Quezon had been alive, Roxas would 
be his choice for President. The crop of politicians now ruling the 
country are Quezon men. 

Over his true worth, over the greatness of his achievements, his- 
torians might differ. The passage of time will supply the proper 
perspective for the evaluation of his merits. 

But the interesting figure of the humble Baler boy born during 
the last quarter of the 19th century, who rose to become the colorful 
leader of his people, will always remain in the hearts of his country- 
men.— The Manila Post, Saturday, July 27, 1946. 

[147] 





jLP RIAL COMMITTEE ^ 



r 



I 



'1 * 



THE RETURN OF THE LEADER 

A great man comes home today. 

The good that Manuel L. Quezon has done will live forever 
after him. 

Leader of the Filipinos during the crucial ordeal through which J 
we won forever our right to freedom in peace and in war, Quezon ] 
returns on his shield as the Spartan. He returns to a free land to ! 
rest in peace in native soil. 

Quezon was a human genius. He never professed to have been ^ 

a god. That is why he fought, suffered, defied power and even re- | 

peatedly lost his temper in quest of the realization of his great com- [ 

mon passion with every Filipino to see his country free and his ^\ 

people happy. ] 

Quezon like his people was a man of peace although he had to :| 
be a soldier as his people has to be soldiers to defend and fight for | 
their rightful heritage. r 

Quezon was the leader of the Filipinos in a noble experiment to- 

gether with America which has proved to the world that a people |f 

can win national independence in peace and with good will. But it rf 

has been written that the price of liberty is blood. Destiny demanded i 

the sacrifice of Filipino blood for freedom. :\ 

Blood was drawn by an outsider who invaded our land, killed ^ 
our people, and sought to frustrate the noble experiment. The price I 
of freedom was tremendous, indeed, but we paid it. Today victory [ 
is ours not only because we fought for it with all our might, but i 
more so because we deserve it. | 

The patriots who remained in the Philippines during the holocaust | 
of the occupation never lost faith in redemption because they knew |r 
that while they were fighting the enemy within, from our ramparts j| 
across the seas our chosen leader would bring back the arms and the f! 
might of our great Ally to lift the siege that the enemy laid for three {| 
years on our land. It was a siege because the Filipinos were merely | 
imprisoned, never defeated. Within the four walls the enemy 
raised around their very homes Filipinos fought on ceaselessly. 

After the tide of victory rolled back across the Pacific to Leyte 
the enemy was crushed easily because he was harassed everywhere 
and anywhere, on the fronts and in his rear lines. 

The Philippines won the last battle for freedom. Today she dou- 
bly deserves liberty because our Republic is the fruit of both peace 
and war. The noble experiment was completed successfully on 
schedule. 

[149] 



Today, every Filipino will weep as the gallant leader returns m 
a coffin, but in sorrow there shall also be joy. After all, men cannot 
live forever and even in death there is no greater glory than ful- 
fillment, no greater happiness than homecoming. Thus it is with 
Quezon. A whole nation bows in tribute to a man who has done 
so much to help his country and his people keep an appointment 
with destiny. 

Even in life, Quezon already belonged among the great. In 
death he belongs among the immortals. — The Manila Chronicle, 
Saturday y July 27, 1946, 

❖ i\' ❖ 

HOME TO REST 

As it happened so many times during his life, the return today 
of the late President Manuel L. Quezon to the shores of his beloved 
homeland has about it, despite the sadness of the occasion, an air 
of triumph. 

The manner of his return this time is a gesture of tribute to the 
man Quezon and to his country. In a great American warship and 
accompanied by his good friend in life. Justice Frank Murphy, the 
mortal remains of Mr. Quezon have been carried in honor and dig- 
nity across the Pacific Ocean to bring even closer together the place 
of his birth and the place of his death. 

Few men have ever been so honored. 

No man, living or dead, ever received the spontaneous acclaim 
of the Filipino people that Mr. Quezon received during his lifetime. 
This was especially marked on the many occasions he has come 
back from a journey to the United States, usually with some new 
grant or favor he had obtained for his people in Washington. 

Those were happy occasions, both for the people who crowded 
the piers to greet him and cheered his arrival until they were hoarse, 
and for their leader of forty years. This is not a happy occasion 
today, but in the sorrow that attends the loss of a man loved by his 
people there is room for pride. 

For it cannot be forgotten that during the forty years Manuel 
Quezon was the political leader of the Phihppines, this countiy made 
greater progress in less time than any nation has done in modern 
history.— Manila Daily Bulletin — Saturday, July 27, 1946. 



[ 150 ] 




1 QUEZO N 




THE WARRIOR RETURNS 

u , '{'^^ ;^^^^NS of Manuel Luis Quezon has returned to a country 
but the shadow of the nation in arms he left seemingly ages ago late 
m December, 1941 It has truly been said that he was the Philip- 
pines greatest casualty in the war. If a nation may be a war casualty, 
the Phihppmes is also one. It is perhaps in the nature of destiny 
that Quezon and his motherland should have shared a common fate. 
For, in many ways, Quezon was the Philippines of his time and era. 

Quezon was essentially a warrior, and a great warrior dies fight- 
ing for his country. He first entered the public service as a frontline 
soldier. It was in Bataan as commander-in-chief of his nation's armed 
forces that he made his last against the Japanese. When he left 
Bataan in 1901 it was to come to Manila and help in the making of 
a new Philippines in accordance with America's democratic pattern. 
When he left Bataan and Corregidor in 1942, it was to go to the 
United States to hasten the American effort that would eventually 
liberate his nation. In both tasks he succeeded mightily but he 
died in the difficult performance of the latter. 

During his last fateful years he had indeed more than one enemy 
to fight. Yet he conquered them all except one — tuberculosis. 
Japan invaded and occupied his country. England, through her 
equally magnetic and persuasive Churchill, had committed the United 
States to the proposition that, before all else, England must be saved. 
In the over-all strategy of the Pacific War, the rescue of the Filipino 
people was an insignificant consideration. But in the end Japan 
was brought down to its knees, the Pacific war prosecuted with vigor 
along with the European, and, instead of being by-passed, the Philip- 
pines was explicitly liberated. In his arduous struggle to accompHsh 
all this, he taxed his energy and vitality to exhaustion and laid him- 
self open to the ceaseless onslaught of his old and insidious personal 
enemy. He died on August 1, 1944, away from the country he lived 
to preserve, at a time when it was in the possession of the enemy, 
but also knowing that that enemy's days were definitely numbered. 

Now the warrior is back. It has been everybody's lament that 
he has not lived to lend his wisdom and his strength to the difficult 
and often heart-breaking postwar problems of his people. But it is 
thus that nations grow and outlive the men who help to found them. 
Its leaders pass away along with the epochs that bear the impress 
of their unforgetable personalities, but their deeds live and their 
inspiration and traditions continue to guide their successors in re- 
sponsibility It has been a stunning blow to lose the genius and the 
inspiration of his leadership in this crucial moment of launching a 
new repubhc. Yet, in a way, he had completed his task. 

[151] 




[ 152 ] 



QUEZON M f'¥^5'^^L COMMITTEE 



Under the American regime, Quezon, with Osmena, drew up i 

the pattern of the Repubhc. More than an architect he was himself i 

the builder. Step by step from the Philippine Act of 1902, through f 

the Jones Law, and lastly under the Tydings-McDuffie Act, he shaped [ 

the republic-to-be with his own genius and inspiration. The historic ' 

event of July 4th last not only had been in his blueprint but the | 

nation launched had been reared by him from babe to full-grown • 

maturity. j 

To history we may safely leave the proper appraisal of this man 
at its full measure, confident in our knowledge that his greatest work ^ 
was done. The counti-y, our people and even his bereaved family t 
should not lament that, having lived a px'odigious life, he has gone : 
at last to rest. He sleeps, we feel certain, the peace of full accom- 
plishment. It is in this final repose of rich fulfillment that the 
country will remember and revei'e him always. — Evening News, 
Monday, July 29, 1946. [ 

QUEZON'S HERITAGE [ 

s 

The things that a great man has said and done literally do not ^ 
die. They live in the memories and emulations of other men, great 
and small, who follow him. The stimulation of Manuel Quezon's per- 
sonality is working upon the country today in its period of mourning 
and during the trials of its first steps as an independent nation. 

The things that were said about Manuel Quezon by President 
Roxas and General MacArthur have served to recall the essence of 
Mr Quezon's heritage to his people. His indomitable will, his warm 
loyalties, his courage, his judgments, worked during his lifetime 
toward the material and spiritual benefits of the people of his race 
and country. 

Mr Quezon was freely and courageously critical of the faults 
of his people, and most of the time fair in his criticisms. The people 
loved him for it. He could say things to them that no one else could 
say In his public speeches he so tempered his barbs with wise 
humor that they were roused to shamefaced laughter. 

Perhaps his most frequent exhortation was for national indus- 
triousness Slothfulness annoyed him wherever and whenever he 
saw t For all the faults that he saw in the Japanese people, their 
canadtv for hard work impressed him enormously, and after one of 
hts trips to Japan he tried his best to make his own people emulate 
this capacity. 

[153] 




The driving spirit of Quezon's toward accomplishment today 
stands this country in good stead, for he was able to pass it on to 
the one man among his people whom he hoped eventually would 
lead them after his death. That man was Manuel Roxas, who has 
inherited in full measure the mantle of leadership and the capa- 
city for driving toward an objective which was the outstanding 
quality of the leader whom he admired. — Manila Daily Bulletin, 
Tuesday, July 30, 1946. 



SIGAMOS EL MANDATO DE QUEZON 

Ha sido a ti-aves de siglos afan incontenido de los hombres, agru- 
pados en masa informe de tribus o en ordenada organizacion de pue- 
blos convertidos en nacion, el cantar las hazafias de su raza perpe- 
tuamente enlazadas con la memoria de sus mejores exponentes. A 
veces por falta de exponentes reales han tejido leyendas al rededor 
de fantasticos heroes, supliendo con la leyenda la falta de historia, 
y asi han luchado por su sobrevivencia, su exaltacion y su hegemonia. 

Filipinas es privilegiada en cuanto que con sus leyendas de glo- 
riosa tradicion cuenta con historia propia, sustantiva de hombres de 
su Raza que le dieron prez y honra. Sus idolos populares son mag- 
nificamente varies, segun el motivo que avivo su prestancia y segun 
las circunstancias que los hicieron ilustres y heroes. Tiene un 
Rizal — asceta del patriotismo, apostol y martir — que en serenas ex- 
posiciones de enfermedades, agravios y demandas de su pueblo dejo 
escrito un evangeho para multipHcacion de patriotas, apostoles y 
martires, pero tambien para producir ejemplares de nervios de rebel- 
dia y de dignidad. Tiene Filipinas su legion de ilustres relacionados 
con el teson laborante de Plaridel, como tiene su inmensa multitud 
de valientes y heroes del nervio de Bonifacio y Gregorio del Pilar y 
los bravos de Bataan y Corregidor y de nuestro movimiento de re- 
sistencia al invasor. 

Y ahora con el indiscutible testimonio de sus contemporaneos, 
Manuel Luis' Quezon es presentido por Filipinas— como apadrinado 
por el Genio de la Raza— hijo cumbre que no tuvo igual en cuanto 
a triunf OS propios y de su pueblo durante su vida y por su actuacion 
hiio exponente de la rebeldia, del laborantismo, de la digmdad en apo- 
teosis de la accion combinada con el calculo y el dmamismo para 
hacer'cierta la victoria y hacer sabrosa la cosecha del triunfo. 

Y como tal la historia de Manuel Luis Quezon es un testamento 
de actitud y ejecucion para los que tan cerca estuvieron de el, y el 
cumplimiento de ese testamento es el que debemos transmitir a la pros- 
peridad. 

[155] 



"Que hubiera hecho Quezon, que hubiera contestado Quezon, que 
hubiera aceptado, transigido o aconsejado Quezon?" deben ser pre- 
guntas frecuentes que a su conciencia hagan nuestros actuales diri- 
gentes, sobre todo cuando la dignidad de nuestra raza y de nuestros 
individuos este en entredicho, sobre todo cuando la integridad de 
nuestra libertad este descarada o veladamente amenazada, sobre todo 
cuando nuestro derecho de soberani'a tenga que estar por encima de 
las consideraciones de la diplomacia y de cortesi'as de hospitalidad, 
sobre todo cuando se imponga la reverencia a la majestad de la ley 
y a la inviolabilidad de la Constitucion. 

La historia de Quezon es un mandate. Tenemos que seguir el 
mandate de Quezon, que ahora incorporado a los Manes de la Patria 
es el modelo mas tangible, mas comprendido y mas precioso para 
nuestra marcha por el mundo con la tunica de la independencia na- 
cional, que Manuel Luis Quezon procuro para nuestra nacion. Asi 
sea!— Voz de Manila, 31 de julio de 1946. 



IN MEMORIAM 

"The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power, 
And all that beauty, all that tvealth e'er gave, 
Aicait alike th' inevitable hour. 
The paths of glory lead but to the grave." 

And so, as with every one, with Manuel Luis Quezon. Fame 

in ! "Mi't • , ^J' ^'K'^f ^ "^"^ ^^^h^^t of all, perhaps! 
m the deep hold he had on the hearts of his people. But not even 
all their prayers and supplications, nor his own indomitable fighting 
spu-it, could stay the beckoning finger of the Inevitable. ^ 

h-.rr. ^"f. ^^^^ ^^^^ him, much more could be said about 

him, but his was one of those elusive, many-sided characters which 

thing unsaT"""' '''''' '^"^ ^^^^ ^ ^^ill Tome- 

Contradictory he was, a man of moods: impulsive, tempestuous 

Wn,rr^'r' '^^'^'^ tender-hearted as a woman ;Tmper^ou ' 

"eithefca^raf ornXn?""; T'^'""^' ^ --hy- 

eimei uaesai oi nothing : at times curt and trying to those arnnnrl 
him, yet they could not leave him. around 

Among the many quahties that commended hi^ +^ u- i 
were his frankness, his fitness, and hisTuTadty. ' He bow/to t 



[ 156 ] 




QUEZON ME MO ^^T a t ^ 



0 M M I T T E E 



man. Even among the great of this earth, he feh, at least in his later 
years, that he was only among his peers. 

X,- J^u ^""j ^T^^^^T ^^'^ back to the land of his 

birth, the land of his forefathers, here finally to sleep his last long 
sleep, iime may have assiiaged somewhat the grief felt at the time 
ot his death, but the sorrowing thousands who during the week at 
tended the last solemn obsequies and paid silent homage to their great 
and well beloved son, bespoke their affection and the veneration in 
which his memory will be held.— The Philippines Free Press, 
August 3, 1946. 



[157] 



Oration 



Oh Divino Corazon de Jesus! fuente inagotable de gracias 
y de perdon, ten piedad del alma de su siervo MANUEL y 
haz, que purificado en tu sangre preciosa, logre tu divina 
vision para amar y ensalzar a tu Divino Corazon, por toda la 
eternidad. Amen, 

Yo muero, pero mi alma y mi carino no mueren. Os 
amare desde el cielo como os he amado en la tierra. (San 
Agustin.) 

Rindio su ultimo suspiro con la misma tranquilidad que 
si hubiera entrado en el mas dulce suefio. {San Juan.) 

Su muerte fue tranquila como su vida, viendose en su 
rostro despues de su muerte un dulce reflejo de la serenidad 
de su alma. 

Dignaos, Dios mi'o, no separar en el cielo, a los que tan 
unidos estuvimos en la tierra. {San Agustin.) 

Dulcisimo Jesus mi'o, por los dolores y angustias que 
sufristeis en las tres horas de tu agom'a, tened misericordia 
de tu siervo MANUEL. 

Misericordiosi'simo Jesus: Dadle el descansoeterno! CSiete 
ohos y siete cuaientenas.^ 

jDulce Corazon de Jesus sed mi amor! 

jDulce Corazon de Maria sed mi salvacion! 

Una Idgrima por el muerto se evapora; una flor sobre su 
umba se marchita; una oracion por su alma la recoge Dios 
{San Agustin.) ^ 



[158] 



M L Q 

RECORD OF PUBLIC SERVICE 

OF 

President MANUEL L. QUEZON 

AS CERTIFIED TO BY THE COMMISSIONER 
OF CIVIL SERVICE 

:;: :i; :!; 

Per annum 

September 19, 1903— Fiscal— Mindoro P2,800 

March 12, 1904— Fiscal— Tayabas 3,000 

November 1, 1904 — Resigned. 

March 5, 1906— Provincial Governor— Tayabas 4,000 

January 1, 1907 — Provincial Governor — Tayabas 5,000 

July 25, 1907— Resigned. 

— Delegate (Tayabas). 

— Resident Commissioner. 

— Senator for the Fifth Senatorial District. 

October 16, 1916 — President — Philippine Senate. 

October 16, 1922— President— Philippine Senate. 

July 16, 1925— President (Fifth Senatorial District) Philip- 
pine Senate 12,000 

January 1, 1926— President (Fifth Senatorial District) Phil- 
ippine Senate t 16,000 

July 16, 1928— President (Fifth Senatorial District ) Phil- 
ippine Senate 16,000 

January 1, 1933— President (Fifth Senatorial District) Phil- 
ippine Senate qqq 

January 1, 1934— President (Fifth Senatorial District) Phil- 
ippine Senate ^2,000 

November 15, 1935— President of the Commonwealth of the 

Philippines 

^ 30,000 

[160] 



a Pinef Statement 



OF THE 

ACTIVITIES AND ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF THE QUEZON 
MEMORIAL COMMITTEE 

The Quezon Memorial Committee was created by President 
Sergio Osmena through Executive Order No. 79, issued on December 
17, 1945. By Proclamation No. 32, issued on the same day. Pres- 
ident Osmena directed the Quezon Memorial Committee to conduct 
a nation-wide campaign for funds until the amount of P250,000 was 
reached. By Executive Order No. 12, however, issued August 19, 
1946, President Roxas amended this directive by authorizing the 
Committee to raise the necessary funds, without hmitation, for the 
erection of a national monument in honor of the late President 
Manuel L. Quezon. 

Conscious of its duty and responsibility, the Committee has 
adopted all the means within its command to accomplish this noble 
mission. Despite numerous difficulties, the Committee has raised, 
to date, a total of P581,169.69. Of this amount, P343,060.41 was 
collected prior to September, 1948. During the administration of 
Chairman Sotero Baluyut which began in September, 1948, the 
collection was P237,416.09, the best yearly collection being in 1950 
which amounted to P81,616.46. The success in raising these amounts 
is due in great measure to the spirit of generosity displayed by 
government officials and employees as well as by private citizens and 
school children who have gladly contributed what they could to 
bolster the Quezon Memorial Fund. 

In order to secure an appropriate plan of this Memorial a con- 
test was opened some time ago by the Committee to all architects 
and civil engineers for the selection of the best design for the 
proposed Memorial. The prize of P10,000 was offered for the plan 
adjudged the best. This prize was won by Architect Federico Ilustre. 
The winning plan together with all its details, is on display in the 
Office of the Committee in the City Hall. A picture o the architect s 
conception of the Memorial when completed with all its units may 
be seen on page 163. 



29824 11 



[161] 



As the proposed Memorial to be erected in Quezon City will 
cost not less than P2,000,000, it may take the Committee a few 
more years to raise all the needed funds, but construction of some 
of the units may be commenced in the near future with the money 
already available, if plans to this effect are approved by higher 
authorities. 

For the satisfaction of the general public, especially of those 
who have contributed to the Quezon Memorial Fund, the Quezon 
Memorial Committee wishes to make it known that great care is 
being taken in the handling of the collections and strict economy 
being followed in the expenditure of the funds. The annual operat- 
ing expenses which reached P29,000 in 1948 has been reduced to 
P14,000. Individuals interested in the progress of the Committee 
collections or in the plan of the Memorial, are cordially invited to 
inquire in the Office of the Committee in the City Hall. 

The new project of the Committee to publish the "Quezon 
Memorial Book," which was originally prepared under the auspices 
of the Committee in charge of the reception and burial of the mortal 
remains of the late President Quezon, is expected to raise a good 
portion of the funds still needed and it is hoped that this project, 
which serves a double purpose, — to help perpetuate the sacred 

memory of the late President Quezon and to raise additional funds, 

will receive the support and patronage, not only of government 
officials and employees, but also of the public in general. — Pedro G. 
Tan, Campaign Manager, Secretary and Executive Officer, Quezon 
Memorial Committee. 



[162] 



tlTfje (^ue^on iHemorial Committee 




Top row, left to right: Hon. Jose Yulo, Member of Council of State, Vice Chairman- 

the Interior, Chairman; Hon. Tom as B. Morato. Vice Chairman. '-^cr^^^^crn, Hon. Sotero Baluyut, former Secretary of 

Second row, left to right: Hon. Aurelio Montinola. Secrefary of Finance Mernhf^r- Ur.r. n^^ 

Member; Hon. Jorge B. Vargas. Chairman of National Urban P la nnfng ComZ's^^^^ Putong. Secretary of Education, 

Third row, left to right: Hon. Jose Figueras. Secretary of Labor Member- Mr^ rnvr^Jn^ r.V' 

Federation of Women's Clubs of the Philippines, Member; Mi. AnTon!o las Alas p--^' ^^^^^"^^"^ 

the Philippines, Member. -^las, President of Chamber of Commerce of 



Clje (Buejon Jlemotial Committee 




T--^ , ^ ^ rrn hJnfional Treasurer, Member; Mr. Antonio Rivero, Member. 

IZT n'.^; Undersecretary o/ Finance, representative oi Secretary of Fir.ar.ce; Mr. Aurelio 

•second row, Je/t to right: Hon. Sixto B. Ortiz, unat^i^^ ^^^^^^^^.^^ Secretary o/ Education; Mr. Benigno T. Sarayba, repre- 

Arguelles, Superintendent o/ Schools ^JJi" .^^^edo representative o/ the President of Chamber of Commerce of the 

semafive of Secretary of Labor; Mr. Jose M. BARREdu. i^i^ 

Thirri ^^^P^"f^- r'n^rMtrn reDresentative of President of National Federation of Women's Clubs of the 

Du?^' ^^^^ *° "9^^* ^* J' M'rTffnnai Treasurer, representative of National Treasurer; Mr. Pedro G. Tan, 

j^nuippmes; Mr. Evaristo Ver, o/ Quezon Meraoriai Committee; Mr. Federico Ilustre, architect. 



^iiinppmes; Mr. Evaristo ver, ^ssisiuiii 
Campaign Manager, Secretary and Executive Otiicer oi w 



REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT 
QUEZON MEMORIAL COMMITTEE 
MANILA 

(As of June 1952) 

Hon. SOTERO BALUYUT 
Chairman 



Hon. Jose Yulo Vice Chairman 

Hon. ToMAS B. Morato Vice Chairman 

Hon. AuRELio MoNTiNOLA Member 

Hon. Cecilio Putong Member 

Hon. Jose Figueras Member 

Hon. Jorge B. Vargas Member 

Hon. Antonio de las Alas Member 

Mrs. CoNCEPCiON M. Henares Member 

Mr. Vicente G. Gella Member 

Mr. Antonio Rivero Member 



representatives of regular members 

The following persons have attended meetings of the Quezon 
Memorial Committee to represent regular members: 

Hon. SiXTO B. Ortiz, representing Secretary of Finance Montinola; 
Mr. Aurelio Arguelles, representing Secretary of Education Putong; 
Mr. Benigno T. Sarayba, representing Secretary of Labor Figueras; 
Mr. Jose M. Barredo, representing Mr. De las Alas; 
Mrs. Paz M. Catolico, representing Mrs. Henares; 
Mr. EvARiSTO Ver, representing Mr. Gella. 

administration 
Mr. PEDRO G. TAN 

Campaign Manager 
Secretary and Executive Officer 

NoTE.-Secretary Montinola, Secretary Putong, Secretary Figueras., 
Mr. De las A as, Mrs. Concepcion M. Henares, and Mr. Gella are members 
by virtue of their positions. 

.1 ■ for the i-elicf picture of President Quezon on the cover of 

this edition IS the work of Professor Guillermo E. Tolentino of the University 
of the Phihppmes. v^xoiuj 

o 



[166] 



