C)F MAJOR GENERAL BASILIO J. VALDES 
CHIEF OF STAFF, PHILIPPINE ARMY ON THE 
OCCASION OF THE FORMAL OPENING OF THE 
MEDICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL EXAMINING CENTER 
AT CAMP MURPHY, 10 A.M. , 4 NOVEMBER L$45 



During the days of development of the National Defense 
program in the States, prior to the outbreak of war, it became 
apparent to those charged with responsibility for building the 
greatest Air Force the world has ever known that great numbers of 
pilots, bombardiers, and navigators would have to be trained to 
man the unprecedented fleet of airplanes even then under cons- 
truction. It was also apparent that requirements for admission 
to such training could not be maintained at the somewhat arbi- 
trary level then in existence and still make it possible to 
supply the numbers of men needed for the vast aircrew training 
program. Two years of college training had been regarded as a 
necessary prerequisite to undertaking pilot training. This was 
all well and good so long as the supply of applicants far exceeded 
the demand for trained men; in the pre-war years "many were called 
but few were chosen.” From 1928 to 1939 nearly 6000 mnerican 
cadets entered into training and only 2328 became rated pilots. 
During these eleven years, then, only two cadets in five graduated 
and received their wings. 

After 1939, the demand went up sharply and the Air Force had 
to begin to worry about the wastage of manpower produced by the 
use of arbitrary standards. Perhaps a lot of men not having two 
years of college in their background could be made into good pilots. 
Perfect physical specimens were still needed to cope with fche 



stresses and strains of flying — no one ever doubted that -- 

% 

but perhaps flying aptitude was not something coming primarily 
out of a classroom; perhaps a minimum of academic background and 
a maximum of the basic capacities of coordination, judgment, 
emotional stability, and sharpness of observation were needed, A 
group of psychologists in the States, who had spent years studying 
these things, believed this was the case and offered their services 
in the construction and application of a battery of aptitude tests 
to screen for the desired capacities. 

The Army decided to take a chance. We now know it wasn’t 
really taking a chance for there is no other sensible way to go 
about solving the problem. And the experiment has paid off with 
big dividends — in instructors, planes, and equipment saved, in 
accidents prevented, more important still, in saving of time and 
personnel which would have been wasted trying to teach inept boys 
to become combat pilots. 

The history of the technical development of the tests, the 
making of exhaustive analysis of the jobs of aircrew members, the 
administrative snags that had to be cleared away — this is a 
long and interesting story which it would be inappropriate to go 
into here. Suffice it to say that very satisfactory tests indeed 
were developed and that they "paid off" handsomely. The elimina- 
tion rate in training was reduced from the pre-war 60 # to a low 
of 12 fo at the height of the pilot production program, while the 
rates for navigator and bombardier training became practically 
inconsiderable. Much of this gain was due, of course, to improved 



2 



training methods and equipment hut no one doubts that a large 
share was due to better selection and more fitting classifica- 
tion of personnel. The figures, if you could examine them as 
I have, you would find very imposing. During the experimental 
period at the beginning, when the Army attitude necessarily had 
to be one of "show me!", a period in which all physically quali- 
fied applicants were allowed to enter training regardless of their 
scores on the tests, a follow-up in the Training Command showed 
that less than 1 $ of the men scoring highest on the tests had 
been eliminated in flying training vdiile 65$> of the lowest 
scoring cadets had already been "washed out". This was good 
enough for the Army — there was no longer any doubt that the 
screening methods wrere paying off. They were immediately adopted 
and, from the middle part of 1942 on, they have constituted the 
official selection procedure of the U. S. Army Air Forces. As 
the work went on the battery of tests was steadily improved until, 
at present, it has a very high predictive power indeed. 

If there has been some doubt as to whether the atomic bomb 
secret should be shared with our allies there never has been any 
concerning sharing personnel selection methods. The British 
Royal Air Force, finding the American methods so much more ef- 
fective than its own, adopted the tests; The Royal Australian Air 
Force did the same. With the termination of the successful action 
in North Africa a mission was sent to Algiers to institute the 
system in the training of the Free French; it is now in operation 
in Paris, Chinese Air Force students, arriving in California for 



"can training, were screened with the tests* Mexican candi- 
ates have Ueen required to demonstrate their aptitude prior 
to entering training. Arrangements have just recently been 
completed to institute the system in Brazil. And now, at the 
first opportunity, the tests have been brought to the Philippines 
where this model Examining Center at Camp Murphy will serve as 
the pattern for all selection in the Archipelago. 

With the tremendous task of reconstruction facing us, and 
even now going on, we must do everything possible to economize 
on resources. No wasteful methods can be tolerated. We cannot 
afford to enter into training for the Philippine Air Force any- 
one who does not have an excellent chance of successfully com- 
pleting the training course. We are confident that the aptitude 
testing methods to be used in this Center, themselves having 
been subjected to rigorous tests in the examination of over half 
a million men in the United States and never found wanting, will 
permit us to build on a sound foundation of personnel selection 
and classification. 

We are appreciative of the high motives which have brought 
this valuable service to us and pledge ourselves to the effective 
continuation of the work begun. We are aware of our responsibi- 
lity not only to preserve the objectivity and impartiality of the 
selection system but also, through continuous psychological 
research, to improve the methods as new contingencies arise and 
new knowledge is gained. It is a pleasure for me to be able to 
announce that a distinguished psychologist has come to this 



- 4 - 



■ 

country at the Request of the Philippine Army Headquarters to 
organize this valuable service. He is Colonel Frank A. Geldard, 

Air Corps, Army of the United States, Professor of Psychology, 
University of Virginia. Under him are all psychological research 
units and psychological sections of all Medical and Psycological 
Examining Units in the United states. Upop. his arrival in Manila 
be immediately set out to look for the available persons who may 
be interested in this type of work. Through him we were able to 
obtain the valuable services of a well known Filipino psychologist, 
Professor Isidoro Paniasigui, Head of the Department of Psychology 
of the University of the Philippines. Professor Panlasigui has 
taken an actiye interest in this venture and will assume, upon 
the return to the United States of our American friends, the 
active Directorship of the psychological work of this Center. 

The aid and the encouragement of the Philippine Army are his; we 
look for a brilliant future in research and service for this 
Center. To Colonel Geldard and his assistants, I want to express 
the gratitude of the Philippine Army and the Filipino people for 
their disinterested work in behalf of our Air Corps. 



- 5 - 



