
The Philippine Legislative Building Where the Constitutional Convention Held Its Sessions 



THE FRAMK OF FHF PHIFIPPINF 
CONSTITUTION 



JOSE M. A.M., LL.B. 

- ^ ^ 1 . • TA 



Delegate to the Constitutional Coiivcntion; Dean and 
Professor of Political Science, College of Liberal 
Arts, and Professor of Political Law and 
International Law, National Laic College, 
of the University of Manila; 

Author of *'Principlcs of Political 
Science, ’ ’ * *Fiindamenta Is o f 

Constitution’Making,^* etc. 




BY 




UNIVERSITY PUBLISHING 
Manila 



Manila 



■f 







lppl‘<# PI ‘ IJWI ■ 

0-aP 



Copyright, 1936 
By JOSE M. ARUEGO 
All I'ights reserved 

f d>o/ 



Printed by LOYAL PRESS 
Manila, Philippines 



DEDICATION 



TO YOU MY COLLEAGUES OF THE CONSTITU- 
TIONAL CONVENTION— 

I affectionately dedicate this humble work in 
recognition of your services to the country in the 
framing of the Philippine Constitution. You have all 
collaborated in the determination of every principle or 
theory underlying the Constitution through your work 
in the different committees as well as in the plenary 
sessions of the Constitutional Convention. A great 
many of you worked to influence decisions on the pro- 
\dsions of the Constitution through participation in the 
debates; while the rest preferred to influence them 
through personal conferences with their colleagues, 
about which the written records are silent. As far as 
I know, there is no single provision of the Constitution 
which could properly be said to be the work of a single 
delegate or of a single group of delegates. To all of 
you belongs the paternity of the Constitution. 



—The Author. 



FOREWORD 



The Philippine Constitution is the most valuable docu- 
ment in the constitutional history of the Philippines. It 
reflects the political experience of the Filipino people and 
expresses their national philosophy. As the fundamental 

law, it is the final refuge of the rights and libei'ties of the 
people. 

The study of the Constitution should be made an in- 
tegral part of the education of the Filipino youth. The 
celebi ation of Constitution Day should also be made a pei’- 
manent institution. They will serve to intrench more 
firmly in the Philippines the system of constitutional gov- 
ernment and to inspire among our people a reverential ac- 
tachment to the Philippine Constitution. 

It is the duty of every citizen to defend the Constitu- 
tion. Any violation of its provisions is a blow to the re- 
gime of law and a step toward the institution of a rule of 
force Avith all its perils and uncertainties. In order to be 
an able defender of the Constitution, he should be ac- 
quainted with the history of its making. He should be 

familiar with the great pinnciples enunciated therein 

their background, the reasons for their adoption, the in- 
tendments behind them. 

It is for this reason that I consider the writing of this 
book very fortunate for the country, and more fortunate 
still that it has been written by a highly qualified man. 
Anyone going over the pages of this scholarly and monu- 
mental work cannot help but feel highly impressed by its 
thoroughness and by the admirable treatment of the ma- 
terials, reflecting the patience, industry, ability, and train- 
mg of its distinguished author. 

One of the leading and most valuable members of the 
Convention, the author belonged to key committees which 
tact easily placed him in a position to gather first-hand in- 



V 



FOREWORD 



VI 



formation on the framing of the Constitution. He was n 
member of the following committees: sponsorship, legis- 
lative powei’, impeachment, metropolitan relations, transi- 
tory provisions, franchise, and the study of compai'ative 
governments. As one of the technical advisers to the sub- 
committee of seven, he helped in the preparation of the 
first draft of the Constitution ; as a member of the special 
committee on style, he cooperated in the preparation of 
the last draft of the same. 

The author is specially trained to write a book of this 
kind. Considered one of the leading political scientists of 
the country, he has written several authoritative works on 
political science. He has spent many years teaching his- 
tory, political science, and law in one of the higher insti- 
tutions of learning in our country. In fact, the book clearly 
reflects his training as a historian, as a lawyer, and as a 
political scientist. One will find herein materials of per- 
manent value to all persons interested in history, law, and 
government. 

I feel sure that Aruego’s FRAMING OF THE PHIL- 
IPPINE CONSTITUTION will become one of the most 
useful and valuable books on the Philippines, an indispen- 
sable companion work to the Philippine Constitution. I 
wish and hope that it will find its way into the library of 
every school, office, and home in the country. 




Claro M. Recto 
President 

Philippine Constitutional Convention 



Manila, Philippines 
December 14, 1936 






PREFACE 



Tliis book has been written mainly for three purposes, 
namely, to assemble together from the scattered and loose 
sources the facts on the framing of the Philippine Constitu- 
tion from the enactment by the Congress of the United 
States on March 24, 1934 of Public Act Numbered One hun- 
di’€d and twenty-seven, which authorized the Philippine 
Legislature to call a Constitutional Convention, to the rat- 
ification of the document by the Filipino people on May 
14, 1935; to show the spirit that animated the Convention 
in the adoption of the different provisions; and to put 
together all the important documentary materials on the 
drafting of the Constitution for the convenience of those 
who wish to make a more detailed study of the various 
phases of the fundamental law. 

The preparation of this book began more than t\vo 
years ago. In fact, the first drafts of the first chapters 
were written before the calling of the Constitutional Con- 
vention. The author took advantage of his membership in 
the Convention to secui-e first-hand information, taking 
daily notes of the proceedings of that body in its plenary 
sessions as well as in its committees and gathering what- 
ever documentary materials there were available. These 
notes, the pi*ess issues of the day, and the original unedited 
records of the proceedings of the Convention, including the 
reports of the different committees, have been the main 
soui’ces of the materials used in the writing of this book, 
with the exception of the chapter “The Approval of the 
Constitution by the President of the United States,” which 
has been based pi’imai’ily on the information furnished 
the author by President Claro M. Recto and Delegate Ma- 
nuel Roxas, both of whom had been authorized by the Con- 
vention to submit the Constitution to the Pi'esident of the 
United States. 



vii 



PREFACE 



vin 



In the manner of arrangement of the materials, the 
author has followed the general plan of making a chrono- 
logical presentation of the facts in order to enable the 
readers to follow easily all the steps taken in the framing 
of the Constitution. In the chapters dealing with the dif- 
ferent articles of the Constitution, he has likewise followed 
the general plan of showing the course of the provisions 
fx’om their origin, through the debates, to the final draft 
of the Constitution, for the purpose of showing the philos- 
ophy behind them. He has tried his best to give a faith- 
ful account of the debates, reproducing, where he con- 
sidered necessary, portions of them as they appear in the 
original unedited records of the Convention. He has pur- 
posely avoided making legal commentaries on the provisions 
m order to keep the book within the bounds of its title. 

The author gratefully acknowledges his indebtedness 
to all of those who have helped him in the preparation of 
this work. He is particularly indebted to his colleagues of 
the Constitutional Convention, former Justice Claro M. 
Recto and Justice Jose P. Laurel of the Supreme Court 
and Honorable Manuel Roxas of the National Assembly, for 
reading portions of the manuscript and giving him the ben- 
efit of their invaluable suggestions; to his friend axid col- 
eague, Mr. Jose R, Cantos of the University of Manila, for 
piping check up the materials used; to his secx’etai'y, 
Mr. Delfino T. Bi’uno, for preparing the copy for the press 
and for doing the painstaking work of proof-reading ; and 
to his wife whose constant encouragement has made possi- 
ble the completion of this work. 

With the hope that it will stimulate abler minds to 
write a more thorough work on the framing of the funda- 
mental law and with the further hope that it will encourage 
others to rriake a more detailed study of the different phases 
of the same, the author humbly offers to the public this 
modest contribution to the literature on the Constitution of 
the Philippines. 

University of Manila Jose M. Aruego 

December 10, 1936 
« 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

VOLUME ONE 

Page 

FOREWORD V 

PREFACE vii 

CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTORY 1 

Final Step toward Independence 1 

President McKinley’s Instructions 1 

The First Philippine Assembly 3 

Filipino Majority in the Philippine Commission 4 

The Philippine Autonomy Act of 1916, Popularly 

Known as the Jones Law 5 

The Tydings-McDuffie Law 7 

CHAPTER II: THE CALLING OF THE CONSTITU- 
TIONAL CONVENTION 9 

Source of Authority 9 

Public Discussions 9 

The Guinto Plan 9 

The Size of the Constitutional Convention 10 

The Enfranchisement of Women for the Constitutional 

Convention 11 

The Quezon Non-Partisan Plan 12 

The Zulueta Plan 13 

The Determination of the Date for the Election of 

Delegates 13 

The Provisions of the Convention Law 13 

The Election of Delegates to the Constitutional Con- 
vention 14 

The Delegates Elected to the Constitutional Convention 17 

CHAPTER III: THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE CONSTITU- 
TIONAL CONVENTION 23 

A Cross-Section of the Constitutional Convention 23 

y Biographical Notes on the Delegates 24 

'/CHAPTER IV: THE OPENING OF THE CONSTITU- 
TIONAL CONVENTION 47 

Preliminaries to the Opening of the Constitutional 

Convention 47 

The Opening Ceremonies of the Constitutional Conven- 
tion 51 

ix 



X 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



Recto Elected as President of the Constitutional Con- 
vention 

President Recto’s Inaugural Address 

The Administration of the Oath of Office 

Other Officers of the Constitutional Convention 

Resolutions of the Constitutional Convention 

Press Comments 

CHAPTER V: THE ORGANIZATION OF THE CONSTITU- 
TIONAL CONVENTION 

The Adoption of the Rules of the Constitutional Con- 
vention 

The Committees of the Constitutional Convention .... 
The Committee System of the Constitutional Conven- 
tion 

The Special Committee on Style of the Constitutional 
Convention 

Protested Elections of the Constitutional Convention . . 

The Blocs of the Constitutional Convention 

Recto and Roxas in the Constitutional Convention .... 

CHAPTER VI; THE CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION 
AT WORK 

The Proposal to Hold the Sessions behind Closed Doors 
The Preliminary Activities of the Constitutional Con- 
vention 

The Sponsorship Committee of the Constitutional Con- 
vention 

The Creation of the Sub-Committee of Seven and the 

Sub-Committee of Technical Advisers 

The First Draft of the Constitution 

Debates on the First Draft of the Constitution.*..**.!! 
Preliminary Arrangement for the Non-Partisan Con- 
sideration of the Constitution 

The Emergence of Partisanship in the Convention. . . . 

The Liberal Forces of the Convention in Action 

Procedure in the Consideration of the First Draft of 
the Constitution 

President Recto in the Debates of the Constitutional 
Convention 

Other Presiding Officers of the Convention! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! 

The Sessions of the Constitutional Convention 

The Death of Delegate Aguilar 

United States Senator Millard F. Tydings and Pres- 
ident Quezon as Guests of the Constitutional Con- 
vention 



Page 

53 

54 

54 

55 
55 
55 

57 



57 

57 

71 

72 

73 
73 
75 



77 

77 

78 

79 

81 

82 

83 

84 

85 

80 

89 

89 

90 
90 
90 



91 



1 



TABLE OF CONTENTS xi 

Page 

The Press and the Constitutional Convention 91 

The Closing Days of the Constitutional Convention... 91 

CHAPTER VII: THE GENESIS OF THE PHILIPPINE 

CONSTITUTION 93 

Historical Basis of the Constitution 93 

Historical Approach to Constitution-making 'J3 

Institutions and Philosophies of the Constitution Fami- 
liar to the People 93 

Influence of Foreign Constitutions 94 

The Limitations in the Tydings-McDuffie Law 94 

The Paternity of the Constitution 95 

CHAPTER VIII: THE SCOPE OF THE CONSTITUTION. 97 

Introduction 97 

The Osias Resolution 97 

Debates and Issues 98 

Legal Authority 99 

Moral and Political Authority 101 

The Lim-Guzman Resolution 103 

The Crisis 105 

The Crisis Solved 106 

The Scope of the Constitution as Drafted 106 

CHAPTER IX: THE PREAMBLE OF THE PHILIPPINE 

CONSTITUTION Ill 

The Draft of the Convention Committee on Preamble. Ill 

The Draft of the Sponsorship Committee Ill 

The Recto Draft 112 

The Draft of the Sub-Committee of Seven 113 

The Draft of the Special Committee on Style which was 

Finally Approved by the Convention 113 

Conclusion 114 

CHAPTER X: THE NATIONAL TERRITORY 117 

Sources 117 

The Definition of the National Territory in the Report 
of the Convention Committee on Territorial Delimi- 
tation 117 

The Definition of the National Territory in the Report 

of the Sponsorship Committee 119 

The Definition of the National Territory in the Draft 

of the Sub-Committee of Seven 120 

Debates on the National Territory 121 

Should the National Territory Be Delimited in the 

Constitution? 121 

May Philippine Territory Be Alienated? 123 



XU 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



Page 

May the Extent of the Territory Defined in the Con- 
stitution Be Increased through Acquisition? 124 

The Definition of the National Territory as Approved 

hy the Convention on November 16, 1934 126 

The Definition of the National Territory as Revised by 
the Special Committee on Style and as Finally Ap- 
proved by the Convention 120 

CHAPTER XI; the DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES 

OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 129 

Sources 129 

Declaration of Principles in the First Draft of the 

Sub-Committee of Seven 120 

Declaration of Principles in the Second Draft of the 

Sub-Committee of Seven 129 

Declaration of Principles in the Third Draft of the 

Sub-Committee of Seven 130 

Debates on the Declaration of Principles 130 

eclaration of Principles in the Draft of the Constitu- 
tion Finally Approved by the Convention 131 

e First Declaration of Principle of the Philippine 

Constitution 131 

The Second Declaration of Principle of the Philippine 

Constitution I 35 

The Third Declaration of Principle of the Philippine 
Constitution 242 

The Fourth Declaration of Principle of the Philippine 
Constitution 145 

The Fifth Declaration of Principle of the Philippine 
Constitution i ^ ^ 

CHAPTER XII: THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE PHILIP- 
PINE CONSTITUTION 24^ 

Introduction 249 

Sources ; ; 4 ^^ 

Debates on the Bill of Rights of the Constitution... 250 

CHAPTER XIII: THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE PHILIP- 
PINE CONSTITUTION (Continued) 253 

Due Process of Law and Equal Protection of the Laws . 153 

The Right of Eminent Domain 259 

Security Against Unreasonable Searches, etc 159 

Liberty of Domicil 269 

Privacy of Communication and Correspondence 161 

CHAPTER XIV: THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE PHILIP- 
PINE CONSTITUTION (Continued) 163 



TABLE OF CONTENTS xiii 

Page 

The Liberty of Association 163 

Freedom of Religion 164 

Freedom of Speech, of the Press, and of Assembly. . . . 165 

CHAPTER XV: THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE PHILIP- 
PINE CONSTITUTION (Continued) 169 

Title of Nobility 169 

Non-Impairment of the Obligation of Contracts 170 

Non-Imprisonment for Debt or Non-payment of a Poll 

Tax 176 

Ex-Post Facto Law, Bill of Attainder 179 

Involuntary Servitude 179 

The Writ of Habeas Corpus 180 

CHAPTER XVI: THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE PHILIP- 
PINE CONSTITUTION (Continued) 183 

Due Process of Law in Criminal Cqscs 183 

Bail 183 

Rights of the Accused 184 

Ibid 186 

Fines and Punishments 186 

Double Jeopardy 186 

Free Access to the Courts 193 

Provisions of the Bill of Rights of the Jones Law Not 

Included in the Philippine Constitution 193 

Proposed Provisions for the Bill of Rights Approved on 
Second Reading by the Convention But Struck Out 

by the Special Committee on Style 194 

Some Other Precepts Proposed for the Bill of Rights 
but Disapproved by the Convention 195 

CHAPTER XVII: CITIZENSHIP UNDER THE PHILIP- 
PINE CONSTITUTION I 97 

Sources I 97 

The Draft of the Convention Committee on Citizenship 

and Naturalization 197 

The First Draft of the Sub-Committee of Seven 197 

The Second Revised Draft of the Sub-Committee of 

Seven 198 

Debates on the Article on Citizenship 198 

The Draft as Approved on November 26, 1934 and De- 
cember 3, 1934 198 

The Draft of the Special Committee on Style which was 

Finally Approved by the Convention 199 

Citizens under the Constitution 200 



xiv TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 

Children Born in the Philippines of Forei^ Parents. 210 
The Loss and Reacquisition of Citizenship 212 

CHAPTER XVIII: SUFFRAGE UNDER THE PHILIPPINE 

CONSTITUTION 215 

Sources 215 

Draft of the Convention Committee on Suffrage 215 

Debates on Suffrage 215 

The Question of Woman Suffrage 215 

The Fight for Woman Suffrage in the Convention 

Committee on Suffrage 210 

The Fight for Woman Suffrage in the Convention. . . . 210 

The Defeat of Woman Suffrage 210 

The Compromise on Woman Suffrage 220 

The Question of Compulsory Voting 222 

The Principle of Compulsory Voting Endorsed by the 

Convention Committee on Suffrage 222 

The Principle of Compulsory Voting in the First Draft 

of the Constitution 222 

Debates on Compulsory Voting in the Convention.... 222 
Other Requisites for the Exercise of the Right of 

Suffrage 224 

Suffrage and the Electors of Municipal Districts 226 

Draft of the Article on Suffrage as Approved by the 

Convention on November 28, 1934 227 

Draft of the Article on Suffrage as Revised by the 
Special Committee on Style and Finally Approved by 

the Convention 228 

Effectivity of the Article 228 

CHAPTER XIX: THE LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 229 

Sources 229 

Debates 229 

Position of the Lawmaking Body in the Government. . 230 

CHAPTER XX: BICAMERALISM VERSUS UNICAME- 
RALISM 233 

Introduction 233 

Recommendation of the Convention Committee on Leg- 
islative Power 233 

Debates 235 

Division among the Bicameralists 237 

The Defeat of Bicameralism in the Convention 237 

Press Comments 239 

Attempts to Reconsider the Question 242 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



XV 



Page 



CHAPTER XXI: THE ORGANIZATION OF THE NA- 
TIONAL ASSEMBLY 

The Name of the Lawmaking: Body 

The Size of the National Assembly 

The Composition of the National Assembly 

The Selection of Members of the National Assembly. . 



243 

243 

244 

245 
247 



The Qualifications cf Members of the National As- 
sembly 

Vacancies in the National Assembly 

Officers of the National Assembly 

CHAPTER XXII: THE COMMISSIONS IN THE NA- 
TIONAL ASSEMBLY 

The Elector/Vl Commission 

Introduction • ; 

Recommendations on the Electoral Commission 

The Electoral Commission in the First Draft of the 

Constitution 

Debates on the Electoral Commission 

The Compromise on the Electoral Commission 

The Approval of the Electoral Commission by the 

Convention 

The Revised Draft of the Special Committee on Style, 
The Draft on the Electoral Commission as Finally Ap- 
proved by the Convention 

The Electoral Commission in the Governmental System. 

The Permanent Commission 

Introduction 

The Permanent Commission in the First Draft of the 

Constitution 

Debates on the Permanent Commission 

The Proposed Permanent Conunission Disapproved by 
the Convention 



250 

255 

255 



257 

257 

257 

258 



260 

261 

267 

271 

271 

272 

273 
273 
273 

275 

276 

280 



The Commission on Impeachment and the Commis- 
sion ON Appointments 

Reconsideration of the Permanent Commission 

Debates on the Commission on Appointments 

The Commission on Impeachment and the Commission 

on Appointments Approved by the Convention 

The Draft of the Special Committee on Style on the 
Commission on Impeachment and the Commission on 
Appointments which was Finally Approved by the 

Convention 

The Meetings of the Commission on Impeachment and 
those of the Commission on Appointments 



280 

280 

281 

282 



282 

283 



xvi 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



Duration of the Term of Members of the Commission 
on Impeachment and the Commission on Appoint- 
ments 

Powers of the Commission on Impeachment and the 

Commission on Appointments 

he Proposed Committee ox Accounts 

The Proposal to Create a Committee on Accounts. . . . 

e ates on the Proposed Committee on Accounts 

e Proposed Committee on Accounts Disapprov'cd by 
the Convention 

XXIII: PRIVILEGES AND DISQUALIFICA- 
TIONS OF MEMBERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEM- 



Introduction 

Privileges 

Privilege from Arrest 

Sources 

Debates 

of Constitution Finally 

Adopted by the Convention 

Freedom of Speech or Debate 

Determination of Rules of Proceedings 

Compensation 

Sources 

Debates 

Special Committee on 
TLo Finally Approved by the Convention.. 

D.S ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; 

SoSc^ to Hold Other Offices . . . . . . . . ...... 

Debates 

raft of the Provision as Approved by the Conven- 
lon on anuary 31, 1935 with the Approval of the 
Article on Legislative Power 

Draft of the Provision as Revised by the Special Com- 
mittee on Style 

the^ Conro Constitution Adopted by 

D.squalification to Engage in Government Contracts. 
Sources 

Debates 

Draft of the Provision as Approved by the Convention 
on Second Reading 



Page 



28.5 



280 

237 

287 

288 

289 



291 

291 

292 
292 

292 

293 

293 

294 

295 
290 

296 

297 

299 

300 
302 
302 
302 
305 



311 

312 

312 

315 

310 

317 

319 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



XVll 



Draft of the Provision as Revised by the Special Com- 
mittee on Style and as Finally Approved by the 

Convention 320 

Disqualification to Serve as Counsel 820 

Sources 320 

Debates 321 

The Draft of the Provision in the Special Committee 

on Style 324 

The Draft of the Provision in the Constitution Adopted 
by the Convention 324 

CHAPTER XXIV: THE POWERS OF THE NATIONAL 

ASSEMBLY 327 

Sources 327 

Nature of the Rowel'S of the National Assemblv 328 

Limitations Upon the Powers of the National Assembly 330 

Power of Taxation 331 

Power of Appropriation 339 ^ 

Power to Borrow Money 346 

Power to Declare War ' 349 

CHAPTER XXV: THE MAKING OF LAWS 353 

The Sessions of the National Assembly 353 

Drafting of Bills 354 

The Process of La^vmaking under the Constitution . . . 356 

The Veto Power of the President 359 

Constitutional Provisions on the Veto Power 359 

Sources 360 

Debates 361 

Reasons for tho Veto 364 

Reconsideration of the Veto 364 

Veto after the Adjournment of the National Assembly 368 

Journal 369 

Draft on the Veto Power of the President as Approved 

bv the Convention on Second Reading 369 

Draft on the Veto Power of the President as Revised 
by the Special Committee on Style and As Finally 
Approved by the Convention 370 

Budgetary Relations between the President and the 

National Assembly 372 

Constitutional Provision on the Budget 372 

Sources 372 

Debates 374 

Draft of the Budget Provision as Approved byt the 
Convention on Second Reading 385 



xviii 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



Page 

Draft of the Bud^ret Provision as Revised by the Spe- 
cial Committee on Style and as Finally Approved bv 

the Convention 385 

The Budget as the Basis of the General Appropria- 
tion Bill 385 I 

Failure of the Assembly to Pass an Appropriation Bill 38G 

Delegation of Legislative Po\ver to the President 387 

Constitutional Provisions on Delegation of Legisla- 
tive Powers 387 

Sources 387 

Debates 389 

Draft of the Provisions on Delegated Powers as Ap- 
proved on Second Reading 39‘2 

Draft of the Provisions on Delegated Powers as Re- 
vised by the Special Committee on Style and as Fi- 
nally Approved by the Convention 392 

CHAPTER XXVI: THE EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT 393 

Sources 390 

Debates 393 

The Executive Department of the Government 294 

CHAPTER XXVII: THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIP- 
PINES 399 

The Office of the President 399 

The Qualifications for the Presidency 400 

Debates 

Provision of the Constitution on the Qualifications for 

President or Vice-President 407 

The Election of the President 407 

Determination of the Election of the President 409 

Oath of the President 41 q 

The Term of the President 4 ;I 3 ^ 

Compensation 4^3 

Succession to the Presidency 4^3 

Debates 

Provisions on Succession as Finally Approved by the 
Convention 

CHAPTER XXVIII: THE VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE 

PHILIPPINES 421 

The Office of the Vice-President 42i 

The Qualifications, Election, Term, and Compensation 

of the Vice-President 424 

The Duties of the Vice-President 425 , 




TABLE OF CONTENTS xix 

Page 

CHAPTER XXIX: THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE 

PRESIDENT 427 

Introduction 427 

TJic Adniinislrativc Power 428 

The Military Power 429 

The Appointing Power 432 

The Pardoning Power 435 

The Diplomatic Power 439 

Information to the Natoinal Assembly 440 

CHAPTER XXX: THE ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENT 443 

The Executive Departments 443 

The Heads of Departments 444 

Prohibitions against Administrative Officials to Prac- 
tice any Profession and to Have Financial Interest. 445 

Department Heads and the National Assembly 447 

Proposed Council of State 450 

CHAPTER XXXI: THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM 453 

Sources 453 

Debates 460 

CHAPTER XXXII: THE ORGANIZATION OF THE JUDI- 
CIAL SYSTEM 461 

The Draft of the Convention Committee on Judicial 

Power 461 

The Draft of the Sub-Committee of Seven 461 

The Proposed. Courts of Appeals.... 462 

The Draft of the Committee of Three 463 

The Draft of the Article as Approved by the Conven- 
tion 464 

The Composition of the Courts 464 

CHAPTER XXXIII: THE SELECTION, QUALIFICA- 

TIONS, TENURE, AND COMPENSATION FOR THE 

JUDICIARY 469 

The Selection of Judges 469 

Constitutional Provision 469 

Sources 469 

Debates 471 

Draft as Finally Approved by the Convention 476 

Qualifications for the Judiciary 476 

Constitutional Provisions 476 

Sources 477 

Debates 479 

The Draft of the Special Committee on Style on the 
Qualifications for the Judiciary 481 



XX 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



Page 

Tenure of OrncE 482 

Constitutional Provision 482 

Sources^' 482 

Debates 483 

The Draft of the SneciaJ Cojnniittce on Style on the 

Tenure of Judges and Justices 484 

Compensation 485 

Constitutional Provision 485 

Sources 485 

Debates 480 

The Draft on Compensation for the Judiciary as Ap- 
proved by the Convention 4BT 

CHAPTER XXXIV: THE POWERS AND JURISDICTION 

OF THE COURTS 489 

Introduction 489 

The Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court 489 

The Jurisdiction of the Inferior Courts 492 

The Power of Judicial Review 493 

Debates 495 

The Rule-Making Power of the Supreme Court 497 

The Proposed Judicial Council 

CHAPTER XXXV: THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 505 

Introduction 505 

The Selection of Judges • • • 

Residence of Judges . . ^ 

Rendition of Decisions 

Removal of Judges .... . . . . . ” 

» • ^^4ependence of the Judiciary 

State Responsibility and Indemnification for Innocent 

Convicts 515 

Postscript / , 516 

APPENDIX: CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 521 

INDEX 551 



THE FRMIING OF THE PHELIPPINE 
CONSTITUTION 



CHAPTER I 

INTRODUCTORY 

Final Step toward Independence. — The framing of 
the Philippine Constitution by the Filipino people through 
delegates chosen by themselves was intended to be the last 
step in the Amei'ican policy of gradually increasing the 
autonomy and the liberty of the Filipinos before the grant- 
ing of their independence. 

President McKinley’s Instructions. — The foundation 
for this policy was laid down at the beginning of the period 
of American sovereignty in the Philippines. In instruct- 
ing the Second Philippine Commission, which was sent to 
the Philippines to continue and perfect the work of or- 
ganizing and establishing civil government ali’eady com- 
menced by the military authoi-ities, President McKinley, 
under whose administration the Philippines was acquired 
by the United States, said, 

“Without hampering them (the Commission) by too 
specific instructions, they should, in general, be enjoined, after 
making themselves familiar with the conditions and needs 
of the country, to devote their attention in the first instance 
to the establishment of municipal governments in which the 
natives of tJie Islands, both in the cities and in the rural 
communities, shall be afforded the opportunity to manage 
their own local affairs to the fullest extent of which they 
are capable, and subject to the least degree of supervision 
and control which a careful study of their capacities and 
observation of the workings of native control shows to be 
consistent with the maintenance of law, order, and lo- 
yalty. . . 

“In the distribution of powers among the governments 
organized by the Commission, the presumption is always to 
be in favor of the smaller subdivision, so that all the powers 
which can properly be exercised by the municipal govern- 



XX 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



Page 



Tenure of Office 482 

Constitutional Provision 482 

Sources"' 482 

Debates 483 

The Draft of the Soccial Committee on Style on the 

Tenure of Judges and Justices 484 

Compensation 485 

Constitutional Provision 485 

Sources 485 

Debates 480 

The Draft on Compensation for the Judiciary as Ap- 
proved by the Convention 487 



CHAPTER XXXIV: THE POWERS AND JURISDICTION 

OF THE COURTS 

Introduction 

The Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court 

; V The Jurisdiction of the Inferior Courts 

The Power of Judicial Review 

" Debates 

The Rule-Making Power of the Supreme Court 

The Proposed Judicial Council 

CHAPTER XXXV: THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 

Introduction 

j The Selection of Judges 

' . Residence of Judges 

* Rendition of Decisions 

Removal of Judges 

The Independence of the Judiciary 

1 State Responsibility and Indemnification for Innocent. 

Convicts 

Postscript ' 

APPENDIX: CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 



489 

489 

489 

492 

403 

495 

497 

502 

505 

505 

506 

507 

508 
511 
511 



515 

516 

521 

551 



THE FRAIMING OF THE PHDLIPPINE 
CONSTITUTION 



CHAPTER I 

INTRODUCTORY 

Final Step toward Independence. — The framing of 
the Philippine Constitution by the Filipino people through 
delegates chosen by themselves was intended to be the last 
step in the American policy of gradually inci-easing the 
autonomy and the liberty of the Filipinos before the grant- 
ing of their independence. 

President McKinley’s Instructions. — The foundation 
for this policy was laid down at the beginning of the period 
of American sovereignty in the Philippines. In instruct- 
ing the Second Philippine Commission, which was sent to 
the Philippines to continue and pei'fect the work of ox*- 
ganizing and establishing civil government ali*eady com- 
menced by the military authoxdties, Pi'esident McKinley, 
under whose administi'ation the Philippines was acquii*ed 
by the United States, said, 

“Without hampering them (the Commission) by too 
specific instructions, they should, in general, be enjoined, after 
making themselves familiar with the conditions and needs 
of the country, to devote their attention in the first instance 
to the establishment of municipal governments in which the 
natives of the Islands, both in tlie cities and in the rural 
communities, shall be afforded the opportunity to manage 
their own local affairs to the fullest extent of which they 
are capable, and subject to the least degree of supervision 
and control which a careful study of their capacities and 
observation of the workings of native control shows to be 
consistent with the maintenance of law, order, and lo- 
yalty. . . 

“In the distribution of powers among the governments 
organized by the Commission, the presumption is always to 
be in favor of the smaller subdivision, so that all the powers 
which can properly be exercised by the municipal govern- 



2 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



ment shall be vested in that government, and all the powers 
of a more general character which can be exercised by tl\e 
departmental government shall be vested in that govern- 
ment, and BO that in the governmental system which is 
the result of the process the central government of the 
Islands, following the example of the distribution of the 
powers between the States and the National Government of 
the United States, shall have no direct administration except 
of matters of purely general concern, and shall have only 
supervision and control over local government as may be 
necessary to secure and enforce faithful and efficient ad- 
ministration by local officers. 

“The many different degrees of civilization and va- 
rieties of custom and capacity among the people of the dif- 
ferent Islands preclude very definite instruction as to the 
part which the people shall take in the selection of their 
own officers, but these general rules are to be observed : 
That in all cases the municipal officers who administer the 
local affairs of the people are to be selected by the people, 
and that, wherever officers of more extended jurisdiction are 
to be selected in any way, natives of the Islands are to be 
preferred, and if they can be found competent and willing 
to perform the duties, they are to receive offices in prefer- 
ence to any others. It will be necessary to fill some offices for 
the present with Americans, which, after a time, may well 
be filled by natives of the Islands... 

In all the forms of government and administrative 
provisions which they are authorized to prescribe, the Com- 
mission should bear in mind that the government which 
they are establishing is designed not for our satisfaction, or 
for the expression of our theoretical views, but for the hap- 
piness, peace, and prosperity of the people of the Philippine 
Islands, and the measures adopted should be made to con- 
form to their customs, their habits, and even their preju- 
dices, to the fullest extent consistent with the accomplish- 
ment of the indispensable requisites of just and effective 
government.^' 

The Philippine Commission laid down the foundation 
of the civil government in the Philippines strictly in ac- 
cordance with these Instructions. In its first formal re- 
port to the President of the United States, the Commis- 
sion stated : 

“The theory upon which the commission is proceeding 
is that the only possible method of instructing the Filipino 



INTRODUCTORY 



3 



people in methods of free institutions and self-government 
IS to make a government partly of Americans and partly 
of Filipinos, giving the Americans the ultimate control for 
some time to come/' 

In the central government, Filipinization began ^Yith 
the appointment in 1901 of Filipino judges, including the 

of justices of the Supreme Court, and 

Of three Fihpmo members to the Philippine Commission. 

The policy enunciated by President McKinley was ad- 
hered to in the years that followed his regime. Step by 

step, institutions of self-government were given to the peo- 
pie. ^ 

The First Philippine Assembly— In 1907, in pursuance 
of the provisions of the Philippine Bill of 1902, the first 
Philippine Assembly was convened. The Assembly, con- 
stituted entirely by Filipinos, was to exercise legislative 
authority over all parts of the Philippines not inhabited 
by Moros or other non-Christian tribes, jointly with the 
Philippine Commission, the sole legislative body of the 
Philippines up to that time. 

This step in the American program in the Philippines 
was of great significance in view of the fact that, for the 
first time, the Filipinos were given a real opportunity to 
participate in the determination of national legislative pol- 
icies. The creation of the Assembly gave to the people an 
opportunity to prove their capacity for self-government. 

nent the calling of the Philippine Assembly, President 
Koosevelt, m a message to Congress on December 6 1904 



We are endeavoring to develop the natives themselves 
so that they shall take an ever-increasing share in their 
own govei-nment, and as far as is prudent we are already 
admitting their representatives to a governmental equality 
with our own... If they show that they are capable of 
electing a legislature which in its turn is capable of taking 
a sane and efficient part in the actual work of the govern- 
ment, they can rest assured that a full and increasing mea- 
sure of recognition will be given them.” 



4 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

In 1906, again he said, 

“We are constantly increasing the measure of liberty 
accorded the islanders, and next spring, if conditions war- 
rant, we shall take a great stride forward in testing their 
capacity for self-government by summoning the first Filipino 
legislative assembly; and the way in which they stand this 
test will largely determine whether the self-government thus 
granted will be increased or decreased.” 

The Assembly, however, had no complete control in 
the determination of legislative policies owing to the fact 
that the Philippine Commission was dominated by a ma- 
jority of American members. Moreover, under the provi- 
sions of the Philippine Bill of 1902, the Philippine Com- 
mission was vested with exclusive jurisdiction over the non- 
Christian provinces of the Philippines. If to these would 
be added the fact that the Philippine Commission was exer- 
cising also executive functions, it could easily be seen that, 
until the Philippine Commission could be controlled by a 
Filipino majority, the Philippine Assembly would at best 
be a consultative or checking, but not a powerful policy-de- 
body for the country. Conflicts between the 
Filipino-controlled Philippine Assembly and the American- 
controlled Philippine Commission were bound to come, as 
they, in fact, did come. 

Filipino Majority in the Philippine Commission. — 

Following the triumph in the United States of the Demo- 
cratic Party in the national elections of 1912, the Filipinos 
were given control of the Philippine Commisson through 
the^ appointment to that body by President Wilson of a 

majority of Filipinos. In explaining his action. President 
Wilson said: 

I believe that in this way we shall make proof of their 
capacity in counsel and their sense of responsibility in the 
exercise of political power, and that the success of this step 
will be sure to clear our view for the steps which are to fol- 
low. Step by step we should extend and perfect the system 
of self-government in the Islands, making test of them and 
modifying them as experience discloses their successes and 
their failures; so that we should more and more put under 
the control of the native citizens of the archipelago the es- 



INTRODUCTORY 



5 



scntial instruments of their life, their local instxunientali- 
ties of government, their schools, all the common interests 
of their communities, and so by counsel ajid experience set 
government which all the world will see to be suitable 
to a people whose affairs are under their own control.” 

With the control by the Filipinos of the two branches 
of the legislature, the government evolved from a govern- 
ment by Americans assisted by Filipinos into a government 
by Filipinos assisted by Americans. 

There still remained, however, the disadvantage that 
the arrangement was purely administrative because of the 
fact that the Commissioners were appointed by the Pres- 
ident of the United States and, consequently, were I’espon- 
sible to him and not to the Filipino people. 

The Philippine Autonomy Act of 1916, Popularly 
Known as the Jones Law.— In 1916, with the passage of 
the Philippine Autonomy Act, popularly kno\vn as the 
Jones Law, another more decisive step was taken in the 
direction of self-government. The purpose of the measure, 
as explained in its preamble, was “to place in the hands 
of the people of the Philippines as large a control of their 
domestic affairs as can be given them without, in the mean- 
time, impairing the exercise of the rights of sovereignty 
by the people of the United States, in order that, by the 
Use and exercise of popular franchise and governmental 
powers, they may be the better prepared to fully assume 
the responsibilities and enjoy all the privileges of complete 
independence.” 

The Philippine Autonomy Act of 1916 created a bi- 
cameral legislature, composed of members elected by the di- 
rect vote of the people, with the exception of two members 
of the Senate and nine members of the House of Repre- 
sentatives who were appointed by the Governor-General to 
represent the non-Christian provinces of the Philippines. 
Although there was no limitation upon the power of the 
Governor-General to appoint any person whom he wished 
to, the appointive members of both houses for all the time 
that the Philippine Autonomy Act was in force were Fili- 



6 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



pinos. The legislature was vested with general legislative 
powers, subject only to such restrictions as were expressly 
or impliedly provided in the Organic Law. The Act confer- 
red upon the Philippine Senate the power to confirm ap- 
pointments made by the Governor-General, which fact ne- 
cessarily meant an increased Filipinization in the executive 
departments. 

Before the framing of the Philippine Constitution, un- 
der the organic acts for the Philippines, there had been 
already established Filipino municipal government, Filipi- 
no provincial government, a Filipino legislature, a Filipi- 
nized cabinet, and a judicial system in which the Filipinos 
predominated. In brief, the affairs of the country were 
administered largely by Filipinos, exercising autonomous 
functions provided in the organic acts then in force. 

But there was still the American Governor-General, 
appointed by the President of the United States, sharing 
directly with the Filipino-constituted legislature in the 
process of lawmaking, besides exercising the supreme exe- 
cutive power. In the exercise of his legislative function 
thiough the power to approve or to veto/»bills passed by 
the lawmaking body, the Governor-General might follow 
the spirit of the Jones Law, limiting the exercise of the 
veto power to measures affecting the sovereignty of the 
United States in the Philippines or might use it, if he so 
wished, in any bill, regardless of its nature. ..The supreme 
executive power of the Governor-Genex’al might be exercised 
^ large degree of autonomy to subordinate 
o cials or to restrict as much as possible this autonomy 
so t at in law and in fact, in theory and in practice, the 
other executive officials of the government would be mere 
agents of the Governor-General, doing ministerial work for 
him. While it was true that, for the years that followed 
the enactment of the Philippine Autonomy Act of 1916, the 
Filipinos were allowed to enjoy, as a general rule, legisla- 
tive as well as executive autonomy, this autonomy was only 
an administrative arrangement depending upon the char- 
acter and the benevolence of the gubernatorial incumbent. 



INTRODUCTORY 



7 



Within the limits of the Philippine Autonomy Act of 1916, 
this autonomy was not a peiTnanent arrangement. Besides, 
there was still a majority of Americans in the Supi'eme 
Court, the members of which continued to be appointed by 
the President of the United States. The department of 
public instruction of the government was, by the provision 
of the Philippine Autonomy Act, headed by the Vice-Gov- 
ernor-General, who was appointed by the President of the 
United States. The insular auditor, another appointee of 
the President of the United States, was still an American. 

For nearly two decades, the Filipinos were governed 
principally under the provisions of the Philippine Auto- 
nomy Act of 1916, a period marked by energetic struggles 
on the part of the Filipino people for the redemption of 
the pledge of independence given therein. 

The Tydings-McDuffie Law.— In 1934, the Congress of 
the United States passed Public Act Numbered one hun- 
dred twenty-seven, 73rd Congress, commonly known as 
the Tydings-McDuffie Law, intended to be the last of the 
constitutional landmarks studding the period of constitu- 
tional development of the Filipino people undei* the Amer- 
ican regime before the final grant of Philippine independ- 
ence. It was by virtue of this law that the Filipino people 
were authorized to frame a constitution of their own. 

For the first time in their history of subjection to a 
foreign rule, the Filipinos were given the authority by the 
mother country to determine, subject to certain limitations 
intended primarily for the protection of her sovereignty 
while she remained herein, the fonns and character of the 
political institutions under which they would live, together 
with the powers and responsibilities that the different 
branches and divisions of the government should have. The 
Philippine Independence Law placed in their hands the 
sole duty and responsibility of determining for themselves 
le governmental system that would suit their own ti’adi- 
tions, psychology, and conditions. 

In the fulfillment of this duty and responsibility, the 
Filipino people, through the Philippine Constitutional Con- 



8 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

vention, determined a governmental system under which 
they would live not only during the transition period of ten 
years but also for the time following the inauguration of 
the Philippine Republic. 

Under the Tydings-McDuffie Law, the Philippines 
would be given her independence on the 4th day of July 
immediately following the expiration of the tenth year 
from the inaugui'ation of the government set up by the 
Philippine Constitution. 

The Philippine Constitution may, therefore, be said to 
be the crowning step in the American program in the 
Philippines of gradually preparing the Filipino people in 
the art of self-government, with a view to their ultimate 
independence. 



CHAPTER II 



THE CALLING OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL 
CONVENTION 

Source of Authority.— Under the Tydings.McDuffie 
Law, the Philippine Legislature was authorized to pro- 
vide for the election of delegates to a constitutional con- 
vention, which should meet in the hall of the House 
of Representatives in the capital of the Philippine Is- 
lands, at such time as it might fix but not later than 
October 1, 1934, to formulate and draft a constitution for 
the new government of the Philippine Islands. 

Public Discussions. — Since the passage of the Law by 
the Congress of the United States on March 24, 1934, with 
the acceptance of the same by the Philippine Legislature 
virtually assured, the thought of the country was turned 
to the great responsibility of framing the constitution for 
the new government. In all circles, there was a great 
awakening to the new national task. The press was very 
prolific in its treatment of the problems involved in consti. 
tution-making. Leaders of thought wrote informational 
articles on constitutional subjects for the enlightenment of 
the masses. The schools, civic societies, and other public 
bodies showed a decided preference for subjects on con- 
stitutions as their topics of public discussion. 

With respect to the Constitutional Convention, the 
public discussions revolved about three problems: — (1) the 
number of delegates and the manner of their choice; (^) 
their qualifications; and (3) the time for their election. 

The Guinto Plan. — One of the early plans regarding 
the composition of the Convention was that submitted by 
Acting Secretary of the Interior, Leon C. Guinto, fixing 
the membership at two hundred and eighty eight delegates, 
to be apportioned among the provinces as herein-below spe- 
cified and to be elected by all the qualified voters of each 



10 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



province: Provided, that, for the Mountain Province, the 

provinces of Lanao, Cotabato, Sulu, and Bukidnon, the dele- 
gates should be elected by a plurality of the members pre- 
sent at the meeting of the presidents, vice-presidents, and 
councilors of municipalities, duly organized, and the pres- 
idents and councilors of the municipal districts within the 
province : 



Abra, three; Agrusan, one; Albay, twelve; Antique, three; 
Bat^n, three; Batanes, three; Batangas, nine; Bohol, nine; 
Bukidnon, one; Bulacan, six; Cagayan, six; Camarines Norte, 
three; Camarines Sur, six; Capiz, nine; Cavite, three; Ce- 
bu, twenty-one; Cotabato, four; Davao, three; Ilocos Norte, 
six; Ilocos Sur, six; Iloilo, fifteen; Isabela, three; Laguna, 
six; Lanao, four; La Union, six; Leyte, fifteen; Marindu- 
que, three; Masbate, three; Manila, six; Mindoro, three; 
Misamis Oriental, three; Misamis Occidental, three; Moun- 
tain province, five; Negros Occidental, nine; Negros Orien- 
tal, six; Nueva Ecija, six; Nueva Vizcaya, one; Palawan, 
t ree; Pampanga, six; Pangasinan, fifteen; Rizal, six; Rom- 
on, three; Samar, nine; Sorsogon, six; Surigao, three; 

ar ac, six; Sulu, four; Tayabas, six; Zambales, three; and 
Zamboanga, four. 



e position of delegates was to be made open to men 
an women, excluding only the chief justice and’ associate 
JUS ces o the Supreme Court; judges of the courts of 
nf peace; officers and members 
ri-p 4-u t/ Constabulary; and the chief and members 

T 1 A States Army and Navy in the Philippine 

Islands and of the municipal police force. 

, Size of the Constitutional Convention The size 

V Convention was a subject of interest- 

time. It was contended that the 
lona Convention, being a body called upon to 

u ^ ^^^^n^ental law of the lan^ for all times, 
^ ^ ^®PJ^esentative of the different sections 

^ possible and, consequently, should be 

constituted by a fairly large number of delegates. The 
advocates for a small number of delegates to the Consti- 
tutional Convention argued that what was needed was a 
group of delegates well versed in Philippine conditions and 



THE CALLING OF THE CONVENTION 



11 



institutions and fairly conversant vith foreign political sys- 
tems in order that they would be able to frame an excellent 
constitution for the Philippines. Recalling the fact that 
the American federal constitution which had received uni- 
versal praise as an excellent document was drafted by a 
constitutional assembly of originally 55 members, these ad- 
vocates stated that, in order to be efficient, the Philippine 
Constitutional Convention should be constituted by a small 
gi’oup of men, preferably not more than one hundred in 
number. 

The Enfi-anchisement of Women for the Constitutional 
Convention. — Another matter that arrested public interest 
at the time was the eligibility of women to vote and be 
voted upon in the election of delegates to the Constitu- 
tional Convention. The Tribune, a leading Filipino daily, 
in advocating the eligibility of women, said: 

‘‘We submit that the women, who are after all in the 
most intimate touch with what we know as social problems, 
are the best fitted to discuss such problems in such an as- 
sembly as the constitutional convention will be. We submit 
that the women leaders in this country are second to none 
in their grasp and understanding of such problems; that 
their warm feeling for the way humanity should live is re- 
enforced by concrete knowledge of the means that may be 
used to bring that way about. And we submit, in conclu- 
sion, that because they are so fitted they must be given the 
right to vote in the election of the delegates to the consti- 
tutional convention, and the right to be themselves eligible 
for membership in the Convention.” 

For several reasons, the proposition to permit women 
to vote and be voted upon was not considered very seriously, 
although it was suggested in a caucus of the legislators 
of the majority party dui’ing the period of the special ses- 
sion in which the Tydings-McDuffie Law was accepted and 
the convention law was approved. In the first place, under a 
law approved on December 7, 1933, women would not exer- 
cise the right of suffrage until January 1, 1935. To consider 
the proposition at length would be to reopen entirely the 
question of woman suffrage. In the second place, the spe-’ 



12 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



cial session of the legislature was called on the eve of the 
general elections of 1934 only to accept the Tydings-Mc- 
Duffie Law and to provide for the calling of the Constitu- 
tional Convention. It had been the plan of the legislature 
to meet only for a few days in view of the approaching 
general elections. In the third place, it was thought that 
there was no sufficient time left for the registration of 
women voters in view of the fact that, under the Tydings- 
McDuffie Law, the Constitutional Convention was scheduled 
to be called not later than October 1, 1934. 

The Quezon Non-Partisan Plan. — A second plan for 
the composition of the Constitutional Convention, very 
highly commended in non-political circles, was that sug- 
gested by President Manuel L. Quezon of the Philippine 
Senate upon his arrival from the United States with the 
Tydings-McDuffie Law, for the election throughout the 
country on a non-partisan ticket of one hundred men. It 
was hoped that, under this plan, the best minds of the coun- 
try could be drafted, regardless of their party affilia- 
tions, political influence, or social positions. Moreover, it 
was argued that, with both parties agreeing on the com- 
position of the non-partisan ticket to be presented to the 
electorate, it would be possible to hold the election of dele- 
gates simultaneously with the general elections for the of- 
government, thereby effecting an economy for 

the latter. 

T^he ^oezon plan, which had the approval of Senator 

- ^ minority party in the legislature, 

ai e o i^a ization because of the strong opposition of 
many members of the legislature. While they believed with 
the leaders in the necessity of electing the best men of the 
coun ry o e Constitutional Convention, these members 
con en e a the plan was undemocratic because it did 
not insure the representative character of the Convention. 
It was pointed out that the Quezon Plan could not assure a 
fair geographical distribution of the candidates to be in- 
cluded in the non-partisan ticket. 



THE CALLING OF THE CONVENTION 



13 



The Zulueta Plan. — Another plan of which Represent- 
ative Jose Zulueta, majority floor leader in the House 
of Representatives, was the chief exponent, would have 
the Constitutional Convention composed of two delegates 
elected from each of the representative districts under the 
Jones Law. It was argued in favor of this plan that it 
insured the representative character of the Constitutional 
Convention, which was necessary to the drafting of a con- 
stitution that would reflect the ideas of all sections of the 
country. 

The Determination of the Date for the Election of Del- 
egates. — There was a unanimous opinion on the part of 
the members of the legislature as well as of the people 
that the election of delegates to the Constitutional Con- 
vention should be free fi’om the influence of narrow 
partisanship. Accordingly, thex*e was a concurrence of 
opinion that the election of delegates should take place 
either before the general elections of June, 1934, or long 
enough after them to give time for party rancour to die 
out. In view of the fact that there was no sufficient time 
left after the special session and before the general elec- 
tions for the necessary preparation for the election of del- 
egates, it was decided to have the election several weeks 
after the general elections. 

The Provisions of the Convention Law. — The Conven- 
tion Bill, finally approved by the Philippine Legislature 
on May 5, 1934, and signed by the Governor-General on 
May 26, 1934, provided for the election of 202 delegates. 
The main provisions of the Convention Bill were as fol- 
lows: 

1. The Constitutional Convention should be composed of 
two hundred and two elective delegates distributed at the 
ratio of two delegates for each representative district, ex- 
cept in the special provinces of Mindanao and Sulu which 
should each have two delegates, and except in the Movm- 
tain Province which should have two delegates for each 
subprovince thereof and two delegates for the city of Ba- 
guio. The delegates for the elective representative districts 
and those of Nueva Vizcaya, Baguio, Agusan, Davao, and 



14 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



Zamboanga should be elected by a plurality of the votes of 
the qualified electors; those of the Mountain Province, Bu- 
kidnon, Cotabato, Lanao, and Sulu should be elected by 
secret ballot and by a plurality of the votes of their members 
present at a meeting to be held in their respective localities 
by the presidents, vice-presidents, and councilors of the mu- 
nicipalities and municipal districts. 

2. The election of delegates should be held on June 
26, 1934; but, for good reasons, the Governor-General might 
postpone the election to a date not later than July IG, 1934. 

3. Every candidate for delegate should have the quali- 
fications required by existing law for eligibility for repre- 
sentative; namely, he must be a cjualified elector over twenty- 
five years of age; he must be able to read and write either 
the Spanish or the English language; he must have been an 
actual resident of the district from which elected for at 
least one year immediately prior to his election. 

4. The office of delegate should be honorary and should 
be compatible with any other public office not subject to 
the civil service rules. 



5. The Convention should be the sole judge of the elec- 
tions, returns, and qualifications of its members; and it 
might organize and adopt such rules as it might see fit, 
punish its members for disorderly behavior, and, with the 
concurrence of two-thirds, expel them. 

6. The laws relative to the parliamentary immunity of 
e members of the Legislature and the protection of the 

sessions of the same and its committees against disturbance 
an molestation, and the penalties provided for the viola- 
^ said laws should be applicable to the members of 
e onstitutional Convention and to the sessions of the 
same and of its committees. 



f ^ action of Delegates to the Constitutional Con- 
'^rsuant to Section 4 of the Convention Law, 
e overnor- eneral fixed July 10, 1934 for the election 
of delegates to the Constitutional Convention. 



i-i. f 4 - 1 , of the work and the responsibi- 

^ ^ ^ 4 - 4 .^ 4 .*^j^ itutional Convention, the election of dele- 
gates to the field many of the most outstanding 

men of the Philippines, identified with different phases of 
Philippine life. Lawyers, business men, educators, labor 
leaders, farmers, medical men, professional politicians, 
newspapermen all aspired for an opportunity to serve the 



THE CALLING OF THE CONVENTION 



15 



country and the people in the task of drafting the funda- 
mental law. Many of them had never been in politics be- 
fore and never been identified with any of the political 
parties ; others had been prominent in politics of the past but 
had already retired to private life after distinguished pub- 
lic service; the remainder were still in active politics. The 
attraction for service was made greater by the unanimous 
appeal for a non-partisan election, for the exercise of the 
highest sense of duty in the selection of the membei's of 
the Constitutional Convention. 

President Manuel L. Quezon and Senator Osmena re- 
fused to become candidates for the Constitutional Conven- 
tion in spite of what appeared to be a national demand; 
the first, because he felt that ha would be too busy to attend 
to his work at the Constitutional Convention, most pi*ob- 
ably as its president in case he had chosen to aspire for 
membex'ship therein, too busy owing to the fact that he 
was the Pi*esident of the Philippine Senate and at the same 
time the leader of the Filipino participation in the goveim- 
ment ; the second, because he wanted to devote all his time 
to *his woi’k as the leader of the minoi'ity party in the gov- 
ernment, whose counsels wei’e often sought by the majority 
party in the political affaii’s of the countiy. 

All efforts had been exerted to insui-e the non-partisan 
character of the election. The country was made to un- 
dei'stand by all means possible the fact that it was urgently 
necessary that the spirit of partisanship be set aside in the 
detennination of members of the Constitutional Assembly. 
President Manuel L. Quezon and Senator Osmena, the lead- 
ers of the great national political parties, even before the 
approval of the Convention bill, tided theii* best to push 
through the plan of a national non-paidisan ticket to insure 
the selection of men for the Convention purely on their 
own meidts. Having failed in this plan, they continued 
their efforts to reduce to the minimum possible the influ- 
ence of partisan feelings in the election. Candidates for 
delegates, according to the Convention law, needed not 
make, in their certificates of candidacy, any statement re- 






16 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

garding their political affiliation, unlike those for offices 
covered by the election laws then in force. Even after 
the June general elections when the two national political 
parties fought what had been acknowledged to be the bit- 
terest election fight in the histoi'y of Philippine politics, 
these two great national leaders continued to use their in- 
fluence to make the election of delegates as non-partisan 
as possible. The bitterness of the fight just staged did 
not in any way prevent them from taking the only states- 
manlike attitude in managing the conduct of an election 
calling for the highest sense of duty and responsibility 
from the directors of the Philippine government. Publicly, 
they appealed to their henchmen in the field and to the Fili- 
pino people to send to the Constitutional Convention the 
best men possible. In their efforts, they were supported 
by the other leaders of the people in all branches of en- 
deavor and especially by the press throughout the country. 
All throughout the country, the appeal was heard and gen- 
erally heeded. 

The press throughout the nation specially cooperated 
effectively in bringing home to the people the necessity 
for a non-partisan election of the delegates to the Conven- 
tion. The editorial of the Philippines Herald for July 3, 
1934, typical of the messages of the press, relative to the 
matter, counselled: 

“We have always insisted upon the necessity of elect- 
ing the delegates to the Constitutional Convention regard- 
less of their party affiliations, and once more we reiterate 
that plea in view of the approach of the elections. 

“The Philippine electorate must forget all partisan 
alignments in the matter of selecting the men who will draft ■ 
the fundamental document of our liberties. Our constitu- 
tion, as we have said before, is not the exclusive concern 
of any particular party but of the whole nation. 

Party loyalties should be brushed aside because we 
are here not deciding which party must rule, the June 5th 
elections having already disposed of that issue, but what 
constitution would best suit the circumstances of our new 
life. 



THE CALLING OF THE CONVENTION 17 

Antis and pros alike have the supreme duty of con- 
tributing to the task of making our constitution a sound 
guarantee of our national welfai-e. All other considerations 
are but secondary to this supreme obligation of every Fili- 
pino.” 

There were no public issues, no constitutional pro- 
grams presented by the political parties before the people. 
There appeared to be a common appeal, a common issue t 
the selection of the men best fitted for the work of drafting 
the Philippine Constitution. Wlule as a rule political par- 
ties presented candidates of their own, the appeal for votes 
was based not on their party affiliations but on merit for 
the task of framing the Constitution, The speeches deliv- 
ered before the electorate, the campaign propaganda dis- 
tributed among the masses, stressed only one point: the 
weight of the responsibility of the Filipino people at that 
period of our national histoiy when they were called upon 
to select the men in whose hands they would entrust the 
solemn duty and responsibility of determining the political 
system un<Jer which they and the many generations of Fili- 
pinos yet to come would live. 

In many places, the local parties presented and sup- 
ported only one set of two candidates for the two elective 
positions corresponding to their districts. In many places 
where the national political parties presented their re- 
spective sets of candidates, the electorate elected one from 
each of the political parties, selecting from the sets those 
whom they considered to be the two best qualified candi- 
dates. 

The election was probably the quietest and the most 
orderly election, in the histoi'y of the Philippines. Of the 
1,704,095 registered voters for the 1934 general elections, 
there were altogether 873,021 voters who went to the polls 
to vote in the election for delegates, compared to 1,344,557, 
who voted in the 1934 general elections. 

®®l®S3^tes Elected to the Constitutional Conven- 
tion.-The following were elected delegates to the Consti- 
tutional Convention : 



18 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



Jesus Paredes 






Julio Borbon 






Apolonio D. Curato 


. . . Agusan 




Delfin Gumban 


. . . Agusan 




Ambrosio A. Calleja .... 






Braulio Leonardo 






Francisco Munoz 






Jose D. Conejero 






Jesus B. Surban 






Jose Bonto 






Satumino Benito 


. . . Albay 




Toribio P, Perez 






Angel Salazar 






Ramon Maza 






Miguel Cuademo 






Roman A. Cruz 






Juan C. Castillejos 






Mariano A. Lizardo 


. . . Batanes 




Antonino Barrion 






Claro M. Recto 






Conrado V. Sanchez 


. . . Batangas 




Eusebio M. Lopez 


. . . Batangas 




Eusebio Orense 






Jose P. Laurel 






Anastacio A. Mumar . . . . 


. . . Bohol 




Bernardino Inting 






Gaudencio Cloribel 


. . . Bohol 




Jose A. Clarin 






Perfecto Balili 






Teofilo B. Buslon . . 






J. G. Sanvictores 


. . . Bukidnon 




Pedro D. Melendez . . 


. . . Bukidnon 




Antonio Villarama . . 






Manuel L. Sevilla . . 


. . . Bulacan 




Nicolas Buendia . . 






Teodoro Sandiko 






Antonio Guzman . . 






Marcelo Adduru . 






Miguel P. Pio . . 






Vicente Nenomuceno . . 






Baldomero M. Lapak 




Norte 


Wenceslao Q. Vinzons 




Norte 


Exequiel S. Grageda 




Sur 


Gabriel P. Prieto .... 




Sur 


Manuel Abell a 




Sur 


Severo Cea 




Sur 




THE CALLING OF THE CONVENTION 



19 



Antonio A. Arcenas Capiz 

Cornelio T. Villareal Capiz 

Jose Altavas Capiz 

Jose M. Hontiveros Capiz 

Manuel Roxas Capiz 

Teodulfo Suner Capiz 

D^etrio B. Encarnacion . . . Cavite 

Vicente J, Francisco Cavite 

Antonio B. Ybanez Cebu 

Casiano S. Carin Cebu 

Antonio Mansueto Cebu 

Cesar Kintanar Cebu 

Dionisio Niei-e Cebu 

Felismeno V, Rivera Cebu 

Filemon Sotto Cebu 

Hilario Camino Moncado .... Cebu 

Jesus M. Cuenco Cebu 

Juanito T. Maramara Cebu 

Manuel C. Briones Cebu 

Nicolas Rafols Cebu 

Paulino Gullas Cebu 

Vicente Sotto Cebu 

Blah Sinsuat Cotabato 

Menandang Piang Cotabato 

Pantaleon A, Pelayo Davao 

Rafael S. Castillo Davao 

Francisco Ventura Ilocos Norte 

Irineo Ran^ Ilocos Norte 

Maximino G. Bueno Ilocos Norte 

Servando Castro nocos Norte 

Artemio Abaya Hqcos Sur 

Delfin Joven Hocos Sur 

Elpidio Quirino Hocos Sur 

Vicente Singson Encarnacion. Hocos Sur 



Tranquilino J. Divinagracia . Hoilo 

Fermin G. Caram Iloiln 

Jose M. Aldeguer Iloilr> 

Jose C. Ganzon Iloilo 

Mariano Ezpeleta Iloilo 

Matias P. Yusay Iloilo 

Ruperto Montinola Iloilo 

Sofronio M. Flores Hoilo 

Tiburcio Lutero Iloilo 

Tomas Confesor Iloilo 

Elias Ocampo . . .* Isabela 

Miguel B. Binag Isabela 



20 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

Conrado Benitez Laguna 

Domingo T. Zavalla Lagnna 

Jose M. Delgado Laguna 

Pedro Guevara Laguna 

Alauya Alonto Lanao 

Tomas L. Cabili Lanao 

Alejandro de Guzman La Union 

Carnilo Osias La Union 

Enrique C. Sobrepena La Union 

Piq Ancheta La Union 

Atilano R. Cinco Leyte 

Francisco Zialcita Leyte 

Mamerto S. Ribo Leyte 

Manuel Martinez Leyte 

Mateo Canonoy Leyte 

Norberto Romualdez Leyte 

Quiremon Alkuino Leyte 

Rafael Martinez Leyte 

Ruperto Kapunan Leyte 

Victorino N. Salazar Leyte 

Gregorio Perfecto Manila 

Manuel Lim Manila 

Rafael Palma Manila 

Salvador Araneta Manila 

Ricardo Nepomuceno Marinduque 

Timoteo P. Ricohermoso .... Marinduque 

Jose Zurbito Masbate 

Amancio A^ilarf Masbate 

Cipriano Liboro Mindoro 

Juan Navarro Mindoro 

Alberto Crespillo Mt. Province 

Bias Villamor Mt. Province 

Clement Irving Mt. Province 

Felipe E. Jose Mt. Province 

Jose Fakangan Mt. Province 

Jose Lorenzana Mt. Province 

Jose M. Carino Mt. Province 

Jose Velasco Mt. Province 

Max Duguiang Mt. Province 

Miguel Gumangan Mt. Province 

Saturnino Moldero Mt. Province 

Sixto A. Gaerlan Mt. Province 

Bonifacio Ysip Nueva Ecija 

Eugenio Baltao Nueva Ecija 



t Died August 17, 1934 



THE CALLING OF THE CONVENTION 



21 



Ezequiel M. Santos 

Florentine O. Chioco 

Demetrio Quirino 

Leon Cabarroguis 

Jose Ozamis 

Paulino A. Conol 

Jose Artadi 

Manuel C. Fernandez 

Enrique J. C, Montilla 

Jesus Y. Perez 

Jose C. Locsin 

Juan L. Ledesma 

Pedro C. Hernaez 

Simplicio Lizares . 

Hermenegildo Villanueva . . . . 

Jose E, Romero 

Sergio G. Jumawan 

Vicente Lopez 

Evaristo R. Sandoval 

Gaudencio E. Abordo 

Jose Gutierrez David 

Felix B. Bautista 

Jose Alejandi-ino 

Juan D. Nepomuceno 

Anacleto B. Ramos 

Bernabe de Guzman 

Enrique Braganza 

Eusebio V. Sison 

Jose L. de Guzmai^. 

Jose M. Aruego \X. 

Juan Ventenilla 

Leoncio R. Esliza 

Numeriano Tanopo 

Pascual M. Beltran 

Castor P. Cruz 

Domingo T. Dikit 

Juan Ortega 

Mai'iano Melendres 

Antonio J. Montesa. 

Manuel F. Albero 

Agripino P. Escareal 

Felipe Abrigo 

Juan L. Bocar 

Luciano Ortiz 

Pedro R. Arteche 

Serafin Marabut 



Nueva Ecija 

Nueva Ecija 

Nueva Vizcaya 

Nueva Vizcaya 

Misamis Occidental 

Misamis Occidental 

Misamis Oi'iental 

Misamis Oidental 

Negros Occidental 

Negros Occidental 

Negros Occidental 

Negros Occidental 

Negros Occidental 

Negros Occidental 

Negros Oriental 

Negros Oriental 

Negros Oriental 

Negros Oriental 

Palawan 

Palawan 

Pampanga 

Pampanga 

Pampanga 

Pampanga 

Pangasinan 

Pangasinan 

Pangasinan 

Pangasinan 

Pangasinan 

Pangasinan 

Pangasinan 

Pangasinan 

Pangasinan 

Pangasinan 

Rizal 

Rizal 

Rizal 

Rizal 

Romblon 

Romblon 

Samar 

Samar 

Samar 

Samar 

Samar 

Samar 



22 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



Adolfo Grafilo Sorsogon 

Francisco Arellano Sorsogon 

Jose S. Reyes Sorsogon 

Mario Guarina Sorsogon 

Aroian Tulawi Sulu 

Jose Montano Sulu 

Clementino V. Diez Surigao 

Montano A. Ortiz Surigao 

Alejandro A. Galang . Tarlac 

Enrique Maglanoc ” Tarlac 

Gregorio M. Banaga Tarlac 

Luis Morales Tarlac 

Fabian R. Millar Tayabas 

Godofredo Reyes Tayabas 

Romualdo Enriquez Tayabas 

Vicente Salumbides Tayabas 

Alejo Labrador Zambales 

Potenciano Lesaca Zambales 

Florentine Saguin Zamboanga 

Pablo Lorenzo Zamboanga 



CHAPTER III 



THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL 

CONVENTION 

A Cross-Section of the Constitutional Convention. — 
The delegates to the Constitutional Convention were repre- 
sentative of Philippine society. Dominated by a big ma= — 
jority of lawyers, the Convention included, in its member- 
bership, businessmen, physicians, educators, farmers, reli- 
gious ministers, newspapermen, social and labor leaders. 

With the exception of four who had already passed 
their seventieth birthday and sixteen who were still be- 
low thirty years of age, the delegates were middle-aged 
men, with a majority of them ranging all the way from 
thirty-five years to fifty years of age. Delegate Teodoro 
Sandiko, the oldest of them all was past seventy-four yeai’s 
of age ; while Delegate Wenceslao Q. Vinzons, the youngest, 
was under twenty-five. 

Practically all of them were college graduates, with 
no less than twenty having been educated in Amei'ican uni- 
versities. 

With the exception of a few of them who were moneyed 
and landed men, the delegates were of the middle class. 

Included among them were men already experienced 
in public affairs. Two of them. Generals Teodoro Sandi- 
ko and Jose Alejandrino, were members of the Revolution- 
ary Congress of 1898, which drafted the Malolos Consti- 
tution. Seven of them were members of the first Philip- 
pine Assembly — Jose Altavas, Jose A. Clarin, Eusebio 
Orense, Rafael Palma, Vicente Singson Encarnacion, File- 
mon Sotto, and Quiremon Alkuino. Nineteen of them had 
served, with some still serving, in the Senate of the Phil- 
ippine Legislature — V. Singson Encarnacion, Rafael Palma, 
Pedro Guevara, Mario Guarina, Jose Altavas, Filemon 
Sotto, Jose A. Clarin, Bernabe de Guzman, Teodoro San- 
diko, Hermenegildo Villanueva, Jose M. Hontiveros, Elpidio 



24 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



Quirino, Camilo Osias, Luis Morales, Jose P. Laurel, Jose 
Alejandrino, Claro M. Recto, Ruperto Monti nola, and Ma- 
nuel C. Briones. More than fifty of them had served, with 
some still seizing, as members of the Philippine Assembly 
after the first, and of the lower house of the Philippine 
Legislature, including Manuel Roxas, former Speaker of 
the House of Representatives. One of them, Norberto Ro- 
mualdez, had been an associate justice of the Supreme 
Court of the Philippines, with another three having seiwed 
as judges of the courts of first instance, and with a num- 
ber as judges in the justice of the peace courts. Three of 
them had served in the Goveimor-General’s cabinet, as de- 
partment secretaries — Jose P. Laurel, V. Singson Encarna- 
cion, Rafael Palma — with Elpidio Quirino still serving as 
such. Two of them were the Philippine resident commis- 
sioners to the United States — Pedro Guevara and Camilo 
Osias. More than thirty of them had served as provincial 
governors, with some of them still seiwing as such. 

Others had already acquired distinction in their res- 
pective fields of endeavor. 



The delegates brought to the Convention a wealth of 
experience and information acquired from the legislative, 
executive, and judicial departments; from labor and indus- 
try; from education and religion; and from science and 
agriculture. 



Biographical Notes on the Delegates. — In the follow- 
ing pages, the author presents some biographical notes on 
the delegates, showing their ages, professions, experiences, 
and interests, from which the reader may obtain general 
information on their qualifications and background for con- 
stitution-making. 



DELEGATES l PROVINCE r AGE 



THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE CONVENTION 



25 



CO 

Eh 

CO 

W 

« 

w 

Eh 

12 ; 

HH 

a 

o 

w 

t—i 

w 



o 

O 



>> o 
o 



►-5 

« *S 

o 

^ 2 
U3 c3 
O 



C 
o 

£ 
c 

o 
> 
o 

a — 

a tQ 

c c 



o 

o 

c: 



^ M 



u 

a 



C/3 

P 

•*-n 

S § 
£ :> 



o 

CS 4 



c. ,S 2 

CXi 

^ >-t o rt 

^ P-( Ph 



c « 

*> ’5 

O C 

^ o 
o U 
x: ^ 

-*-> . ^ 

® c rt 

C3 £ 

o CO 
^ CO 

£ *HI 

^ g o 
O o c 

C -Q >-i 
£ o 



o rt 






.2 o 



tc 



0i 

-O 

p 

o 

w 

o 

JC 



0 c /5 
o 
> 

^ rt 

gl 

£ S 

1 - 

£ CS 2 

>-l 

O 

^ o 



o 

cn 

P 

o 



a 

j:: 



<♦-4 

® c/: 
<u 
> 
o 

1| 

S o 

in 

o 

S 

C O 

£ « 
o 

o 



u 

o 

c 

>-4 

o 

> 

o 

bo 



o 

c 

’> 

o 

u 

P4 

f-4 O 
O 

c ^ 

S £ 

o o 



JL 

c 
o 

• - ]B 

« Q. 

o ^ 

H c; P 
cb ,p 

c -r^ 

o e 

O «s s 

§ « 

"o "3 

P & 

^ <D 

- fco 

£ 
a 



* Ut • 

> s 

p c CO 
fcc £ 

o‘ 

>» c 



p. 
p. 

S gs 

.« C!. 

g S " 
2 « £ 
te 

o 



0^ O 



o ^ 

p ® ^4 

o 

o o £ o 
P c o 

Pi O £ 



CS 

c 



;z; 

o 

HH 

CO 

CO 

W 

o 

« 



'b^ 


Vi 


Vi 






Vi 


Vi 


o 


O 


O 


o 


<y 


0 ) 


(U 


1 * 




1 * 


r 


>* 






CJ 


P 


rt 


f 3 


rt 


C 3 


C 5 




hJ 


iJ 








h -3 


52 


27 


CO 


CO 


o 


n< 


tH 


CO 


CO 




LO 





'T^ 

5 ^ 

of o 

2 
f-i 

o CO 

r I 

cS cS 



Ui 

o 



CO 

<N CO 



p 

CO 



o 

o 

o 



P 

CO 

w 

o 

£ P 




p 


<S 


P 


*C 

ctf 


p 


V 

03 


OS 

>» 

CS 


-M 

c3 

Xi 


O 

3 


5 2 


E 


bo 


in 


£ 




p 


p 


o3 


C3 


o 


O P. 


CO 


O 




PJ 



5* 

bo 

c 

a 

P 

£ 

c 3 

£h 



W 



o 

E 


o 

p 


o 

‘G 

P 

o 

'p 


<D 


3 

o 

Vi 


.2 

’o 

p 

03 


3 

p 


0SC 


o 

in 

o 

Ho 


CJ 

-M 

<J 


p 

03 


p 

•rt 

O 




cS 

s 


E 


p 

p 

S 


>-o 

vT 


o 

.S 


>» 


pS' 


o 

T3 

Vi 


• o 
^bo 


p" 

V< 

P 


iS 

2 


o' 

Vi 


<D 


X 3 

P 

03 


oS 




o 


*C 


no 


*3 


O 


O 


••— * 


<J , 


<J 


rO 

c 


XJ 

< 


nj 

<J 


bo 


rP 

< 


■P 


O 



& INTERESTS 



26 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



u 

^2; 

w 

►— 4 

w 



o 

c 

*& 

a. 












c 

o 



o 



o 

w 

p 

o 

w 

o 
(— < 
o 

!S 



t/) 



Pi 

o 



> _ 
o ^ 

^ S o 

o ^ o c/5 <4-4 
C 5 C O O 

|l & | S 

I?- - 



P O <4-1 O 

' * o j: 



^ Pi •'* 

w <y N o _ 

.i S a s S 

^ 0 ( 3 ^ § 

^ w ^ 



s o o 

*p p< ^*— • • •• 

CO p o 
O C Z« O 

o c •-« 

CO O O xi-) 



° ® to 

S > 
S -2 P 
g p 

o P 

§5 ^ S 

a ^ 

'5 £ « 

.5 o 



a c 



o 

*S- J; 'S o 

:§ I ^ « 

S O c3 2 
hJ :n 



CO 




I 


Pi 


P< 




o 


to 




P 


o 


o 




to 


o 




•— • 




pH 




p 


.£ 


u 


> 

o 








o 


*co 


o 


Pi 


o 






l-H 


p 


>> 


P. Ph 


o 






JO 


> 










a 






2 


hJ 


o 

> 


Pi 

a 


x; 

-*-> 


»>• 

U>4 

CJ 


tp 


«4H 

r> 


P 


o 

u 


'V 

P 

CJ 


Ph 

.. o 



U ^ 



p» 

p 

Pi 



CO 

C 



O P 

o 



-2 O a _ 

P Pi Pi O 

P P4 Pi 
Pi O 
O ^ 



U ^ •— CP 
O P P 
*o p O 



o 



r .2 p 

r? k. A 



to 






2 



CO 

o 
6 .> 

£ 5 

o c 



o 

Pi 

C/ Pi 

P 

£ ^ 
® U-l 

^ o 




w 

o 



00 

to 



l> 



l> 

to 



03 

t- 



Cl 

CO 



<M 

rr 



CO 




THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE CONVENTION 



27 



CO 

t-< 

CO 

w 

K 

H 

►-H 

a 

o 

;2; 



P-. 



rt 

CO 



u 

o 

c 

0 

1 



£ S 



« 5“ a 

^ " S 

^ ^ V3 

5 _ 

1^0 



S) 2 



a 
o 
D \z 

c3 ;z: 
o 



O ... 

u ^ 5 o 

C 3 c 3 

5 

rt 

CS3 ^ rt 



o 

o 

O 



C 

o 

rH 

*w 

o 

Pl. 



5 

*s ^ 

‘c C> 

S (§ 



> 

o 



o ^ 
^ p:3 



c3 

> 

o 

p 



o 

42 

E 

o 



;-4 

o 

s 

o 

(X4 



3 

O 



O 

4 = 



o w 

a 

Ih > 

o 

S c 
cj E 
E w 
o 

& 
s K 

>-i ^ 

r£ ^ 

o 



pro- 




“a.i 


0 


3! 

to 


0 c ^ 


c 

C3 


3 : 5 

C3 03 

0 0 . 2 . 

r '» 4: 



|| O 

a S -P 

>— < (y >-< 

. C 3 

to o 
.5 

*W ^-1 ^ 

g rt 

E £ ‘o 
^ c 

^ O .3 
0< Cs. > 



'^P .£ 

4 : 

U ^ 

I'S^ 

cj c c/T 
^ rt 

_ o ^ 

|) ^ C 

*55 

o c;} 

O C 

^ E 42 

U 0:3 



l=" 

< .ti 
cc '3 
CO o 



CQ to 
O 4d 

s I 

c. ^ 

E* ^ 
"" 13 



> 

o 

CO 

o 

u 

o 

5 

3 

cs 



^ VH ^ 

° T a 
^ 3 W 





















? 

3 






^ w 














-3 


0 


c>. 


W 














W 








c 














CO 




c 


I 












3 


CO 




CJ 












cj 








E 














Ph 


;-4 


Vi 


cr. 


>-• 


u 




f-l 






0 


0 0 


g; 


<1> 


0 








0 0 


0 




>» E 


.£ 






r>» 


b 


b 


>> HH 


H-l 

Ph 


:3 


1 s 


‘co 

3 


cr. 


CS 


cs 


CCS 


cs 


> CCS 

5 « 






pc 




h -2 






ij 


hC 


w 




















0 




















<J 


LO 


<M 


CO 

CO 


c:i 


rH 








0 




CO 


CO 


xr 








00 




w 




















0 

;z; 




c 

CCS 




c3 

0 






c3 


r* 

rt 




»-H 

> , 
0 

/■« . 


r-l 

C4 

E 


g 

’co 

CCS 

t4) 

3 


r-* 


w 

c5 

S 


0 

i2 


CO 

CCS 

to 

C 


to 

3 

rt 

a 

E 


*co 

to 

3 


CCS 

3 

a 


»-H 


rt 


CCS 


0 


3 


CCS 


c3 


cc3 


ccS 


CCS 




U1 


(1^ 


PC 




H 


PC 


Ph 


pH* 


hP 



CO 


p 4 

0 


s 


0 


0 


0 

rH 

0 


0 

3 

‘3 

/*\ 


pq 


13 

3 


0 

3 


W 

H 


rH 

T 2 

a 

P^ 


0 

CO 

0 


0 

cu 

«*H 

»H 


to 

3 

H 


to 

(L» 

0 


0 

3 


'0 


a 

CO 

3 

Ph 


SH 

3 

0 

0 


0 

W 

w 


qT 

4:: 

0 

cy 


0 

to 

CD 

3 


Ph 


(O' 

cS 

• 4 ^ 


cf 

to 

CCS 

»3 


3 " 

0 

*c 

;h 


cT 

CO 

*43 

3 


d 

a 

u 

HH 


bT 

Q) 

4 H 

*3 


Q 


?H 




CCS 


CCS 


CCS 


CCS 


CCS 


'o 


<D 




< 


<J 


PQ 


pq 


pq 


pq 


pq 


PP 


P3 




06 




0 


t-H 


c 4 


CO 




IT 5 


CD 




tH 


T— i 


(NS 


(M 


C<l 




<NJ 




(M 



28 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 





o 












C3 




o 


P 
« ^ 


















HH 


c/3 














j- - 




CO 


P 
















cs 


CO 
















rt 


rt 




Jh 


p 














d 




o 

03 


s 


hi 

o/ 


hi 

o 


s 


hi 

03 


hi 

03 


hi 

o 


hi 

o 


o 


.s 








E*» 


h 


h 


>» 


P4 


« 


*5} 




& 




& 








P 


p-l 








p 




P 









o 






crj 



-3 



o 

C3 

CJ 

D 

rD 

w 



O 



to tH 

to 



CO CO to 

(M CO to 



<n 

CO 






to CO 

to CO 



W 

O 

:z; 

HH 

> 

o 

PL^ 




cS 

•a 






c 

c? 



c/3 

CtJ 



fcX3 

C3 



Ph 



?3 

03 






c 

C2 



p 



o 

t: 

o 

cn 

O 

o 

o 



CO 


o 

c; 


pq 








pl^ 


C2 


, 








H 


S 


03 






o 


o 

pq 

pq 


5 

p 

CO 

o 

<4^ 


P 

tJO 

i§ 

tS 


p 

p 

p 

►-3 


03 

CO 

o 

o 


'p 

•T3 

cf 

o 


Q 


'S 


p 

pj 


P 

C3 


•«-» 

p 


■g 




03 




O 


o 


o 




PP 


H 


w 


PQ 


pq 




00 

(M 



C3 

(M 



O 

CO 



c4- 

CO 



CO 

CO 



to 

CO CO 







THE MEMBERSHIP 


OF THE CONVENTION 






29 


CO 


1 


C3 








^3 






o 


1 




>» 




Eh 

CO 

w 


o 

C3 

;-i 


> 

O 

3 

;z; 








rt 

o 

JD 






03 

3 

O 

K 


o 

a 

CO 

U CJ 




1-4 

3 

-4-> 

O 

)h 


3 

CJ 

'3 

3 


« 

W 

Eh 

;z: 


o 

u 

^ - 


o 

u 








*3 

CJ 




c 


0> 

-c; 

-4-» 


CJ 3 
1 -2 
<2 w 




O 

o 

CO 

73 


a 

<D 

'3 

3 


HH 

ca 

w 

o 

z 


u ^ 

M 

rt 'rt 
o 


govcrno 


u 

o 

>> 

•2 


o 

>* 

i2 


o 

>» 

i2 


»> 

o 

M 

a 

o 

-*-> 


>•4 

0 

1 


.3 

o 

*3 

>» 

rC 

a 


o 

u 

CJ 

B 

o 


«*-4 

CO O 
CJ 

t ^ 
5 E 


u 

CJ 

s 


h4 

CJ 

3 

CJ 

O 


O 

C 

*34 

a 


a 

»-H 


C > 


*3 


fcX) 

c 


to 

c 


fcO 


o 


fco 

c 


to 

.5 


s 


CO O 

o to 


to 

.S 


3 

3 


-3 

a 


a 

a 


2 

-*-» fii 


*o c3 
C 

C3 


[w 

*•43 


*w 

*-I3 


*w 

•4-> 


f-* o 
o 

-Q *o 


*3 

*-*3 


|3 

*Xj 


u 

CJ 

c 


^4 

^ 3:; 

CJ cc 


*3 

*-*3 


a 

o 


^ 2 


p-i 

XJ 

a 


2 ^ 
a .5 


s s 
2 .2 
a > 


o 

CJ 

u 

a 


u 

c3 

V4 

a 


O 

c3 

a 


S “g 


o 

03 

a 


CJ 

cS 

a 


g 

o 

a 


5’^ 

*r 

o > 


CJ 

C3 

a 


r3 

CO 

a 


<4-4 ••3 
o O 







4-> 


















S-4 








c 


















CJ 




o 




2 

c 

3 


















■4-> 

CO 

3 




w 




O 

CJ 


















E 




CO 

a 

a 




CJ 


u 




u 


3 

3 


M 


3 

3 






3 

g 




o 


CJ 


0) 




CJ 


*o 


O 




CJ 


o 


o 




o 


b 






b 


b 


3 


b 


*3 


£ 


>» 


;& 




a 




3 








>> 




>> 


M 








a 


rt 


3 


3 


3 


3 




3 


a 


3 


3 


'o 




a 


a 


a 


a 


a 


a 


a 


a 


a 


a 


a 




w 


1 
























•K 




























t- 


tH 


tH 


rH 


Ci 


o 


i> 


CO 


CD 


00 


tH 






CO 




CO 


TT 






CO 




ID 




t- 




a 

o 




ctJ 

>» 

3 












o 






CJ 




)2; 

HH 

> 

o 




O 

N 

> 












3 

*> 

2 


m 

CJ 




1i 

o 




a 

a 


o 

a 


Oj 

g 


o 

a 

3 


>4 

3 

X) 


t. 


jo 


3 


PLh 


3 

3 

4-J 


o 

3 

> 


CO 

o 

CJ 






o 

a 


3 


3 

a 


< 




a 


u 


-4-5 


3 

a 


3 

Q 


a 













<i 










d 








a 


g 


. 


o 




d 


CO 






CO 


o 


CO 

a 

H 


o 

o 


CJ 

a 

in 


a 

CO 


*3 

o 

r3 

3 


o 

CJ 


.5 


o 

3 

3 


S 

CJ 

CO 


3 

3 


'cJ 

3 


'O 

3 

3 


<tj 

o 

a 

a 

a 


CJ 

Eh 

3 

To 


I 

J-4 

f-l 

3 

-Q 


o 

Eh 

*J3 


1 

ccT 

‘S 


o 

3 

o 

3 


a 

£ 

3 

r-( 


*3 

3 

o 

^3* 


o 

o' 

«3 

*E 


t/T 

o 

•f— > 

*-3 

CO 


Cu 

a 


M 

CJ 

CO 

2" 

CO 


p 


3 


3 


3 


^3 


3 


3 


3 


3 


3 


3 


3 




a 


u 


O 


o 


a 


a 


a 


o 


u 


o 


a 




CO 




00 


OJ 


o 


a 


c4 


CO 


a 


LO 


CO 




CO 


CO 


CO 


CO 


TJ< 












T14 



EXPERIENCE & INTERESTS 



30 



c 



xn 

Xfl 



W 

o 

52 ; 



> 

o 

Ph 



CO 

W 

H 

o 

w 

w 

Q 






FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



u o 
3 



o CO S' 

p4 CO o 

o c ^ 
•JS o 



§3 

O 

C 



CO 

< 



o •• 

^ CO 

^ <y 



o I 



c 

cs 



® 5 s 

c r 

CJ 

pO CO CO 



^ c 

I * = ^ 

{m >v ^ ;i: 

3 >- c o 
PC * 5 ; c U 
3 o 

^ > O 



c ^ o 

o 5= i-i 



« 

a o 



c: 

o 



CO 



•r: ^ 

^ O 



'2 « ® 
*:= — o 
- *2 CO 



o 

p: o 



c 

u 



C^ ^ 
o 



^ *T3 0 

C H c 



^ P. 

C3 



CO 

O 

J-4 



c ^ 

P^ p:. 

^ cu 

o -- 



o ^ 

2 ^ s 
£ 



^ r:: >-i 
r® *2 ,0 

O '♦H 



to 
p: c 

(ii 

<L> ^ 

p4 c5 
a t~$ 
P? Ph 



^ Ph 



j-i •«-' ;r* 

o o P-< 



to 



o ^ 
c -e c 
3 O 

b-H X h~4 

»ti; hJ 



... u 



.$2 CO 



:3 ji: 

coo 
o h-' C 

c/3 >-H 



® S-I 

5 4. ® 

O c 

o g S- g 
E c. ? 

c I£ ^ 
P* c Pi 
00 s 

c ^ c 

^ o E 
O ^ O 
tS4 o ^ 



a i 



C S ° 



o 

c c3 

*0 C 
P O 



C- .c 



o o 
J= O 



o 

^ o 
eo .ti 

O CO tM 

« s ^ 

.^: E 

o D c 



.5 
® S 

^ ^ M 

C? "S *i-« 



CO 

o 
> c 
n o 



c ^ 

O wX 

to ,«=; o 



CO 

p 



p 

CO 



ns 

C 

c3 



Vn 



'2 

5 



w 


p 


p 


r* 












c 


0 




0 

P=1 


0 


g 

CO 

CO 

0 


►« 

.2 

*S 

*co 


p 

0 


»-l 

o> 

>» 

>• 


Oi 


%-, 

CJ 

>* 


fL< 

0 


CO 

CO 

0 


p 

CJ 

p 

ns 


0 

>» 

> 




?-• 

p 

fa 


C 


& 

0^ 


to 


> 

p 


P 


p 


C3 


*co 

p 

m 


W 


P 

hJ 


w 










• 














0 


l> 




Ci 

CO 




L.O 

CO 


55 


rH 

CO 


0 

CO 


CO 




CO 

CO 



f~t 

p 

Xfl 



rn 

o 

c 



o 

w 



03 

S 

C3 

XJ 



03 



P 

;5 



>» 

o 

hJ 



o 

pq 



"o rt ^ 
^ 

pp <; s 



e 

CCS 

CO 





0 






.2 










0 

1— ■ 

*-D 




. 


*0 

p 

0) 


Q 


CO 

p 


< 


2 

<13 


P 

cu 


0 

p 


<! 

<D 

CO 

Q 


”§ 

p 

0 


p 

CO 

0 

»-» 


s 

0 

Eh 


0 

.s 

'p 


> 

P 


Pi 


*-E 

<J 






0 


Q 


p 

fli 


CO 


cT 

CJ 

0 


0 

CJ 


^P" 


'a 

’E 


u 

p 

•r— j 

P 


CO 

p 

«+H 


*0 


<U 

0 


c 


G 


P 

G 


0 

G 


P 

0 

0 


0 

0 


p 

0 

0 




00 


C5 


0 


tH 


c4 


00 










LO 


to 


to 


uo 


u:> 







THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE CONVENTION 



31 



CO 

CO 

« 

W 

^2; 

HH 

w 

o 

52; 

w 

t—t 

w 

Ph 

w 



CO 

to 

a> 

.s 

*co 



be 

.S 

13 

c 

c3 

JD 



.£ *2 



X3 

O 

tU) 

C3 

to 

s 

C£I 



T3 

O 

bo 

bo 

C 

C£] 



o 

O 



.1 I 

to cj 

‘5 o 

t-4 

a 
CO 
a 

*o 

O 3 

to r>, 

CO 

o 

u -*-* 

<D 

£ ° 

^ O 



C3 

o 

.£ c 
.Sr 

^ a 

;s bo 

g) 

c 

c 

o ^ 

:h 'c 

£ « 
pH ^ 
o c3 
o C 

> 



3 

O 



o 



> 

o 

bo 

3 

s 

*> 

o 

u 

3. 



o ^ 

£ tn 'S 

||o 

O 



;-4 

O 



to 



bo 

3 



o 

. ^ 

o o 

02 



o 



o 

> 

o 

bo 



3 

o 
p< 



g o C3 
to 

& 

< 



o 

o 

to 



.£ 3 

o o 

CO ^ 

^ s 

a.® 

•5f 

Mg 

.5 n 

CO LT 
o 

C2 M 

^ p 

Ph ^ 



o 

o 



3 

O 



o 



si 
I i 

£ f-* 

n 34 

o o 

fx, « 



o 



« • «K c) 

< S .£ 

^ *34 .& 

§ Pk 
cq 

^ o 

Jg 5 • - 
■' 'S ^ 
2 

c ® 

-§ § 

.b; H-> 

2 ^ 
n o 
Ph o 



o 



3 a 
a 3 






O 

HH 

CO 

CO 

H 

PC4 

O 

P^ 

Ph 



3 

rt 

P3 



3 


r~ 




'3 












'T3 


3 






3 












3 


£ 






3 








3 




3 


to 














3 






CO 




L| 






u 


^4 




Vl 




(D 


<D 




0> 




o 


<D 


[o 


o 


O 


3 






>> 






b 


*co 




-4-> 


*co 








u 






>* 






3 


3 


3 


3 


CJ 


3 


3 


r3 


3 


3 


PP 


hP 


hJ 


hP 




hP 


hP 


Ph 


hP 




t- 


CO 


CO 






00 


03 


t- 


tH 


t- 


(M 


CO 




Tf 






rr 






Ti< 



^ -2 
^ o 

3 

3 
Ph 



T3 3 

o 5 

35 S 



W 

o 

<1 



w 

O 

^2; 

HH 

> 

o 

p; 



o 

o 

3 

*> 

o 

;h 

Ph 



s s 



c 

3 

3 

3 

PP 



3 

3 

3 

H-i 

3 

PP 



3 

r3 

o 

o 



3 

3 

3 

s 



3 

3 

a 

3 

kP 



o 

cl 

^bO 

*n 

3 

CO 



3 

N 

S 



CO 

w 

H 

O 

w 

hP 

w 

o 













Q 




> 


O 






p*-4 


• 








*e 

(U 


Ph“ 


<i 


o 

a 


IS 


.2 

’£ 


s 


o 

.5 










to 




o 

CO 

o 


h3 




f-4 

O 


3 

3 


s 


3 

CO 


'o 


3 

o 




-M 

CO 

3 


£ 

o 


o' 


•O 


P4 

C 


•-3 


s 


‘S 

CO 

cu 


CP 

n' 

3 


p^ 

isT 

3 


£ 

<D 

*T3 

3 


o' 

CJ 

3 

<D 


o' 

-M 

3 

F-i 


o' 

3 


u 

0) 








3 


3 


3 


*o 




CP 


CP 


CP 


CP 


CP 


CP 


P 


p 


lO 

lO 


CO 


tp 


00 


<3> 


o 


tH 


c4 


lO 


uo 


to 


lO 


CO 


CO 


CO 



8) 

3 

s 

o 

Q 



a 

5 



CO 

CO 



32 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



CO 

c-« 

CO 

W 

« 

W 

Eh 



w 

o 

:z; 

i-H 

ps; 

w 

Ph 



<y 

>> 



tZ) 



CJ 

C3 

f-i 

o< 



o 



C3 

o 



a 

G 



P 



o 

o 

CO 



a 

o 



o 

>> 

c5 



o 

o 

c 3 

o 



o 

>> 



1-4 

ZJ 

>» 



u 

o 



o 


a 

■*-> 




bo 

3 


bo 


3 

CD 

rO 


*> 

3 


.2 


CO 


2 • J 


r— 

o 

W— ( 


u 

Hh 

o 


CD 

3 

P 


CD 

g 

P 


P ^ 
o 2 
p a 



u 



C3 

Ph 



o 

>k 



•T 3 

o 

u 

5 ) 

a 



s-« 

o 



*2 ^ ^ j . 



t 4 ) 

c 



^ g g 



s: .2 ^ 

H. “5 2 

^ ^ r; CO 

— — **-i 



^ ^ ^ 
o 



=3 

C3 



t 4 

C 



c o 

•Si '*-* 

2 |l a> 

^ O w 
z> ^ a o 

o 1-2 3-> C-> o 

lliaj 



s 

u 

C3 



CO 

rO 

O 

c 

to 

3 



bO 

C3 

to 

C M 

w .5 



:z; 
























o 
























HH 

CO 

CO 




3 

3 

f— 












g 








w 

p 


u 


V 5 

CO 


^H 


U 






Vi 


to 

CO 


Vi 


V 


Vi 


Q 


CD 


CD 


CD 


CD 


CD 


CD 


CD 


CD 


CD 


CD 


CD 


p 

p 


>> 


3 




>* 


>> 




>* 


3 






>> 




*co 












*CO 






f? 


3 


3 


3 


3 


3 


3 


3 


o 


3 


3 


3 




P 


P 


P 


P 


P 


P 


P 


P 


P 


P 


P 



CO 

3 

3 

C3 

o 

2 

iZ 

a 



3 

3 



S 



CO 

CO 

O 



3 



H 

O 

C 



00 



C 5 

ca 



o 



CO 



CO 



<M O C 5 CO CO 

CO CO CO CO 



oo 

CO 



w 

^ 2 ; 

HH 

> 

o 

p^ 

Ph 



CO 

W 

H 

O 

W 

W 

Q 



C 5 

3 





CD 












CD 


.2 








CD 

#— 








3 




CD 


'vl 

O 








*> 

Q 




CO 




(— • 




> 

P 


.2 






O 


u 

p 


o 

H-» 


3 

3 


V 

3 


*co 

b) 


O 


P 


3 

3 


o 


CD 

HD> 




• 


*> 




£ 


3 


r 3 


• 


.2 






HH 


-V> 

IpH 


3 


3 

H 


3 

CO 


3 

P 


P 


■*-» 

krH 

r=; 


S 


*r 2 

P 


3 

a 



3 

cr 

3 

c3 



s 

'o 

CCS 

& 

•S § 

p a 

CO 



a 

3 

o 

Q 



to 

3 

.2 

*3 

bO 

3 

P 



lO 

CO 



3 

.2 

*o 

3 

3 



CO 

CO 



o 

2 

2 

3 

s 

« 



b* 

CO 



o 

3 



P^ 

- .2 

t_. ♦n 



bo 






& 



3 

3 

CJ 



WWW w 



00 

CO 



3 

O 

CD 

P 



3 

-2 

'co 

w 

Ci 

CO 



o 

3 

3 



3 



CD 

p 4 

KJ 

W 

o 

t- 



i 

to 

3 

3 

P 

3 



O 



CD 

3 

3 

3 



3 

O 

u 



^ CO 

3 ^ 

2 <D 

r ^H 

?H O 

CD ^ 

P*H P=H 



C<l CO 

t* b- 



o 

CD 

CO 

*CD 

3 

3 

pSH 

P 

b- 



<D 

CD 

3 

*> 

O 

;-4 

P 

-iJ 

s 



o 

HJ 

X 

• F-^ 

CO 



3 

2 

TJ 

CD 

3 

o 



THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE CONVENTION 



33 



ro 

in 

K 

r-» 

E 



o 

a 

HH 

w 

Ch 













<<-i 


u_( 


^4 JL 




O 






Ci> 












o 


o 


O 3, 




3 


Z) ^ 




;r» 








rt 








3 O 




3 


3 CO . 




3 








o 




:-• 

o 


o 


•: c=5 

o 




O 


r* *-• 

o O § 




O 

h--4 








*3 

'5 




o 

> 

o 

be 


o 


<4-t <*H 

o 

O 3 
yj 

3 3 




CJ 


.£ .o 

34 *Co 
n. 3 

3 r3 £ 




o 

-3 


o 


o 

>» 


a 

>> 


> 

o 

S-« 


u 

3 

C/2 


‘w 


o 

r- 


3 O 
C» »— ' 

in ^ 
o 




<4-4 

o 

u 

o 


P -c c 
^ o 
tJ O 

i3 o ^ 


3 


<«H 

O c/3 

a 

>-t > 

o • — 


i2 

Ui 


i3 

bo 


bO 


o 

o 


CO 

o 

.£ 

*>3 


’> 

p 


o 

«4-J 


o ^ 
3 <4-» 

r> 

3* <♦-• 
.3* O 


3 

p 


,3 

3 

O 

£ 


C 

O ^ 

a ^ 

^ ® 3 


3 

-*-> 

CO 


-2 rt 

g c 

3 ^ 
3 3 


3 


3 


c 




3 






— 


•3 




?r ^ 




O 


*to 


Co 

*-*3 




a 


£ 

3 


o 


o 

b^ 

o 


-pi CJ 
Ch ,3 


•4-3 

3 

-4-> 


u 

p 


C2 o ^ 


*£ 


J-* C4 

i K 

^ o 


a 

rt 

E 


o 

c3 

E 


o 

3 

E 


o 


o 

<4-1 

o 


o 


V3 

o 

OQ 


O o 

*5 £ 


3 

O 

J-* 


o 


of 

mem 

natc; 


»— ' 
o 
C*!3 



o 

> 



C3 

C 

o 

rt 

o 

3 

a 



§) 

C3 

bi) 

c 

W 



^ o 

0 

w 

1 *3 



C *43 
w 
3 

I " 
l§ 

H «2 



o 

>-H 

w 

OQ 

W 

O 

fX, 



H 



w 

o 

3 

















3 

3 


w 

3 

3 


3 

3 

S 




^4 










?-i 


5-4 


;-4 




o 


a 


a 


Q 


<D 


a; 


o 


o o 


<D 


o 


>> 


>» 


>> 


>> 


>> 


r>» 


>» 




E 


34 
















S 2 


?-< 


3 


3 


3 


3 


3 


3 


3 


3 


3 ^ 


3 


34 




.4 


h4 


.4 


4 


4 


4 


J4 


f4 





W 

o 

c 



(M 



C3 

CO 



LO 

CO 



(M 

CD 



lO 

lO 



LO 

LO 



CO 



CD 

(M 



Tj< 



i 



4 

O 

:z; 

HH 








3 

CO 

3 

O 

C 








3 

O 

£ 


> 






3 


3 








o 

4 


o 


o 


o 

bJO 

o 


3 


8) 

o 


3 

3 




O 

u 

Ph 


Ph 


3 

in 


*o 

4 


3 

;-4 

o 

CO 


£ 

3 

o 


CO 

o 

CO 


3 

b5 

3 

4 


Cebu 


4 

krH 



3 

cs 

m 

3 

<1 





< 






CO 




CO 

4 


o 

?H 

nz> 

3 

3 


d 


o 

<+H 


"S 

*3 

cr 

o 


p 

*4 




••“S 


o 




X 


3 




O 


to 

o 




4 




O 




»-3 


< 






4 












4 

4 


bB 

3 

c3 


3 

O 

N 


<4 


b;) 


!£ 

f-4 


Q 


IS 


3 

3 


3 


3 

?-4 


3 

3 




o 


O 


O 


a 


o 




<vd 


t4 


00 


CD 


o 




i>* 


t- 


L- 


t- 


00 







'E 








3 




o 




bJD 


.£ 


f-i 

T3 


o 

3 


i 


<4 


CD 






O) 


Ph 


'E 


c 


Q 




3 


3 




3 


Ph 


bo 




3 

3 

> 

<D 


c/T 

4 


3 

3 

s 


3 

£ 


3 

o 


3 

O 


3 

O 


3 

o 


4 

00 


ci 

CO 


CO 

00 


4 

oo 



EXPERIENCE & INTERESTS 



34 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 













ll. 

D 

w 




far- 








o 






















Ul 

Ul 










CJ 




'TJ 

c: 

d 








K 
























u 


U 


fe 




5 




;h 




>H 


lUi 


o 


(D 


CJ 


o 


*o 




o 


y ^ 


<D 




« 

Ph 


r 

C3 

h4 


r 

C5 

h4 


■ £ 
U 
CS 


>» 


'55 

pH 


o 

o 

bo 


r 

C3 


o 




d 

►-J 


w 






















o 






















< 




ITS 




Cl 


o 




lib 




lib 


lib 






TT 


r}« 


uo 


cc 




CO 






CO 






































CJ 






















HJ 








H 














d 

o 








O 














r2 


















c 




'G 








1 

> 


§. 


.2 


r-« 


2 


2 




CJ 

o 








o 

« 


CS 

a 


JD 


5 

>> 

cS 


*w 

C5 

b;) 


*55 

C5 

bo 




in 

o 




N 




p-l 


s 




U} 


p: 


c 




bo 




*s. 






C3 


rt 


c3 


C3 


d 




o 




d 


o 








U 




Ph 




iz; 




CJ) 


pp 



THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE CONVENTION 



35 



CO 

CO 

W 

« 

W 

Eh 

w 

o 

hh 

w 

X 



c o 
o 

>-l > 

P« o 

l-l 

z ^ 

^ 4J 

0 

1 o 
s •H 

l-i 3 
CJ o 

s •“ 

^ 'IT 
o ^2 
*C 



o 

tn 

P 

o 



o tn 

o 



a 

6 



O) 

o 

1-4 

Q) O 

s « 

O «M 
H-t O 



O 

03 

o 

O 

03 



P 

O' 

io 



50 

p 



o 

p 

Ph 



P 

o 

ffi 

o 



1 2 

§1 
> >- 
o o 
fco ^ 

CO 

^ o 

§ & 
-2 ^ 
S c 
;3 



CO 

Q) 

%■* > 

O 

s| 

p <1> 

P CO 

o 

u ^ 
2 & 
I « 

c£ 

Pm o 



p 

o 

w 

( 1 ) 

Jp 



«f-4 

o 

u 

SL »-• 

ri 

« E 



O 

03 



O 

' 

P« 



*co 

s ^ 

•S s 

3 ° 

P ^ 

O) rp 
CO ■ ' 

o 

»-l 
p 4 
0 ) 

« 



o 



3 

p .s 

p 4 
^ p 4 

o 

CO ro 

VH (D ’T^ 

O ««-4 P-4 



3-4 

O 

>i 

50 

P 



0 > c 

Q £ 

tS 
o ^ 
•• 
p 

o 

0 ^ 

!>v ^ 
£?►- 

-2 

a :5 

^ "»H 

•4J 

1 S 

Is 

pc< p. 



p ^ 

.5 p 

p4 ^ 

p: p 

*p ^ 

^ o 

s 

CO 

o 

^ «M 

-M O 

<M Ui 

o o 

^ "p 

O iT 

£ -S' 

M " 

0 M 



O 

CO 

CO 

o 

V -4 

o 

3-1 

p ;4 

P 



• - o 

CO 50 

O P3 

2 o 

rO O 



;z: 

o 

HH 

CO 

CO 

W 

fe 

O 

« 

P^ 






3-1 

o 

£ 

3-« 

P 

Pq 



'P 

P 

P 

•+J 

CO 

d) o 

2 *c 

o 



3 ^ 


34 


34 


IM 


34 






0 


0 


0 


0 


<y 


34 


34 


h 


b 




b 


b 


0 

>v 


<D 

>> 


P 


P 


p 


P 


p 




P 

I-) 




hP 




hP 




p 



w 

a 



CD 

TJ 4 



4-f CO 

00 00 



a> 

uo 



(M o 
00 



CO 00 



w 

O 

; 2 ; 

HH 

> 

o 

p^ 

p, 



0 ) 

o 

p 

*? 

o 

3-4 

p^ 



<D 

CJ 

p 

■l 

3-1 

p< 

•4-» 



3-1 

P 

CO 

to 

o 

o 

Q 



P 

.2 

*£ 

O 

CO 

2 

bo 

CD 



HH 



-S 

g? 



P 

J £ 

0 ) ca 
Q tS3 



CO 

p 

50 

P 

P 

4-9 

P 

PP 



O 





4-3 






* 5 o 




3 ^ 


0 


OJ 




CO 

H 

Eh 

0 


3 

£ 

( 1 ) 

0 


w 

O) 


P 

«n 

% 

P 


wJU 

0 

CO 

p" 

p 


P 

P 

P" 

P 


P 

CO 

<U 

u 

p 


’ 5 ? 

< 

u 

0 


£ 

0 

2 

m 


P 

<D 

CO 

0 

Ho 


w 

hP 

w 


50 

.s 

> 


pC 4 

oT 

CO 


P*' 

a 

> 


1 

s 


P 

P 

P 4 


p 

p 

4-9 

P 


'S 

2 

rP 


-iiT 

p 

P 4 


'o 

P 


p 


6 

HH 


0 

Ho 


0 

Ho 


p 

Ho 


wQ 

X 


M 


C 3 

P 


P 

P 


P 

P 




CO 


Tj 4 


LQ 


cd 


i> 


00 


05 


0 


1-4 




0 


Oi 


0 


Oi 


Oi 


Oi 


05 


0 


0 



AGE I PROFESSION ( EXPERIENCE & INTERESTS 



THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE CONVENTION 



37 



a 



w 

trj 

O 

.S 

*53 

p 

JD 



tJO 



•2 



I I 

bo ^ 
rt o 



CO 


c 

CO 




a 

U) 






o 


CJ 


3 




3 






bo 


o 

a 

^ CJ 


O 

X 




O 

HH 






o 

W 


c3 C 


<D 




a 






tM 


1 ‘i 






pC 

•4J> 






o 


o ^ 


«4-l 

o 


CO 


o 


CO 




"c 

o 






o 




a 


o 

>» 


r£ 




u 


> 


Jh 


> 


CO 


>> s 

2 o 


o 

£ 

o 


*-l2 

-4-> 

c 


pQ 

£ 

o 


rt 

•+-> 

C 


p 2 


c; 

u, 

P 


cT •£ 
'TJ 


£ 


o 

CO 

o 


E 


o 

CO 

o 


bO 

.£ 


*c3 


s o 


o 




u 

G3 


p-i 


*w 




£ 

<—• CJ 


£ 


cT 

« 


£ 


03 

« 


o 

CJ 


1-^ 


o £; 


o 


V-l 

o 


o 

p 


<♦-4 

O 


p 


S u 




O 






bO 



o 

CJ 

Ph 



'T3 

C3 



o 



c 

c3 

£ 

w 

w 

^ s 



:3 

« 



V4 

<l) 

C3 



O 

>» 

c3 

►-5 



<D 

cJ 

>-5 



c 

cj 

£ 

c /3 

C« 



CO 

w 



cj 

E 

CO 

CO 



3 

pq 



o 

• 4 ^ 

crt 

CJ 

3 


s 

s 


C 3 

E 


<u 

r 


O 




3 


rt 


3 


C 5 


w 


fa 


P 


wJ 


P 



o 



o 



o 






t- 

CO 



05 

lO 



r-{ O 

o ».o 



o 

CM 



o 

:z; 

HH 

> 

o 

pq 



c 

o 



bo 

<D 



O 

O 

.£ 

o 

;h 

Ph 



CtJ 

bo 

C 

c3 

o 

rn 

E 

C3 

ISI 



O 

‘o 






Jh 

ci 

H’ 






3 

c 


3 


o 

40 


o 

4^ 


o 

3 

G" 


r- 

C5 

3 

"2 




pjQ 


>> 




*P 




c3 


<D 


<13 


o 


3 


3 


C/2 


o 


P 


p 




P 



CO 

w 

Eh 

<J 

O 

W 

W 

P 











£ 


.£ 




O 

•+H 








P 




03 




O 


& 


r;j 

o 


.s 


*3 


'ftJ 

3 


T) 




o 


C) 

4J 

3 

.A) 

o 

> 


rn 

O 

cT 

3 

ccJ 


3 

ccJ 

P 

cT 


‘o 

pH 

3 

pQ 

P 


*P3 

3 

P 

cT 

o 


4-> 

3 

o 

4-> 

03 


3 

Jh 

O 

CO 

p* 


3 

3 

<3 

Jh 

3 


3 

3 

s 

8 


«+H 

3 

p 

N* 

03 


3 

o 

s 

3 

P 


?H 

C 3 

P 

bT 

03 


N 

03 

3^ 


N 

3 

03 


N 

3 

03 


O 

>H 

03 

4-> 


p3 

To 


3 

CO 

3 


p3 

3 


£ 

3 

?H 


3 

t 


3 

*43 

;4 


3*' 


•T3 

3 

o 


O 


o 


o 


3 


3 




3 


Cj 


3 


3 


3 


'o 


P 


P 


P 


P 


S 




g 




WtH 


s 


g 


s 


P 




oi 




ir£ 




t4 


00 


ci 


o 


P 


CM 


tH 


1-4 


tH 


tH 


P 


rH 


1-H 


t-H 


tH 


CM 


<M 


(M 



EXPERIENCE & INTERESTS 



38 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



O JC 

u 

O «4-4 

c o 



§>•§ 



•S c 

O 

.s ^ 

> O 

2 ^ 
P4 O 
SH 
Ih 

o 



c 
o 

(Tj 

. s 
s & 

g P=i 



o 

E « P 
S .S o 
« W 



o 

C/5 

P 

O 

W 

o 

-4-» 

CO 

«♦-< C/ 

o > 
'43 
Ih c3 

0 ^ 

^ c 

1 S 3 
£ 2 

& « 



o 



p 

o 

w 

f ? I 

® > s 

^ rt — 

O 

C O 

c o *-• 

r. Sf5 c5 

1 1 ? 



c .2 
S o § 

CO 



p 

tx 

'S 

o 

£ ^ 

P 

U 00 

1 1 § 
2 c -g 
Cl. > 



CO 

O 

P 



P 

UP 



-T3 

S> 

P 

w 



o :f= 

C 

o o 

^ o 

« 

O o 

. 5^0 

> P * * 

o o 



*-• o 

CJ --- 

p *0 



o 



o 

_ _ p 



•e I s s i 

-I 

^ ^ o ^ 
O C P *p 

-S ^ I s ^ 

^ o 0 

C O - E-’ « 

o 'P CO 5 
. p p 
^”*4300 

•§ ji:* c 

"5 P ^ "5 

g o - 

O P _ 

CO CO 

S-. CO 

o 



"I g s ^ 

o « o c 

- 2 “ I 

g-'g E 

£ o 'o 

p .2 «*-i .2 2 

U< > e 



S: 

o 

CO 

CO 

W 

Ph 

O 

« 

CL, 



s/N 



O 

C5 



J-i 

O 

I- 

P 



P 

P 

£ 

CO 

CO 

O 

P 

*co 

p 

w 



o 

o 



o 

o 

CO 



t-4 

CJ 

fH 

o 

o ^ 
- 

p § 

CO 



CO 

P 



§ 

t i 

P CO 
p 

Ph 



t-l 

p 



t? 2 



p 



o 

p 

hJ 



O 



CO 

LO 






CD 

CO 



CD CO 
rj« 



O 

CO 



LfO 

CD 



<T5 



w 

o 

12; 

>-< 

> 

o 



CO 

w 

H 

< 

O 

w 

f-3 

w 

p 



p 

tQ 

S 



CO 

p 

rJQ 

P 

>» 

P 

Eh 



a 

o 

.5 

*> 

o 



P 

rQ 



P 

CO P 



p 

CJ 

rs 

*0 

o 

O 

CO 

2 

to 

O) 

^2; 



*0 



o 

p 

T3 

p 

Eh 



P 

O 



O 



0 

p5 




0 






►-3 


►-3 


0 




.£ 




.£ 


0 




0 


P 


t: 




*£ 




’£ 


3 






P 


CJ 




p 

s 


P 

P 

3 


p 

-4-J 

P 


3 

s 




P 

0 0 

0 P 


•S’ 

P 


P4 

P 

« 


CO 

"p 


xn 

CJ 


p 


CO 






►-3 


W 


pT 


h:i 


M 




2 

0 

3 


(o' 

T3 

P 

CJ 


0 


Ip ^ 
P CJ 


3 

'43 


3 

p 

'43 


t/T 

CJ 

*P 


*o 

s 


1 


3 

S 


P 

0 

s 


,P 


§ § 
s s 


P 

0 


p 

0 

s 


0 

s 


CO 

(M 

rH 


<M 

tH 


LO 

<M 

T-J 


CD 

CM 

tH 




“5 

CM CM 
tH tH 


C3 

CM 

tH 


0 

CO 

t-4 


T — 1 

CO 

1-H 



EXPERIENCE & INTERESTS 





EXPERIENCE & INTERESTS 



40 FRAIvIING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



O 

trx 




c 



& W C/J ^ 

5 S -S 

^ p c3 W 
pH c CQ p 



tS -g "S 5 

«rH ^ ^ 

0 .::i - C3 

c ^ 5 
^ ^ o 

1 o - 






F o 

c .E c S 
fa c- fa 



c 



- O ^ 



o 

b: 



c/3 

O 



c ^ s: 



s 2 o 



c 

fa 



,22 




o 

d. 



;m 

o 



U 




u 

o 



o o 

^ *o 
o ^ 



Ui 

a 



§ 2: 



tc 

c 



fa 



M 

o ^ 
Ci- o 











Ji, 


52 : 

0 








fa 


w 


'-0 








03 










fa 








C 5 


fa 


7-4 


C 






0 

fa 

fa 


0 

>i 

C 2 


C 3 

0 


0 

>> 

c: 


0 

>■, 

C 5 




fa 


fa 


fa 


fa 



fa 





fa 

O 

C 



l> L.C 

CO 



o o 

CO CO 



CO 



CO 



fa 

o 

;2; 

HH 

> 

O 

fa 

fa 



o 

C 3 




5 



c! 

fa 




fa 

o 

fa 

fa 

fa 

fa 



o 

rt 



!= 

O 



CO 



o 



C3 

O 



c/T 

.2 

‘ot 

o 

fa 



O) 


0^ 


C3 


CO 


«+H 


0 

►-3 


C3 

fa 


xS 






« 


c 


pz: 


cl 






CJ 


0 


fa 


LO 


CO 






tH 


t-H 



o 



CO 

3 

CO 


0 

"rt 

•+-* 


>H 

CO 


(D 


c;S 


p 

CO 




fa 


CD 


C'T 




►-0 


<D 


>> 


bT 


0/ 


r2 

"oj 


CD 

0 


fa 


fa 


fa 


fa 


CO 


0 









THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE CONVENTION 



41 



CO 

H 

CO 

W 

« 

W 

HH 

w 

o 

w 

HH 

« 

w 

fl. 

X 

w 



o 

c /3 



o 

r 

cs 

U) 

c 



rt 

£ 



O 

E 

o 



o 

O 



o 

c 

c 

> 

o 

tc 



rt 

o 



o 

c 

’> 

o 



r- 

C 



<«-> 

c 

c 

C/J 

O 


:3 




1-^ 

-*-> 

o 1 


S. 

o 


f-4 

a 


o 


rt 

o to 

^ C3 


p 


g 


c? 


£ o 


C«-l 


o 


rH 


o 

V— 4 Ck_l 



o 



to 

c 



o 

CJ 

pH 



^ c 

p: ^ 

f 1 



a 

c 



o 



c O 

£ 

O f-t 

to o 

c3 £ 

to S 
;:: o 

W ^ 



Si ^ 

cj 

I £ 

f- o 
^ CO 

c 

g c; .£ 

•j rt 

5 o 

g w ° 

S -je 

^ ^ Si 
^ .B ^ 

« .£• 3 

.'z: jz. 

u_. ^ 



c 

o 

cn 

o 

u 

c- 

a 

P4 



o 

U 3 

P 

O 



c 

<D 



o 


a 




Ui 


U3 




P 


D 


O 


o 


C 






►th 


£ 


l-M 


HH 


o 


o 


<D 


s 




^2: 

o 

HH 

CO 

CO 

W 

Ph 

o 

« 

pH 



O 

— c 



^1 


f-^ 


u 






OS 

£ 

W 




^4 








o 


o 


o 


a 


3 


O 


o 


G> 


o 


o 


C3 


>» 


C3 


>> 


>> 


>> 


.£ 

'£ 


>> 






1* 


r 


ci 


rt 


c3 


CS 


p 


c: 


c5 


a 


a 


a 


P 


'I 

H- 1 


H-J 


P 


P 


P 


P 


P 


P 


P 


P 



AGE 














a 










Ci 


CO 


CO 


C<I 


t-H 


L.O 




CO 


CO 


CM 




(M 




CO 


CO 


TT 


CO 






TT 


LO 




w 










f-4 

p 


d 

>» 












o 










CO 


CJ 








O 




;z; 










CJ 






P 


4-^ 




HH 

> 

o 

p 

p 


>» 

a 

jO 


c3 


C3 

rQ 

rt 


p 

C3 

>> 

to 


in 

CJ 

P 

’S 

cs 

£ 


N 

> 

C3 

> 

o 


^-1 

P 

CO 

o 

o 


p 


d 

P 

’55 

d 


o 

!z: 

m 

o 

o 


in 

d 

bo 

P 

d 

H-4 




£ 


o 


ccj 


ci 


p 




a 


d 


o 


d 




5 


If-H 


O 


O 


O 


J2; 


»-H 


O 


P 


p 


« 



CO 

w 

Eh 

<J 

O 

W 

W 

P 





o 


to 




. 






P 


'S 

o 


p 

d 




P 


rio 


O 


o 


to 

a> 


P 


P 


3 


4J 

o 


S 


3 


fH 


d 




3 


p 






O 

d" 


p 


3 

p 

to 


• rP 


CJ 


f— < 


*fH 

o 

Eh 


CJ 


d 

o 


Q 


« 


isT 


4-> 

O 

03 


to 


§ 


o' 


o' 

p 


O*' 

.s 


o 

3 


'ti 

CJ 


p 

d 


o' 




.'S 

*p 


'p 


P 


P 


s 


s 


P 




G* 


o 


tH 


CM* 


cd 




Id 


CO 


lO 


LO 


Id 


»d 


Id 


Id 


Ld 


t-H 


tH 


T— H 


tH 


j—i 


tH 


rH 



P 



o 



w 

3 

3 


H-> 

O 

*0 

d 

P 


o 

CJ 


S 

o 


a 

S 


p 

HH 


3 

p 


c/T 


c/T 






3 


o 

£ 


o 
• 1 — > 
p 


o 

4 -i 

o 


d 


d 


d 


(D 


P 


P 


P 


P 


r> 


00 


Ci 


O 


Id 


Ld 


Id 




r-H 


r-H 


i-H 


t-H 



AGE I PROFESSION I EXPERIENCE «fc INTERESTS 



1 



42 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



=5 

"o O 

O s: 



o .:r 
P 2 

If Ci. 



o 


o 


O 


u 

o 


*o 


u 

o 


r 






>* 


*w 


>> 


j2 


?-• 

o 


o 






c5 


to 


*E 

S3 






£f 


to 



•rr 



o 

g 






C3 

c 



o o 
o. O 



O 



3 

O 



O 



o 

s 



c/2 - 



o ^ 



i o 

^ fc E 1 

I 

.S c/'-^ § -5:^ 

O t/, 



W o 



c 

fco 

o 



C/J 

to ^ 
*<* ^ 

- o 

a C. 
CO C ^ 

> o 

Cr- 



o 



2 o 



o 





O 




o 






>• 


o 


d 


cT 


c; 


O 

Sm 


C5 


£ 




o 




tf3 


ss. 








<•-1 




S3 








3m 




o 


O 




rt 


3m 




M 

'E- 


C/ 


•-!-« 


o 

s 

3m 


o 

-o 

c 


O 

E 


O 


C3 


c 


o 


o 


C3 


o 


r». 


o 




-S3 


Ph 


CS3 





I -S 

§) E .t; 

O -i-» 

^ S c 
.S ^ S 
S ^ 2 
E g- 
.2 « 



o o 

§. o 
.is «J 
3 

c o 



w 

5 



o 

r 

C3 



O 



3 

w 



.s 

*o 

'55 



a 



o 

& 



o 

>> 



c3 



t-i 

o 



o 

C5 



O) 

E 

C3 



<r> 



LTD 

CO 



<01 

CO 



t- 

CO 



cn 

irr> 



pq 
o 
^2; 
*— I 
> 
o 
« 
ci< 



tn 

c3 

03 

>> 

c3 

Eh 



c 

o 

fcJO 

o 

ui 

O 

CO 



S3 

'TO 



^ -s 



o 

nq 



c5 

VH 



S3 


p 


o> 




pO 


to 


r>> 


*s. 


o 


(D 


o 


C5 


o 




p 


o 



cS 

fcjo 

c 

C3 

O 

rt 

tS3 



<D 

S3 

.S' 

*413 

C 



GQ 

pq 

Eh 

o 

pq 

hJ 

pq 

P 



P 

o 

o 



o 

'TO 




CO 


o 


o 

s 


pq 

CD 

tn 

o 

>“T> 

o'* 


3h 

G3 

'P 




O 

.s 




O 

3m 

«+H 

O 

no 

o 

O 


c/i 

<13 

tn 

o 


o 

-4-> 

a* 

«2j 

E 


s 

tn 

o 

S 

3h 


o 

2 

tn 

Ph 


3h 

O 

sT 

CD 

2 


<o 

S3 

G 

a 

S 


'43 

P 

CD 

3h 

O 

Ph 


2 

to 

G 

< 

3-T 


U2 

(D 

>> 

<D 

P 


tn 

03 

& 

pq 


cT 

-o 

S 


<L> 

-s: 

o 

o 

s 


cT 

rH 

o 

> 

s 


<D 

S 

o 

M 


13 

S3 

s 

o 

p 


tn 

C3 

O 

pq 


.£ 

S3 

to 

03 

CO 


CS 

N 

C3 

13 

CO 


t-H 

CO 

rH 


c4 

<x> 

t-H 


CO 

CO 

tH 


p 

CO 

tH 


L.O 

CO 

tH 


CO 

CO 

rH 


CO 


o6 

CO 

rH 


03 

CO 

tH 


t- 

tH 






THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE CONVENTION 



43 



^ : 
w ' 
w 

Eh 

:2; 

HH 

a 

o 

:2: 

a 

►— t 

a 

a 

cu 

a 




u 

o 

c; 

o 

> 

§) 



3 

O 

X 



p 



o 



o o 

c 

‘S4 o 

S £ 





13 


® s 


la 


j:: 

a 


CJ 

£ 


CO 


p 




u > 


P 






£ 


1“ 


.£ 


P T3 






1-4 

P 


1 


i2 

to 


^ .s. 

M .z? 
a p 


£ -2 
0 c 

C P 
P to 


rS 

to 


a 


£ 

«2 


s 

p 


p 


a 


p 


P 






p 


[to 




t, f-< 

0 ^ 
c P 

1-1 

cS 

a 0 


to 

*-3 


f-i 

p 

rP 




*Pa 

a 


0 

a 

)h 

a 


n p 
0 p 

a ^ 


0 

cd 

a 


£ 

P 

s 


3 

£ 

p 

CO 


3 

a 



a o 

£ 

0 o 

^ g 

1 g. 

CO o 



0 p 

^ Q 
1-1 ^ 
a 

£ 5 

0 

a <M o 

o s 

1 |l 

ca i« 

O 

cl 

s s ® 

3 w ^ 

p M p 

.£ S £ 
n £ tj 
to ^ fa 
^ o P 
<5 ti:; Pa 



12; 

O 

HH 

CO 

CO 

a 

a 

o 

X 

a 



r- 



CO 

3 

rQ 

P 



















3 


p 




















cd 


f-4 


1-1 


f-4 


H 


l4 


1^ 




f-i 


1-4 


£ 


P 


0 


P 


P 


P 


p 


P 


0 


p 


to 




>» 


>* 


£ 


>> 


>> 


£ 


>» 


>> 


to 








1-4 






l4 






p 


ctf 


cd 


cd 


3 




cd 


Cd 


Cd 


cd 


p 


a 


a 


a 


a 


a 


a 


a 


a 


a 




t- 


T— t 


L.O 




CO 


T— 1 




LO 


0 




CO 




CO 


t- 


oo 


Tl4 




C4 


V.O 





a 

o 

<i 



a 

o 

12 ; 

HH 

> 

o 

a 

a 





to 


CO 

cd 


p; 


p 


p 

a 


p 

0 


p 

-M 

>» 


cd 

a 

>» 


bo 

P 

cS 


rt 

0 

jd 


cd 

3 


p 

> 

p 


p 

3 

13 


p 


a 


d 


3 


3 


3 


3 


a 


Eh 


a 


a 


a 


)2; 


a 



c 

a 

o 

r2 

3 

a 



u 

3 

CO 

to 

o 

o 

o 



CO 

a 

Eh 

o 

a 

a 

a 

p 



;2i 

0 


3 

c 


> 

Q 




a 

0 

-4-> 






a 


£ 

0 

*p 


.5 

r-t 


P 

P 


X3 

P 


0 

l4 

0 


to 

3 


3 


d 


3 


p 

g 


0 

-M 

P 

> 


> 

to 

a> 

3 


fH 

P 

0 

0 


0 

p 

Eh 


p 

> 

a 


& 

p 

tsi 

a 


►td 

t/T 

p 


3 

p 

p 

s 


M 

p 

p 

p 

a 


iT 

cd 

N 

r£ 


a 

£ 


n" 

p 

a 

p 

p 


o' 

a 


0 

0 

"p 


c/T 

0 

•4-> 

P 


0 

P 

3 

e 


V 


p 

0 

to 

to 


Id 


Id 


cS 


p 


p 


P 


p 

CO 


p 


^ P 


CO 


CO 


CO 


CO 


CO 


CO 


CO 


'io 


tH 


<?4 


CO 




VO 


to 


t- 


00 




tr- 


t- 


t- 


t- 




t- 


t* 


t~ 




tH 


tH 


tH 


t-H 


t-H 


▼H 


tH 


iH 


r—i 










U 










O 




52; 






CO 




o 






!s o 




HH 

CO 

CO 

W 


e: 

C3 

r- 

to 


-A 


C3 c3 
CO 'o: 






CO 

o 


o 


^ o 
o 


o 


o 




>> 




0r» 


« 


*eo 








C3 


C3 


'o ^ 


cc 


tt 


.-4 


p^ 


*-4 





1-1 






u, 


u 

a 

o 


o 




<i> 




o 

s 










?S 


;-• 




C-. 


cc 


rt 


C3 


CJ 


o 




>-4 




H-1 




CO 



o 



Cl 



CO 

CO 



1^3 

CO 



L.O 






CO 



CO 



LTO 

CO 



t- 

CM 



H 

O 

52 ; 

HH 

> 

o 

Ph 




o 

*s 

c3 

hJ 



o 






p: 

C3 



^3 



q; 



O 



tc 



rt 

CJ 



c: 






CO 



cS 






2 


3 


p 




CO 



O 

o 

.5 

*> 

o 



d 







> 


P 

.2" 








. 


p 

C5 




CO 






*C 






o 


P4 






P4 




.2 


p 


C 


<D 

-+-> 






^ P 




E-» 


S 


is 


W 


O 


'p 


CO 

3 


e ^ 


o 


< 

O 


a> 

CO 

P 


c? 


P 

c3 


Oi 

o 


o 

<D 


CO 

<D 


§ 2 
52; 


in 

O 


P4 


-jj' 


P4 


ip 

o 


S 


*> 


Eh 








»_3 


c3 




p. 








J=T 


O .j-T 


O 


n 


P 

CO 

g 


o 

CO 

• l-< 


o 

;h 

o 


cT 

is 

o 


cT 

•+-» 

o 


o 

*p 


cJ 

'g 

3 


P-i s 

g 1 

c5 P 


o 

CO 

ci 






CO 


CO 


CO 


CO 


U2 


CO 


Eh Eh 


> 




o 

CO 


T— ( 

oo 

T— 1 


Cl 

CO 

rH 


CO 

00 


oo 

tH 


LfO 

CO 

'•—4 


CO 

00 

1—4 


CO 

oo CO 

i-H t-4 


Ci 

00 



.'/2 

Sh 

CO 



a 

Eh 

HH 

o 

r— H 
H-4 

C:^ 

a 

a 

>< 

a 



:2; 

o 

HH 

CO 

CO 

a 

a 

o 

« 

a 



a 

a 

<1 



a 

o 

;2; 
H- ( 

> 

o 

a 

a 



CO 

a 

o 

a 

a 

a 

p 



THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE CONXTSNTION 



45 





CO 


ZJ 






«4-4 

0 


>> 


u 


a 


1— 1 


n 




0 

-i-i 


CO 

a 


•t-> 


c 


G 


’a 



U) 

c 



o 

a 



5 rr w 
.!£ a .5 

w o > 

c3 

cs 



o 

a 



« ^ 2 
^ o .S; 

o to ^ 



;h 

o 

c 

o 

> 

o 

fco 



.2 ^ 
*S 'o 
c ^ 

*> S 
2 ^ 
CI4 

c 

o 

£ s 

O ^ 

a c 



W C' 

o ^ 

O -2 

c: 



o 
c 

o O 

o S 
fc£ ^ 



d 

’2 « 

•r c 
o .2 

a o 



i 2 

o .:: 



w it: 

•2 " 
c a 

O ^ 

CO 

o ^ 
M o 

cT 

s 

o O 

0 
w 
3 
o 



C 

C3 



CO 

>» 



bo 

c 



O -rt 



, a 

§ § 

3 CO 



o 

a 



u* 

Q 

>> 

> 



u u 

o o 

>> >> 



a ^ p 2 



b) 

c 



fcc 

c 



o 

u 

a 



a 



o 

;h 

a 



fco 

3 



to 

c 



y 

c3 

u 

a 



G 

o 

r2 

*53 

o 

a 



g3 

a 



G 

3 



G 

U 

O 

a 




1/5 rH 
CO 



CD 



CD 

la 



S-I 



3 

CO 



'G 

G 

G 

G 

.2 

!§ 

*C0 

a 



o 









u 




G 

0 


(D 


<D 

>» 


0 

>> 


<D 

>» 


u 

bo 


G 

a 


G 

a 


G 

a 


G 

a 



^-H 




00 


05 


CO 


CM 


CO 


CO 



S5 

S 

G 

a 



CD 

LQ 





I 

Q) 



<U 

s 



CO 


0) 




G 


w 




S 








G 




0 

£ 


> 

CD 

3 

G 




G 


jG 


0 


G3 






> 


> 


*& 



O 

O 



c4 



CO 

05 



o 



G 



o 



G 



ccT 

£ 



G 

G 



> 





a 

05 



ID 

05 



CD 

05 



00 

05 



05 

05 



EXPERIENCE & INTERESTS 



46 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



bo 

C 



o 

c3 



0 

o 

w 

<;> 

5 



^ 05 

(V 
> 

S -2 
5 c; 

WM O 
05 
<25 

u, ^ 

I & 

I « 

o 



• * 






a 


o 




-4-> 






C3 


o 






05 




05 


:3 




C3 


o 




s 


K 






<D 










o 


•w 




U 

O 


o 




p; 


u 


05 




o 


O 


<2; 




> 


> 

§3 


£ 

o 

f— 


c: 

-k-» 






r* 






O 


o 


%* 


05 


£ 


<y 


2 


u 






o 








o 





o 

t-H 

CQ 

W 

W 

O 

« 








u. 




1 


% 


o 

r 


c 3 


c 3 


05 


P 


P 


P 



w 

a 



LTD lO 
LO 



o 



W 

o 



> 

o 

Ph 



cS 




05 

-4.J 


a 


<15 


C5 


=5 




bO 

=3 


>* 

(15 


02 

b-H 



CQ 

W 

H 

O 

W 

h:i 

W 

P 



Eh 


O 




o 


o 




bJO 


02 






*£ 




*£ 

o 


G 

05 


<15 

02 


P 




O 

»-3 




oT 


<D 




~4-> 


-4-2 


> 


'o 


13 


oS 






ES3 


s 






, 


, 


o 


1-H 




o 


O 


o 


(>3 


<M 





CHAPTER IV 






THE OPENING OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL 
CONVENTION 

Preliminaries to the Opening of the Constitutional 
Convention. — With the election of the delegates over, the 
nation awaited with great interest the opening of the Con- 
stitutional Convention, scheduled to take place on July 30, 
1934, at eleven o’clock in the morning. 

As the opening date approached, delegates from the 
provinces arrived in the capital to exchange impressions 
with one another regarding the task that awaited them. 

One of the first questions that presented themselves in 
the days immediately preceding the inaugural date was re- 
lative to the opening of the Convention. There were dele- 
gates who contended that, in view of the fact that under the 
Tydings-McDuffie Law it was the duty of the legislature 
to call the Constitutional Convention, upon it devolved the 
responsibility of seeing to it that it was properly organized. 
Other delegates, the most outspoken of whom were Tomas 
Confesor of Iloilo and Eusebio Orense of Batangas, sus- 
tained the opinion that, because of its nature as a body 
possessed of supreme governmental authority, independent 
of the existing agencies of the goveimment, the Constitu- 
tional Convention should be given the complete author- 
ity to take charge of its organization without any inter- 
ference from any of the branches of the government. 

President Manuel L. Quezon, subscribing to the first 
view, issued on July 27, 1934, the following statement to 
the press: 

“Under the Philippine Independence Act, it is the duty 
of the Legislature to call the Constitutional Convention. 
Consequently, upon, the Legislature devolves the responsibility 
of seeing to it that the Convention is properly inaugurated. 
In order that proper steps may be taken to this effect. 
Speaker Paredes and I have invited to a conference the fol- 



CHAPTER IV 



I 



THE OPENING OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL 
CONVENTION 

Preliminaries to the Opening of the Constitutional 
Convention. — With the election of the delegates over, the 
nation awaited vith great interest the opening of the Con- 
stitutional Convention, scheduled to take place on July 30, 
1934, at eleven o’clock in the morning. 

As the opening date approached, delegates from the 
provinces arrived in the capital to exchange impressions 
with one another regai'ding the task that awaited them. 

One of the first questions that presented themselves in 
the days immediately preceding the inaugural date was re- 
lative to the opening of the Convention. There were dele- 
gates who contended that, in view of the fact that under the 
Tydings-McDuffie Law it was the duty of the legislature 
to call the Constitutional Convention, upon it devolved the 
responsibility of seeing to it that it was properly organized. 
Other delegates, the most outspoken of whom were Tomas 
Confesor of Iloilo and Eusebio Orense of Batangas, sus- 
tained the opinion that, because of its nature as a body 
possessed of supreme governmental authoxdty, independent 
of the existing agencies of the government, the Constitu- 
tional Convention should be given the complete author- 
ity to take charge of its organization without any inter- 
ference from any of the branches of the government. 

President Manuel L. Quezon, subscribing to the first 
view, issued on July 27, 1934, the following statement to 
the press: 

“Under the Philippine Independence Act, it is the duty 
of the Legislature to call the Constitutional Convention. 
Consequently, upon; the Legislature devolves the responsibility 
of seeing to it that the Convention is properly inaugurated. 
In order that proper steps may be taken to this effect, 
Speaker Paredes and I have invited to a conference the fol- 



48 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CON:-TITUTION 



lowing mcmbcrs-clcct of the Con**titutionul Convention; 
namely, the Honorable Jose A. Clarin, the Honorable Clato 
M. Recto, the Plonorablc Ruperto Montinola, the Honorable 
Manuel C. Briones, the Honorable Manuel Roxas, Resident 
Commissioners Guevara and Osias, the Honorable Scrafin ^ 
Marabut, the Honorable Mariano Jesus Cuenco, the Honors 
able Rafael Palnia, the Honorable Vicente Singrson Cncama^ 
•cion, the Honorable Jose P. Eaurel, the Honorable Jose Hon^ ' 
tiveros to meet with us at the office of the President of the 

I 

Senate this afternoon at 4 :30, so as to prepare the progTmin 
for the inaugruration of the Constitutional Convention.” j 



The national leaders, President Manuel L. Quezon of 
the majority party and Senator Serjfio Osmena of the mi- 
nority party, seriously concerned themselves, .since the elec- 
tion of delegates, with the proposition of devising means to 
effect the organization of the Convention and place the de- 
liberations of the same on a non-partisan basis to insure the 
drafting of the best constitution possible. Both of them held 
preliminary conferences with their followers at the Consii- 
tutional Convention to insure the attainment of these ob-' 
jectives. 



- 






VJ 



At the meeting of July 27, 1934, a tentative agreement 
was reached with respect to the inaugural ceremonies. 
President Manuel L. Quezon was to call the Convention to 
order; Delegate Jose P. Laurel of the minority party was 
to be chosen as temporai’y chairman after the Convention 
had been called to order; and Delegate Claro M. Recto of 
the majority party was to be elected as permanent pres- 
ident, with Delegate Ruperto Montinola of the minoidty 
party as vice-president. The proceedings of the Conven- 
lon were to be conducted in a non-partisan manner. 

The news of the reported agreement among the na- 
lonal leaders was received with great rejoicings. In its 
editorial for Sunday, July 29, 1934, the Tribune said: 

"UNIFIED CONVENTION 
"Every Filipino will rejoice over the latest develop, 
ment on the organization of the Constitutional Convention- 
‘‘The national leaders met to deliberate upon it. It is 
their decision that Senator Recto, majority floor leader, will 



THE OPENING OF THE CONVENTION 



49 



be chairman of the Convention and Senator Montinola, in- 
fluential in the minority party, the vice-chairman. 

“Senate President Quezon, in explaining this initiative 
v.’hich the leaders took as to the Constitutional Convention, 
points to it as a course of action which the legislature had 
to take in view of its responsibility in having been the 
creator by law of the convention. 

“Whether we agree or disagree with him, we should 
find satisfaction in the result achieved, namely, the placing 
of the leadership in the convention in capable hands, and 
in men whose very party allegiances ser\*e to prevent the 
division of tlie convention into two hostile camps and to 
forestall the attendant disruption of its work. 

“The convention is a large body. There is no doubt 
about the high ability of its members. They are, generally, 
men of parts. 

“So large a body is difficult to organize. And men of 
parts, if not made to observe the rules of the game, may 
fly off the handle. Their very ability and eminence some- 
times spell disaster in a deliberative body. 

“That Senate President Quezon felt it to be his duty 
to explain why Senator Recto and Senator Montinola were 
chosen to direct the convention, is a proof of the good faith 
in the procedure leading to their selection. 

“Senate President Quezon wanted to impress upon the 
members of the convention the absolute necessity of giving 
it a start. Nothing is meant, in what was done, to offend 
the members of the convention by an undue exercise of 
functions which belong to that body. 

“To put it mildly, it is conceivable that the convention 
has been helped and not obstructed. There was secured 
for it the chance to act as one body. 

“The constitutional convention meets tomorrow. A 
historic body, its position of permanence in recorded events 
should be the very motive for its going about its task with 
competence and dispatch.^^ 

The agreement at the meeting was submitted to sepa- 
rate caucuses of the majority and the minority parties, held 
at the Philippine legislative building on Sunday, July 29, 
1934, the day before the inaugural session of the Constitu- 
tional Convention. The opposition of some membei-s of 
the minority party to the plan of a non-partisan cooperation 
was easily overcome by the vigorous appeal for a spirit of 




50 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

service by Delegate Manuel lioxas. When President 
submitted the agreement to the caucus of the majority 
delegates, while there was a unanimous .acclamation foj. 
choice of Delegate Recto as permixnent president, there was 
a vigorous opposition to the election of Delegate ^lontiu^jj 
as vice-president, many of the outstanding membei-a 
the Convention in the ranks of the majority party insisting 
that the majority party should have complete control of 
offices of the Convention. In the midst of the heated debates 
that followed after President Quezon told the* caucus that he 
had already promised to the minority party the election of 
Delegate Montinola as vice-president. Delegate Ricardo 
pomuceno of Marinduque presented a motion giving a vote 
of confidence to President Quezon. And so it was finally 
agreed that the first vice-presidency should be given to u 
man of the minority party, Delegate Ruperto Montinola. 
with the compromise that a second vice-presidency be 
created to be filled by Delegate Teodoro Sandiko of the ma- 
jority party. The majority party caucus likewise agreed to 
elect, for secretary of the Convention, Narciso Pimentel, 
and, for sergeant-at-arms, Narciso Diokno, both of whom 
were not delegates to the Convention. This arrangement be- 
tween the leaders of the two political parties, together with 
the concerted plan of conducting the deliberations of the 
Convention on a non-partisan basis, gave a very happy 
start to the work of the Constitutional Assembly. 

The ratification of the agreement of the national lead- 
ers by the delegates in their respective party caucuses on 
July 29, 1934 was praised very highly. The editorial of 
the Philippines Herald, in its issue on the following day, 
read as follows: 

“AN AUSPICIOUS BEGINNING 
“The seketion of Senator Claro M. Recto as president 
of the Philippine Constitutional Convention is a happy 
au^ry of the success of this momentous gathering in our 
national history. Over him, indeed, there could not have 
t>een any cleavage of opinion, considering his intellectual 
leadership and vast knowledge of the law. 






THE OPENING OF THE CON\TENTION 51 

“The selection of Senator Ruperto Montinola, of tlie 
Minority, as vice-president of the Convention, is the har- 
binger of harmony in the deliberations of the assembly. 
Here the Majority deserves its measures of praise for set- 
ting aside considerations of party predominance for the 
sake of a perfect understanding witli the Opposition. 

“That the Majority has been tolerant can no longer 
be doubted. In all frankness it could control this Conven- 
tion, if it wanted to. Its leaders are in key positions in 
the national scheme, and there are men enough in the 
ranks of the “anti” delegates whose training and record 

of service are the best guarantee of achievement for tlieir 
party. 

“But the Majority has not chosen to claim a monopoly 
on the powers of the Convention and has given the Minor- 
ity its share of the honors by consenting to the selection of 
Senator Montinola as vice-president of the constituent body. 

“With this demonstration of faith in the patriotism and 
good purposes of the Opposition group, and with the choice 
of Senator Recto ,as director of the assembly, the Majority 
has given auspicious beginning to the siting of the fun- 
damental law of the land.” 

The Opening Ceremonies of the Constitutional Con- 
vention. — July 30, 1934. Although the inauguration of the 
Convention was scheduled to take place at eleven o’clock 
in the morning, long before that time, a vast throng had 
already crowded itself at the enti*ances of the Philip- 
pine legislative building, seeking admission to the session 
hall of the House of Representatives. Owing to its limited 
capacity, admission to the session hall was by invitation 
» or by written permission. 

The session hall was packed up long before the time 
for the opening of the Convention. All the elements of 
the community were there I'epresented. Among the mass 
of humanity who came to witness the opening of the Con- 
vention were Brigadier-General Frank Parker, command- 
ing the Philippine department of the United States Army, 
and other ranking officers of the samej members of the Su- 
preme Court, including Chief Justice Ramon Avancena, and 
Associate Justices George A. Malcolm, Thomas A. Street, 



52 FR/\MING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

Antonio Villareal, Carlos A. Imperial, Jose Abad Santos, 
John A, Hull, James A. Vickers, Anacleto Diaz, Ctcorge A. 
Butte, and Leonard Goddard; members of the Philippine 
Legislature; other leading officials of the Philippine gov- 
ernment; consular representatives; leading business men; 
women leaders; and members of the local press, with the 
correspondents of several foreign newspapers. 

Although he was scheduled in the Orders of the Day 
of the Convention to address the Assembly, the Governor- 
General did not attend, following his policy announced 
in advance that he would not intervene in any way with 
the proceedings of the Convention in order to give the dele- 
gates a free hand in the fulfillment of their mission. This 
attitude evoked the commendation of the people, particu- 
larly of the American sector of the countiT* ^^s editorial 
on July 31, 1934, the American-owned newspaper, the 
McLTiild Daily BuUetiTi^ said i 

“Governor-General Murphy acted with wisdom and tact 
in declining to he present at the first session of the consti- 
tutional convention. The delicacy of his behavior was great- 
ly appreciated by those who have the utmost confidence ia 
him and would have welcomed his presence. 

“Murphy’s conduct is a symbol of the fact that the 
administration wants the constitution to be a truly great 
Philippine and Filipino achievement, and does not wsh to 
bring pressure to bear n't any point. The convention has 
been given a free hand. 

“In a sense this increases the responsibility of the dele- 
gates. They are taking independent and unhampered action 
and their work will not be surveyed by the sovereign power 
until it is completed and presented to the President of the 
United States. This is as it should be, and the delegates 
will welcome and enjoy this responsibility.^’ 

At 10:30, the Convention was formally opened by 
Senate President Manuel L. Quezon, who, a few minutes 
before, arrived at the session hall, proceeding to the ros- 
trum with Speaker Quintin Paredes of the House of Rep- 
resentatives. 



THE OPENING OF THE CON\^NTION 



53 



After a solemn invocation by Monsignor Alfredo Ver- 
soza, bishop of Lipa, Batangas, President Quezon addressed 
the Convention. In part, he said; 

“You have met in pursuance to the call of the Philip- 
pine Legislature to organize yourselves as a Constitutional 
Convention and to frame and adopt the Constitution for the 
Government of the Commonwealth, as well as for the Gov- 
ernment of the Philippine Republic, until such Constitution 
is amended or abrogated by the sovereign will of the people 
of the Philippine Islands. It is my fervent wish and prayer 
that your task upon which the freedom, happiness and pros- 
perity of the Filipino people will greatly depend be crowmed 
with complete success.’’ 

The roll of delegates was then called by the secretary 
of the House of Representatives, Eulogio Benitez, acting 
secretary of the Convention. Of the 202 delegates, two 
hundred were present. The t\vo delegates from the Ba- 
tanes Islands could not be at the Convention until two 
days after, having been delayed because of the difficulties 
of transportation from those islands. 

With a quorum of the delegates declared present, the 
Convention then unanimously chose Dr. Jose P. Laurel, del- 
egate from Batangas, as temporaiy chainnan. 

After Delegate Laurel had been installed as temporary 
chairman. President Quezon and Speaker Paredes then left 
the rostrum, the first leaving the session hall while the 
latter remaining in the Assembly. 

Recto Elected as President of the Constitutional Con- 
vention. — With only one dissenting vote, that of Delegate 
Tomas Confesor, who, a few minutes before, questioned 
insistently the right of President Quezon to intei-vene in 
the pi eliminary oi ganization of the Convention and who 
nominated Delegate Pedro Guevara, with the latter declin- 
ing, however, the nomination. Delegate Claro M. Recto of 
Batangas was elected pemianent president of the Consti- 
tutional Convention. 

Delegate Claro M. Recto was already a national figure 
at the time of his election as president of the Convention. 



54 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



One of the foremost members of the Philippine bar, whose 
legal career shortly after the closing of the Convention was 
crowned by an appointment to the Philippine Supreme 
Court, and an eminent man of letters, he had to his credit 
many years of distinguished ser\-ice in public life, first as 
a member of the House of liepresenUitives and later as a 
member of the Philippine Senate. 

President Recto’s Inaugural Atldress. — After having 
been conducted to the presidential chair, from outside the 
Convention hall, by a committee composed of Delegates 
Manuel Roxas for Capiz, Jesus M. Cuenco for Cebu, and 
Norberto Romualdez for Leyte, President Recto, on assum- 
ing the presidential chaii', delivered his speech of accept- 
ance, which sounded the keynote of his policy in directing 
the proceedings of the Convention. In part, he said: 

“In order that it may be effective as an instrument for 
organizing the powers of the State and for safeguarding 
the rights of the citizen and of society; in order that it 
may command the respect and reverence of all, governors 
as well as governed; in short, in order that the jieoplc may 
consider it their duty to love and defend it, the Constitution 
should be the work of the people, their legitimate creation, 
moulded from their hands, like a gem from the hands of 
the artificer, like the universe from those of God. It is 
the law of paternity and of the affections, of the creative 
power*, that rules life in its divex’se manifestations. The 
Constitution must be, therefore, the woi*k of the people and 
not of a political party if the people are to love and defend 
it, and if the governors are to respect and obey it. For 
this I'eason, fellow delegates, I trust, and you with me — 
of that I am sui’e — that, before entering this saci'ed hall, 
befoi'e passing through these histoidc doors, we had stripped 
ourselves of our partisan ti'appings and washed our hands 
a hundred times not in the wash-basin of any pi*etorium 
nt in the joi’dan of tolerance, of respect and mutual un>* 
dei'standing, of indestructible faith in the unity of our des- 
tiny that of suiwiving all or perishing all in this last lap 
of our odyssey for liberty.’’ 

The Administi'ation of the Oath of Office. — The 
President-elect then took his oath of office before Delegate 
Teodoro Sandiko of Bulacan, designated by him to admin- 



THE OPENING OF THE CON\TENTION 



55 



ister the same. And, with President Recto administering 
it, the other delegates likewise took their oath of office. 

Other Officere of the Constitutional Convention.- — 
The Convention then proceeded to the election of other 
officers, choosing Delegates Ruperto Montinola of Iloilo as 
first vice-president and Teodoro Sandiko as second vice- 
president; Narciso Pimentel, a technical assistant to the 
House of Representatives, as secretary; and Narciso Diok- 
no, sergeant-at-arms of the same House, as sergeant- 
at-arms of the Convention. 

Resolutions of the Constitutional Convention Before 

it adjourned, the Convention adopted four resolutions: — 
(1) a resolution thanking the Philippine Legislature, Pres- 
ident Quezon of the Senate, and Speaker Paredes of the 
House of Representatives for having cooperated in the 
inauguration of the Convention; (2) a resolution notifying 
the Governor-General and, through him, the President and 
the Congress of the United States of the fact that the Con- 
vention had been duly organized; (3) a resolution notifying 
the Senate and the House of Representatives of the Philip- 
pines of the fact that the Convention had been duly organ- 
ized ; and (4) a resolution authorizing the President to 
appoint a committee on credentials of three menibers. 

Press Comments. Thus was most auspiciously inaugu- 
rated the Constitutional Convention in an atmosphere of 
good will and harmony. 

The spirit of non-pai'tisanship that characterized the 
deliberations of the Convention on this opening day evoked 
the appioval of all and augined for the Convention a happy 
success in its delicate task of framing the fundamental law 
of the land. The Philippines Herald, on July 31, 1934, 
after extolling the lofty sentiment and the spirit of non- 
partisanship of the Convention, said: 

If this is the scntimeiit that will write the fundamental 
law of the future Filipino nation, if this is the spirit of 
tolerance and nobility that will rule the deliberations of 
this Assembly, the country can congratulate itself and look 



56 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

forward to an accomplishment worthy of its noble tradi- 
tions." 

The Tribune, another influential organ of public opinion, 
anent the opening session, commented on the same day 
as follows: 

"The opening session of the Constitutional Convention, 
if it is to repeat itself in the subsequent meetings of that 
body, sums up all the forces that, whether in the individual 
members or in the group they form, shall make for the suc- 
cess of the assembly. 

"There were the more masculine revelations at the ses- 
sion- Men with a sense of responsibility arc in control of 
the convention. They appear to be committed to high prin- 
ciples. The people know who they are, what their public 
careers have been, how they have achieved distinction in the 
service of their people, and why they have been able to as- 
sume command of the constituent assembly. In them is also 
proved ability both to create a working organization and to 
debate and discuss to its final form the proposed consti- 
tution. 

"We have in the convention this warranty of its ulti- 
mate success." 



f 



CHAPTER V 

the organization of the constitutional 

CONVENTION 

The Adoption of the Rules of the Constitutional Con- 
vention. — With its officers ah'eady elected, the Convention 
proceeded to the consideration of its rules and to its in- 
ternal orgfanization. On August 3, 1934, President Recto ap- 
pointed a special committee on rules, composed of Filemon 
Sotto, chairman, and Jose M. Hontiveros, Ruperto Ka- 
punan, Jose S. Reyes, Jose P. Laurel, Paulino Gullas, and 
Gregorio Perfecto, as members.^ The committee made 
its partial report on August 8, 1934, recommending the for- 
mation of committees on the government and functioning 
of the Convention and on the Constitution, submitting the 
remaining part of its I'eport, covering chiefly the rules of 
debates, several weeks later. The I'ules were approved by 
the Convention on September 5, 1934. 

The Committees of the Constitutional Convention.— In 
accordance with the i*ules, the Convention was oi'ganized 
into seven committees on the goveniment and functioning 
of the Convention, and forty on the Constitution. The 
committees, with their respective members, wei*e as fol- 
lows: 

COMMITTEES ON THE GOVERNMENT AND FUNCTIONING 

OF THE CONVENTION 

Committee on Rtdes 

1. Jose E. Romero, Chairman 3. Jose P. Laurel 

2. Luis Morales 4. Paulino Gullas 



1 After the completion and approval of its report, this com- 
mittee was dissolved, and another committee on rules created, along 
with other committees. The members of the committee were: — Jose 
E. Romero, chairman; Luis Morales, Francisco Ventura, Juan L. Le- 
desma, Jose P. Laurel, Paulino Gullas, and Gregorio Perfecto, 



58 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



4. Francisco Ventura C. Gregorio Perfccto 

5. Juan L. Ledesma 

Committee on Credentials 

1. Vicente Nepomuceno, Chairman 4. Jose S. Reyes 

2. Norberto Romualdez G. Luciano Ortiz 

3. Luis Morales 



Committee on Interior Government 

1. Mariano Melendres, Chaimnan 7. Juan D. Nepomuceno 



2. Manuel Martinez 

3. Nicolas Buendia 

4. Bemabe de Guzman 

5. Anacleto B. Ramos 

6. Potenciano Lesaca 



8. Angel Salazar 

9. Matias P. Yusay 

10. Gabriel P. Prieto 

11. Montano A. Ortiz 



Committee on Privileges 



1. Romualdo Enriquez, Chairman 8. Demetrio B. Encarnacion 



2. Enrique J. C. Montilla 

3. Conrado V. Sanchez 

4. Elias Ocampo 

5. Juan L, Bocar 

6. Vicente Nepomuceno 

7. Servando Castro 



9. Pascual M. Beltran 

10. Nicolas Rafols 

11. Paulino Gullas 

12. Manuel F. Albero 

13. Anastacio A. Mumar 



Committee 

1. Fabian R. Millar, Chairman 

2. Castor P. Cruz 

3. Serafin Marabut 



on Accounts 

4. Miguel Cuaderno 

5. Paulino Gullas 



Committee 

1. Jose D. Conejero, Chairman 

2. Toribio P. Perez 

3. Gaudencio E. Abordo 



on PHnting 

4. Vicente Salumbides 

5. Leoncio R. Esliza 



Committee on Style 



1. Vicente Sotto, Chairman 

2. Irineo Ran jo 

3. Francisco Munoz 

4. Jose D. Conejero 



5. Victorino N. Salazar 

6. Paulino Gullas 

7. Gregorio Perfecto 

8. Juanito T. Maramara 



THE ORGANIZATION OF THE CONVENTION 



59 



COMMITTEES ON THE CONSTITUTION 



Committee on Sponsorship 

1. Filenion Sotto, Chairman 43. Antonio Villarama 

2. Manuel Roxas 44. Angel Salazar 

3. Luis Morales 45. Conrado V. Sanchez 

4. Jose M. Aruego 4G. Evaristo R. Sandoval 

5. Vicente Singson Encarnacion 47. Eusebio M. Lopez 

6. Jesus M. Cuenco 

7. Jose S. Reyes 



8. Jose A. Clarin 

9. Elpidio Quirino 

10. Rafael Palma 

11. Manuel C. Briones 

12. Norberto Romualdez 

13. Jose M. Hontiveros 

14. Jose P. Laurel 

15. Godofredo Reyes 

16. Vicente J. Francisco 

17. Eusebio Orense 

18. Salvador Araneta 

19. Manuel Lim 

20. Conrado Benitez 

21. Miguel Cuaderno 

22. Serafin Marabut 

23. Vicente Nepomuceno 

24. Ruperto Montinola 

25. Pedro Guevara 

26. Alejo Labrador 

27. Camilo Osias 

28. Jose Ozamis 

29. Jose E. Romero 

30. Jose Alejandrino 

31. Alejandro de Guzman 

32. Ricardo Nepomuceno 

33. Domingo T. Dikit 

34. Gregorio Perfecto 

35. Hermenegildo Villanueva 

36. Jose Altavas 

37. Ruperto Kapunan 

38. Nicolas Buendia 

39. Enrique Braganza 

40. Francisco Arellano 

41. Jesus Paredes 

42. Domingo T. Zavalla 



48. Juan Navarro 

49. Pedro R. Arteclie 

50. Sofronio M. Flores 

51. J. G. Sanvictores 

52. Clementino V. Diez 

53. Jose D. Conejero 

54. Castor P. Cruz 

55. Jose Zurbito 

56. Enrique J. C. Montilla 

57. Francisco Zialcita 

58. Juan L. Bocar 

59. Jose C. Locsin 

60. Marcelo Adduru 

61. Miguel B. Binag 

62. Irineo Ranjo 

63. Eusebio V. Sison 

64. Braulio Leonardo 

65. Manuel Abella 

66. Severe Cea 

67. Gregorio M. Banaga 

68. Baldomero M. Lapak 

69. Jose Montano 

70. Antonio J. Montesa 

71. Pedro C. Hernaez 

72. Simplicio Lizares 

73. Luciano Ortiz 

74. Manuel C. Fernandez 

75. Wenceslao Q. Vinzons 

76. Mariano A. Lizardo 

77. Albei'to Crespillo 

78. Pablo Lorenzo 

79. Jose M. Delgado 

80. Jose Gutierrez David 

81. Bonifacio Ysip 

82. Nicolas Rafols 

83. Delfin Gumban 



60 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



84. Demetrio Quirino 86. Enrique C. Sobrepona 

85. Eugenio Baltao 87. Jesus Y. Perez 

Committee on Preamble 



1. Norberto Romualdez, Chairman 9. 

2. Francisco Arellano 10. 

3. Jose S. Reyes 11. 

4. Antonio Guzman 12. 

6 Vicente Sotto 13. 

6. Simplicio Lizares 14. 

7. Felix B. Bautista 15. 

8. Rafael Palma 



Hilario Camino Moncado 
Pedro Guevara 
Camilo Osias 
Ambrosio -A. Calleja 
Alberto Crespillo 
Bernardino Inting 
Alojo Labrador 



Committee on Declaration of Principles 



1. Rafael Palma, Chaiirman 

2. Jesus Paredes 

3. Ruperto Kapunan 

4. Antonino Barrion 

5. Adolfo Grafilo 

6. Ramon Maza 

7. Juan L. Bocar 

8. Delfin Gumban 



9. Romualdo Enriquez 

10. Manuel C. Briones 

11. Pascual M. Beltran 

12. Pablo Lorenzo 

13. Demetrio Quirino 

14. Teofilo B. Buslon 

15. Antonio A. Arccnas 



Committee on 

1. Jose P. Laurel, Chairman 

2. Adolfo Grafilo 

3. Juan L, Bocar 

4. Manuel L. Sevilla 

5. Bonifacio Ysip 

6. Domingo T. Zavalla 
V. Sergio G. Jumawan 

8. Enrique Braganza 

9. Anacleto B. Ilamos 

10. Francisco Zialcita 

11. Wenceslao Q. Vinzons 

12. Max Dug^iang 

13. Casiano S. Garin 

14. IVTenandang Piang 

15. Demetrio B. Encamacion 

16. Baldomero M. Lapak 

17. Francisco Munoz 



Bill of Rights 

18. Manuel C. Briones 

19. Jesus Y. Perez 

20. Enrique C. Sobrepeiia 

21. Eugenio Baltao \j 

22. Ambrosio A. Calleja 

23. Juan C. Castillejos 

24. Gaudencio Cloribel 

25. Anastacio A. Muinar 

26. Hilario Camino Moncado 

27. Victorino N. Salazar 

28. Mamerto S. Ribo 

29. Paulino A. Conol 

30. Timoteo P. Ricohermoso 

31. Manuel AbelLa 

32. Mario Guarifia 

33. Salvador Araneta 



Committee on Citizenship Duties 



1. Jose S. Reyes, Chairman 

2. Marcelo Adduru 

3. Enrique C. Sobrepefia 



4. Jesus B. Surban 

5. Clementine V. Diez 

6. Exequiel S. Grageda 



THE ORGANIZATION OP THE CONVENTION 



61 



7. Maximino G. Bueno 

8. Antonio B. Ybanez 

9. Antonio Mansueto 

10. Ser\-ando Castro 

11. Manuel Martinez 



12. Perfecto Balili 

13. Felismeno V. Rivera 

14. Juanito T. Maramara 

15. Jose M. Aldeguer 



1. Jesus M. Cuonco, 

2. Eusebio M. Lopez 

3. Manuel F. Albero 

4. Potenciano Lesaca 

5. Montano A. Ortiz 

6. Juan L. Ledesma 

7. Jose D. Conejero 

8. J. G. Sanvictores 

9. Eusebio V. Sison 

10. Jose Montano 

11. Mariano Ezpeleta 



12. Pio Ancheta 

13. Manuel Lim 

14. Juan Ventenilla 

15. Irineo Ranjo 

16. Juan Navarro 

17. Vicente Salumbides 

18. Ezequiel M. Santos 

19. Eugenio Baltao y 

20. Alejandro A. Galang 

21. Jose C. Ganzon 



Committee on Executive Power 

Chairman 



Committee on Judicial Poiver 



1. Vicente J. Francisco, Chairman 12.. Eusebio Orense 

2. Jose M. Hontiveros 



3. Domingo T. Zavalla 

4. Juan Ortega 

5. Mariano Melendres 

6. Norberto Romualdez 

7. Paulino Gullas 

8. Conrado V. Sanchez 

9. Gregorio M. Bahaga 

10. Anacleto B. Ramos 

11. Numeriano Tanopo 



13. Ruperto Montinola 

14. Roman A. Cruz 

15. Salvador Araneta 

16. Luciano Ortiz 

17. Evaristo R. Sandoval 

18. Manuel L. Sevilla 

19. Mariano Ezpeleta 

20. Francisco Ventura 

21. Cornelio T. Villareal 



Committee on Legislative Power 



1. Manuel C. Briones, Chairman 

2. Bernabe de Guzman 

3. Jose M. Aruego 

4. Demetrio B. Encarnacion 

5. Casiano S. Carin 

6. Manuel Abell a 

7. Julio Borbon 

8. Miguel B. Binag 

9. Gaudencio E. Abordo 

10. Baldomero M. Lapak 

11. Florentino Saguin 



12. Manuel Roxas 

13. Bonifacio Ysip 

14. Angel Salazar 
15 Nicolas Rafols 

16. Clementino V. Diez 

17. Felipe Abrigo 

18. Delfin Joven 

19. Sofronio M, Flores 

20. Teodulfo Suher 

21. Jesus Y. Perez 



62 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



Committee on Provincial 

1. Hcrmenegildo Villanueva, 

Chairnum 

2. Pedro R. Arteche 

3. Cipriano Liboro 

4. Cesar Kintanar 

5. Victorino N. Salazar 

6. Francisco Munoz 

7. Jose Altavas 

8. Felismeno V, Rivera 

9. Jose Ozamis 

10. Jose Zurbito 

11. Jose L. de Guzman 

12. Matias P. Yusay 

13. Paulino A. Conol 

14. Jose M. Aldegner 
15 Tomas L. Cabili 

Committee on 

1. Jose Alejandrino, Chairmajx 

2. Bias Villamor 

3. Severo Cea 

4. Evaristo R. Sandoval 

5. Sergio G. Juniawan 

6. Teodoro Sandiko 

7. Julio Borbon 

8. Juan Navarro 

9. Bemabe de Guzman 

10. Antonio J. Montesa 

11. Marcelo Adduru 



ayid Municipal Government^ 

16. Felipe Abrigo 

17. Ezequiel M. Santos 

18. Satumino MoUieru 

19. Atilano R. Cinco 

20. Antonio Man.^ucto 

21. Pio Ancheta 

22. Jose .'Vrladi 

23. Demetrio Quirino 

24. Perfecto Balili 

25. Timotco P. Ricohormoso 

26. Bernardino Inting 

27. Gaudcncio E. .\bordo 

28. Jose M. Carino 

29. Miguel V. Pio 

30. Leon Cabarrognis 

31. Wcnceslao Q. Vinzons 

National Defeyuse 

12. Vicente Salumbides 

13. Mariano A. Lizardo 

14. Luis Morales 

15. Hcrmenegildo Villanueva 

16. Demetrio B. Encarnacion 

17. Aroian Tulawi 

18. Conrado Benitez 

19. Sixto A. Gaerlan 

20. Tranquilino J. Divinagracia 

21. Apolonio D. Curato 



Committee on Delimitation of 



1. Nicolas Buendia, Chairman 

2 . Juan D. Nepomuceno 

3. Rafael S. Castillo 

5. Bias Villamor 



X erntui y 



6. Miguel P. Pio 

7. Jose Bonto 

8. Alauya Alonto 

9. Aroian Tulawi 



Committee on 

1. Alejo Labrador, Chairman 

2. Paulino Gullas 

3. Mario Guarina 

4. Enrique C. Sobrepena 

5. Paulino A. Conol 

6. Leon Cabarroguis 



Official Language 

7. Manuel C. Fernandez 

8. Pedro C. Hernaez 

9. Jose E. Romero 

10. Florentino O. Chioco 

11. Wenceslao Q. Vinzons 

12. Mlateo Canonoy 



THE ORGANIZATION OF THE CONVENTION 



63 



13. Juanito T. Maramara 15. Atilano R. Cinco 

14. Numeriano Tanopo 



Committee on Citizenship ayid Naturalization 



1. Gregorio Perfecto, Chairman 

2. Fermi n G. Caram 

3. Toribio P. Perez 

4. Francisco Ventura 

5. Mariano Ezpeleta 

6. Anastacio A. Mumar 

7. Jose Zurbito 

8. Braulio Leonardo 



9. Tiburcio Lutero 

10. Ricardo Nepomuceno 

11. Dionisio Niere 

12. Montano A. Ortiz 

13. Artemio Abaya 

14. Juan C. Castillejos 

15. Enrique Maglanoc 



Committee on Constitutional Guarantees 



1. Manuel Lim, Chairman 

2. Enrique Braganza 

3. Norberto Romualdez 

4. Angel Salazar 

6. Fabian R. Millar 

6. Jose M. Hontiveros 

7. Alejandro de Guzman 

8. Vicente Salumbides 

9. Julio Borbon 

10. Vicente Nepomuceno 

11. Gaudencio Cloribel 

12. Vicente J. Francisco 

13. Irineo Ranjo 



14. Pascual M. Beltran 

15. Jesus Y. Perez 
16 Luis Morales 

17. Quiremon Alkuino 

18. Enrique C. Sobrepena 

19. Enrique Maglanoc 

20. Gregorio Perfecto 

21. Ramon Maza 

22. Felismeno V. Rivera 

23. Romualdo Enriquez 

24. Pantaleon A. Pelayo 

25. Bernardino Inting 

26. Leoncio R. Esliza 



Committee on Special Provinces 



1. Menandang Piang, Chairman 

2. J. G. Sanvictores 

3. Leon Cabarroguis 

4. Clement Irving 

5. Delfin Joven 

6. Gaudencio E. Abordo 

7. Delfin Gumban 

8. Satumino Moldero 

9. Jose Ozamis 

10. Sixto A. Gaerlan 

11. Jose M. Carino 

12. Miiguel Gumangan 

13. Jose M. Delgado 

14. Felipe E. Jose 

15. Jose Artadi 

16. Aroian Tulawi 

17. Bias Villamor 



18. Blah Sinsuat 

19. Jose Montano 

20. Mariano A, Lizardo 

21. Pedro D. Melendez 

22. Alberto Crespillo 

23. Cipriano Liboro 

24. Pantaleon A. Pelayo 

25. Pio Ancheta 

26. Juan C. Castillejos 

27. Max Duguiang 

28. Teodulfo Suher 

29. Artemio Abaya 

30. Hermenegildo Villanueva 

31. Apolonio D. Curato 

32. Florentine Saguin 

33. Rafael S. Castillo 

34. Tomas L. Cabili 



64 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CX)NSTITUTION 



35. Pablo Lorcna^o 

36. Pedro R. Artcche 

37. Jesus M. Cuenco 



38. Nicolas Ruondia 

39. JoHC Vcinsco 

40. Jose Loronzana 



Committee on N citioTUilization and Conservation of 
Land and Natural Resources 



1. Jose C. Locsin, Chairman 

2. Demetrio B. Encamacion 

3. Juan L. Ledesma 

4. Pedro C. Hemaez 

5. Florentino O. Chioco 

6. Jose Bonto 

7. Roman A. Cruz 

8. Leon Cabarroguis 

9. Atilano R. Cinco 

10. Adolfo Grafilo 

11. Luis Morales 

12. Juan Navarro 

13. Delfin Gumban 

14. Jose M. Carino 

15. Dionisio Niere 

16. Mamerto S. Ribo ‘ 

17. Sixto A. Gaerlan 

18. Demetrio Quirino 

19. Francisco Ventura 

20. Tomas Confesor 

21. Nicolas Rafols 

Committee on Nationali 

1. Camilo Osias, Chairman 

2. Roman A. Cruz 

3. Mariano Ezpcleta 

4. Quiremon Alkuino 

5. J ulio Borbon 

6. Pedro D. Melendez 

7. Vicente Nepomuceno 

8. Blah Sinsuat 

Committee on Finance 

1. Vicente Singson Encamacion, 

Chairman 

2. Domingo T. Dikit 

3. Delfin Joven 

4. Felix B. Bautista 

5. Miguel Cuaderno 

6. Potenciano Lesaca 

7. Ramon Maza 



22. Jose M. Ahleguer 

23. Montano .A. Ortiz 

24. Jose Ariadi 

25. Rafael S. Castillo 

26. Gabriel P. Prieto 

27. Satumino Benito 

28. Anastacio A. Mumar 

29. Severo Cea 

30. Pantaloon A. Pelayo 

31. Artemio Abaya 

32. Tiburcio Lutcro 

33. Francisco Zialcita 

34. Manuel C. Fernandez 

35. Juan D. Nepomuceno 

36. Mariano Melendrez 

37. Mario Guariha 

38. Antonio Villarama 

39. Felipe E. Jose 

40. Sergio G. Jumawan 

41. Wenceslao Q. Vinzons 

ation of the Public Utilities 
9. Severo Cea 

10. Vicente Sotto 

11. Jose M. Delgado 

12. Apolonio D. Curato 

13. Mariano A. Lizardo 

14. Tomas Confesor 

15. Jose Lorenzana 

and Public Accounts 

8. Deoncio R. Esliza 

9. Castor P. Cruz 

10. Salvador Ar.aneta 

11. Conrado Benitez 

12. Ruperto Montinola 

13. Serafin Marabut 

14. Elias Ocampo 

15. Juanito T. Maramara 



THE ORGANIZATION OF THE CON^HENTION 



65 



Committee on Currency and Banks 



1. Mj^el Cuaderno, Chairman 

2. Castor P. Cruz 

3. Elpidio Quirino 

4. Vicento Lopez 

5. Enrique J. C. Montilla 

6. Juan L. Ledesma 

7. Jose D. Conejero 

8. Serafin Marabut 

9. Miguel P. Pio 

10. Rafael Martinez 

11. Manuel Martinez 



12. Exequiel S. Gragcda 

13. Vicente Singson Encarnacion 

14. Leon Cabarroguis 

15. Salvador Araneta. 

16. Domingo T. Dikit 

17. Tomas Confesor 

18. Simplicio Lizares 

19. Felix B. Bautista 

20. Pantaleon A. Pelayo 

21. Tranquilino J. Divinagracis 

22. Antonio A. Arcenas 



Committee 

1. Serafin Marabut, Chairman 

2. Conrado V. Sanchez 

3. Elpidio Quirino 

4. Vicente Singson Encarnacion 

5. Felipe Abrigo 

6. Miguel Cuademo 

7. Sergio G. Jumawan 

8. Ambrosio A. Calleja 

9. Alberto Crespillo 

10. Salvador Araneta 

11. Mariano A. Lizardo 

12. Exequiel S. Grageda 

13. Leon Cabarroguis 



on Tariff 

14. Fabian R. Millar 

15. Enrique Maglanoc 

16. Eugenio Baltao 

17. Amancio Aguilar 

18. Matias P. Yusay 

19. Tomas Confesor 

20. Miguel Gumangan 

21. Pantaleon A. Pelayo 

22. Max Duguiang 

23. Jose Lorenzana 

24. Elias Ocampo 

25. Enrique J. C. Montilla 



Committee 

1. Pedro Guevara, 

2. Manuel L. Sevilla 

3. Enrique Braganza 

4. Antonino Barrion 

5. Antonio J. Montesa 

6. Jose S, Reyes 

7. Bonifacio Ysip 

8. Dionisio Niere 

9. Paulino A. Conol 

10. Jose M. Aruego 

11. Pascual M. Beltran 

12. Evaristo R. Sandoval 

13. Juan L. Bocar 

14. Manuel Abella 



15. Adolfo Grafilo 

16. Eusebio V. Sison 

17. Camilo Osias 

18. Rafael Palma 

19. Jesus Y. Perez 

20. Pantaleon A. Pelayo 

21. Gaudencio Cloribel 

22. Blah Sinsuat 

23. Francisco Arellano 

24. Braulio Leonardo 

25. Pedro R. Arteche 

26. Enrique J. C. Montilla 

27. Victorino N. Salazar 



on Metropolitan and Foreign Relations 

Chairman 



Committee on Commerce 

1. Salvador Araneta, Chairman 2. Demetrio Quirino 



66 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



3. Miguel P. Pio 

4. Mateo Canonoy 

5. Vicente Lopez 

6. Ambrosio A. Calleja 

7. Roman A. Cruz 

8. Satumino Molcioro 

9. Francisco Zialcita 

10. Hilario Camino Moncado 

11. Exequiel S. Grageda 

12. Leon Cabarroguis 

13. Irineo Ranjo 

14. Florentino O. Chioco 

15. Vicente Singson Encarnacion 

16. Domingo T. Dikit 

Committee 

1. Conrado Benitez, Chairman 

2. Vicente Lopez 

3. Saturnine Benito 

4. Timoteo P. Ricohermoso 

5. Rafael Martinez 

6. Agripino P. Escareal 

7. Felix B. Bautista 

8. Francisco Zialcita 

Committee 

1. Luis Morales, Chairman 

2. Gaudencio E. Abordo 

3. Domingo T. Dikit 

4. Domingo T. Zavalla 

5. Pio Ancheta 

6. Mariano Ezpeleta 

7. Ajitonio Mansueto 

8. D elfin Joven 

9. Pablo Lorenzo 

10. Maximino G. Bueno 

11. Artemio Abaya 

12. Atilano R. Cinco 



17. Castor P. Cruz 

18. Miguel Cuaderno 

19. Rafael Martim-z 

20. .Manuel .Martinez 

21. Florentino Saguin 

22. Manuel F. .Albero 

23. Gabriel P. Prieto 

24. Matias P. Yu.-ay 

25. Jose Fakangan 

26. Jose Velasco 

27. Blah Sinsuat 

28. Jose Artadi 

29. Enrique J. C. Montilla 

30. Sergio G. J umawan 

on Industry 

9. Enrif|uc J. C. Montilla 

10. Tomas Confesor 

11. Sergio G. Jumawan 

12. Simplicio Lizares 

13. Sixto A. Gacrlan 

14. Pablo Lorenzo 

15. Antonio A. Arcenas 

on Civil Service 

13. Castor P. Graz 

14. Jose C. Ganzon 

15. Leon Cabarroguis 

16. Paulino Gullas 

17. Manuel C. Fernandez 

18. Wenceslao Q. Vinzons 

19. Juanito T. Maramara 

20. Antonio Villarama 

21. Francisco Ventura 

22. Manuel Abella 

23. Hilario Camino Moncado 



Committee on Labor and Social Welfare 



1. Jose M. Delgado, Chairman 

2. Ezequiel M. Santos 

3. Nicolas Buendia 

4. Jesus M. Cuenco 

5. Florentino O. Chioco 

6. Felipe E. Jose 



7. Cesar Kintanar 

8. Romualdo Enriquez 

9. Salvador Araneta 

10. Maximino G. Bueno 

11. Julio Borbon 

12. Atilano R. Cinco 



THE ORGANIZATION OP THE CONVENTION 



67 



13. Gaudencio E. Abordo 

14. Quiremon Alkuino 

15. Clementino V. Dicz 

16. Antonio B. Ybanez 

17. Sofronio M. Flores 

18. Jose C. Locsin 

19. Antonio Mansueto 

20. Exequiel S. Gragcda 



21. Delfin Gumban 

22. Teofilo B. Buslon 

23. Jose Zurbito 

24. Cornelio T. Villareal 

25. Jose Alejandrino 

26. Juan C. Castillejos 

27. Miguel P. Pio 



Comviittee on Immigration 



1. Alejandro de Guzman, Chair- 

viayi 

2. Evaristo R. Sandoval 

3. Amtonio J. Montesa 

4. J. G. Sanvictores 

5. Menandang Piang 

6. Jose Velasco 

7. Angel Salazar 

Committee 



8. Jesus Y. Perez 

9. Teodoro Sandiko 

10. Felipe E. Jose 

11. Jose M. Carino 

12. Mamerto S. Ribo 

13. Salvador Araneta 

14. Gaudencio Cloribel 

15. Leoncio R. Esliza 

on Public l7istriictio7i 



1. Ricardo Nepomuceno, Che 

man 

2. Conrado Benitez 

3. Jose M. Aruego 

4. 'Miguel P. Pio 

5. Alejo Labrador 

6. Antonio B. Ybanez 

7. Sergio G. Jumawan 

8. Maximino G. Bueno 

9. Castor P. Cruz 

10. Toribio P. Perez 

11. Pascual M:. Beltran 

12. Alejandro A. Galang 

13. Jose M. Delgado 

14. Felipe Abrigo 

15. Baldomero M. Lapak 

16. Braulio Leonardo 

17. Ramon Maza 

18. Enrique C. Sobrepena 

Committee on 



19. Tomas L. Cabili 

20. Paulino A. Conol 

21. AJejandro de Guzman 

22. Gaudencio E. Abordo 

23. Sixto A. Gaerlan 

24. Juanito T. Maramara 

25. Quiremon Alkuino 

26. Servando Castro 

27. Perfecto Balili 

28. Miguel B. Binag 

29. Jose Montano 

30. Irineo Ranjo 

^ 31. Dionisio Niere 

32. Mariano A. Lizardo 

33. Leoncio R. Esliza 

34. Antonio A. Arcenas 

35. Camilo Osias 

36. Wenceslao Q. Vinzons 

37. Fermin G. Caram 

Health and Hygiene 



1. Antonio Villarama, Chairman 

2. Timoteo P. Ricohermoso 

3. Fermin G. Caram 

4. Jose L. de Guzman 
6. Jose M. Delgado 



6. Jose M. Carino 

7. Jose Fakangan 

8. Florentine O. Chioco 

9. Dionisio Niere 

10. Antonio Mansueto 



68 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 






11. Hiiario Camino Moncado 

12. Jose C. Locsin 

13. Amancio Aguilar 

14. Juan C. Castillejos 



15. Gabriel P. Prieto 

16. Bias Villamor 

17. Jose Gutierrez David 



Committee on Mandatory Provisions 



1. Francisco Ventura, Chairman 

2. Bonifacio Ysip 

3. Vicente Nepomuceno 

4. Jesus B. Surban 

5. Mariano A. Lizardo 

6. Bemabe de Guzman 

7. Antonino Barrion 

8. Bernardino Inting 

9. Teofilo B. Buslon 

10. Alejandro A. Galang 

11. Marcelo Adduru 

12. CasLano S. Carin 



13. Irineo Banjo 

14. Fcrmin G. Caram 

15. Wenccslao Q. Vinzons 

16. Manuel Roxas 

17. Manuel F. Albcro 

18. Jose C. Ganzon 

19. Florentino Saguin 

20. Jose P. Laurel 

21. Eugenio Baltao 

22. Manuel Abella 

23. Clement Irving 



Committee on Suffrage 



1. Jose Altavas, Chairman 

2. Delfin Joven 

3. Anastacio A. Mumar 

4. Mateo Canonoy 

5. Jose M. Carino 
0. Clement Irving 

7. Juan L. Bocar 

8. Pedro D. Melendez 

9. Jose Velasco 

10. Nicolas Buendia 

11. Alejandro A. Galang ) 

12. Jose Bonto 

13. Juan Ventenilla 

14. Bernardino Inting 

15. Agripino P. Escareal 

16. Sofronio M. Flores 

17. Montano A, Ortiz 

18. Eusebio V. Sison 

19. Numeriano Tanopo 

20. J ose M. Aldeguer 

21. Manuel L. Sevilla 

22. J . G. Sanvictores 

23. Quiremon Alkuino 



24. Ruperto Kapunan 

25. Antonio J. Montesa 

26. Perfect© Balili 

27. Teodulfo Suner 

28. Cesar Kintanar 

29. Manuel Abella 

30. Gaudencio E. Abordo 

31. Anacleto B. Ramos 

32. Felipe E. Jose 

33. Tomas L. Cabili 

34. Teofilo B. Buslon 

35. Menandang Piang 

36. Fermin G. Caram 

37. Jose Zurbito 

38. Miguel B. Binag 

39. Antonio B. Ybanez 

40. Paulino Gullas 

41”. Felismeno V. Rivera 

42. Max Duguiang 

43. Alberto Crespillo 

44. Francisco Ventura 

45. Mamerto S. Ribo 



Committee on Amendments to the Constitution 

1. Jose Ozamis, Chairman 



2. Jose Bonto 



THE ORGANIZATION OP THE CON\nENTION 



3. Juan Ventenilla 

4. Anaclcto B. Ramos 

5. Romualdo Enriquez 

6. Juan Navarro 

7. Jose Aitadi 

8. Manuel Abclla 

9. Delfin Joven 

10. Juan L. Bocar 

11. Sofronio M. Flores 

12. Luciano Ortiz 

13. Gregorio M. Banaga 



14. Jose Fakangan 

15. Jose Lorenzana 

16. Manuel F. Albero 

17. Numeriano Tanopo 

18. Victorino N. Salazar 

19. Adolfo Grafilo 

20. Julio Borbon 

21. Jose Velasco 

22. Blah Sinsuat 

23. Alauya Alonto ^ 

24. Pedro D. Melendez 



Committee on Transitory Provisions 

1. Ruperto Kapunan, Chairman 21. Felix B. Bautista 



2. Domingo T. Zavalla 

3. Severo Cea 

4. Braulio Leonardo 

5. Jesus Paredes 

6. Antonio Guzman 

7. Juan D. Nepomuceno 

8. Ezequiel M. Santos 

9. Casiano S. Garin 

10. Toribio P. Perez 

11. Sofronio M. Flores 

12. Antonio Mansueto 

13. Jose Artadi 

14. Manuel Abella 

15. Alberto Crespillo 

16. Jose D. Conejero 

17. Tiburcio Lutero 

18. Luciano Ortiz 

19. Amancio Aguilar 

20. Cornelio T. Villareal 



22. Jose C. Ganzon 

23. Enrique Maglanoc 
24 Gregorio Perfecto 

25. Demetrio Quirino 

26. Menandang Piang 

27. Mario Guariha 

28. Artemio Abaya 

29. Paulino A. Conol 

30. Jose M. Aruego 

31. Jose Montano 

32. Cesar Kintanar 

33. Pascual M. Beltran 

34. Bernabe de Guzman 

35. Jose Gutierrez David 

36. Jose Lorenzana 

37. Nicolas Buendia 

38. Antonio Villarama 

39. Mateo Canonoy 

40. Conrado V. Sanchez 



Committee on Impeachment 



1. Jose Gutierrez David, Chair- 

man 

2. Jose M. Aruego 

3. Jesus Paredes 

4. Antonino Barrion 

5. Sixto A. Gaerlan 

6. Francisco Arellano 

7. Agripino P. Escareal 

8. Juan Ortega 

9. Pascual M. Beltran 

10. Francisco Zialcita 



11. Mamerto S. Ribo 

12. Ruperto Montinola 

13. Gaudencio Cloribel 

14. Jesus B. Surban 

15. Vicente Salumbides 

16. Manuel Lim 

17. Elias Ocampo 

18. Teofilo B. Buslon 

19. Maximino G. Bueno 

20. Miguel B. Binag 

21. Anastacio A. Munar 



4 



70 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



22. Antonio Guzman 

23. Vicente Sotto 

24. Paulino Gullas 

25. Eugenio Baltao 
2G. Montano A. Ortiz 
27. Mariano Ezpeleta 



28. Nicolas Rafols 

29. Gregorio M. Banaga 

30. Felipe E. Jofc 

31. Luciano Ortiz 

32. Manuel C. Fernandez 



Committee on Agricultural Development 



1. Juan L. Ledesma, Chairman 

2. Enrique J. C. Montilla 

3. Felipe Abrigo 

4. Mario Guarina 

5. Braulio Leonardo 

6. Antonio Villarama 

7. Exequiel S. Grageda 

8. Conrado Benitez 

8. Rafael Martinez 

10. Timoteo P. Ricohermoso 

11. Cipriano Liboro 

12. Pedro C. Hemaez 

13. Bonifacio Ysip 



14. Juan I). Nepomuceno 

15. Juan Ventenilla 

16. Bcmabc de Guzman 

17. Sixto A. Gacrlan 

18. Rafael S. Castillo 

19. Miguel Gumangan 

20. Antonio A. .Arcenas 

21. Jose C. Locsin 

22. Tiburcio Lutcro 

23. Simplicio Lizares 

24. Matias P. Yusay 

25. J. G. Sanvictorcs 



Committee on Comparative Study of Constitutions 

1. Jose M. Hontiveros, Chairman 

2. Francisco Ventura 



3. Domingo T. Zavalla 

4. Jose M. Aruego 

5. Mamerto S. Ribo 

0. Francisco Munoz 
Sergio G. Jumawan 

8. Gaudencio E. Abordo 

9. Perfecto Balili 

10. Salvador Araneta 

11. Agripino P. Escareal 

12 . Vicente Salumbides 

Committee on 

1. Juan Ortega, Chairman 

2. Jose M. Delgado 

3. Antonio Villarama 

4. Antonino Barrion 

5. Anastacio A. Mumar 

6. Miguel P. Pio 

7. Dionisio Niere 



13. Manuel Abella 

14. Casiano S. Carin 

15. Artemio Abaya 
IG. Sofronio M. Flores 

17. Pedro R. Arteche 

18. Juan Ventenilla 

19. Maximino G. Bueno 

20. Jesus Y. Perez 

21. Mariano Ezpeleta 

22. Luciano Ortiz 

23. Eugenio Baltao 

24. Felismeno V. Rivera 

Scientific Research 

8. Fermin G. Caram 

9. Enrique J. C. Montilla 

10. Florentino O. Chioco 

11. Domingo T. Dikit 

12. Camilo Osias 

13. Jose C. Ganzon 

14. J. G. Sanvictores 



Committee on Miscellaneous Matters 

1. Ambrosio A. Calleja, Chairman 2. Jesus B. Surban 



THE ORGANIZATION OF THE CONVENTION 



71 



3. Irineo Ranjo 

4. Teofilo B. Buslon 

5. Pascual M. Beltran 

6. Jose Velasco 

7. Migruel Gumangan 

8. Elias Ocampo 

9. Quiremon Alkuino 

10. Tinioteo P. Ricohermoso 



11. Mariano A. Ldzardo 

12. Fermin G. Caram 

13. Hilario Camino Moncado 

14. Pedro D. Melendez 

15. Mariano Ezpeleta 

16. Jesus Y. Perez 

17. Simplicio Lizares 



Committee on Insular Police 



1. Jose Zurbito, Chairman 

2. Severo Cea 

3. Bias Villamor 

4. Jose Montano 

5. Marcelo Adduru 

6. Francisco Zialcita 

7. Victorino N. Salazar 

Committee 

1. Jose M. Aruego, Chairman 

2. Mariano Ezpeleta 

3. Jose E. Romero 

4. Evaristo R. Sandoval 

5. Saturnino Benito 

6. Salvador Araneta 

7. Antonio Guzman 

8. Manuel Lim 

9. Leon Cabarroguis 

10. Mariano Melendres 



8. Antonio J. Montesa 

9. Felipe E. Jose 

10. Alauya Alonto 

11. Tranquilino J. -Divinagracia 

12. Pantaleon A. Pelayo 

13. Pablo Lorenzo 

14. Julio Borbon 

on Fi^anchises 

11. Alejandro A. Galang 

12. Jesus Paredes 

13. Antonio Mansueto 

14. Atilano R. Cinco 

15. Jose L. de Guzman 

16. Demetrio Quirino 

17. Vicente Lopez 

18. Fei'min G. Caram 

19. Gabriel P. Prieto 



Committee on Selection of Resident Commissioner 
under the Commomvealth 



1. Fermin G. Caram, Chahmian 

2. Mateo Canonoy 

3. Delfin Joven 

4. Ezequiel M. Santos 

5. Pascual M. Beltran 

6. Romualdo Enriquez 



7. Conrado Benitez 

8. Cesar Kintanar 

9. Adolfo Grafilo 

10. Manuel L. Sevilla 

11. Mariano Ezpeleta 

12. Jesus Y. Perez 

the Constitutional Conven- 
Constitution 
Convention to 
possible, of a 
It had been thought 



The Committee System of 
don. — The creation of the committees on the 
was part of a plan of the leadership of the 
insure the drafting, within the shortest time 
thoroughly considered constitution, 
that the division of labor among the different committees,. 



72 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



each assigned to what had been planned to be a specific 
division of the constitution, would mean a thorough consi. 
deration of all the parts of the constitution. 

Under the plan of the leadership of the Convention^ 
all proposed constitutional provisions introduced in the pi®, 
nary sessions would be referred for further study to, and 
investigation by, the appropriate committee. The comniit. 
tees would render their reports to the sponsorship commit, 
tee, composed of eighty-seven leading members of the Con. 
vention, which, under the rules, had the duty to “prepay 
and fonnulate for submission to the Convention the draft 
of the Constitution, after considering the partial di'afu 
submitted to it by the respective committees.” The spon. 
sorship committee would then report its draft of the Coa. 
stitution to the Convention for its consideration. With the 
sponsorship committee composed of the leading members 
of the Convention, it had been hoped by the leaders that 
whatever draft it would submit would be readily approved 
h.v the Assembly. 

While it delayed I'ather than expedited the completion 
of the task of constitution-making, the committee system 
furnished the delegates an opportunity to make a thorough 
study of proposed provisions for the Constitution. The 
"wealth of materials acquired by the committees in the in- 
vestigation of the matters within their respective jurisdic- 
tion proved of great help to the Convention, later in the 
debates on the first draft of the Philippine Constitution. 

The Special Committee on Style of the Constitutional 
Convention.- On January 80 , 1935, President Recto ap- 
poin e a special committee on style to go over the fin- 



ished draft of the Constitution, 
posed of the following delegates : 



The committee wasjcom- 



I' 



Chairman 
Manuel Roxas 
Norberto Romualdez 
Vicente Singson Encarnacion 
Conrado Benitez 



President Glare M. Recto, 



Manuel C. Briones 



Miguel Cuaderno 
Filemon Sotto 



Jose M. Aruego 
Jesus M. Cuenco 



Vicente J. Francisco 



THE ORGANIZATION OF THE CON\TENTION 



73 



Jose P. Laurel 



Jose M. Hontiveros 
Jose E. Romero 



Ricardo Nepomuceno 
Rafael Palma 



Francisco Arellano 



Camilo Osias 
Eusebio Orense 
Jose S. Reyes 
Jose M. Delgado 
Gregorio Perfecto 
Jose D. Conejero 



Manuel Lim 

Subsequently, after the committee had begun function- 
ing, President Recto appointed the following additional 
membei's : 



Protested Elections of the Constitutional Convention. — 
Of the 202 members of the Convention, the election of 
Delegates Zavalla, Vicente Lopez, Vinzons, Vicente Sotto, 
Delgado, Albero, Abrigo, and Maramara were protested; 
but, upon recommendation of the committee on credentials, 
composed of Delegates Romualdez, Vicente Nepomuceno, 
and Luis Morales, to whom were added later Delegates Lu- 
ciano Ortiz and Francisco, their elections were confirmed 
by the Convention. 

The Blocs of the Constitutional Coaivention. — In a dis- 
cussion of the organization of the Convention, mention may 
be made of the blocs formed therein. There was the Con- 
vention Club of which Wenceslao Q. Vinzons was president, 
composed largely of young delegates of liberal minds. Then 
there was the Lopez bloc of around seventy members, led 
by Vicente Lopez, a bloc that caused a lot of worry to the 
leadei’s of the Convention, including President Recto. 

The Lopez bloc was organized in the early period 
of tlfe Convention days before the idea of a completely 
non-paiddsan consideration of the provisions of the Con- 
stitution had definitely established itself in the minds of 
the great majority of the delegates. Its organization was 
inspired by the attitude taken by leading men of the ma- 
jority party, expressed in the party caucuses, that the ma- 
jority party should get all the credit for the framing of 



Ruperto Montinola 
Teodoro Sandiko 



Jose C. Locsin 
Fermin G. Caram 



74 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITLTION 



the Constitution. Such an attitude was assumed in the 
early days when the leaders of both parties were still 
lowing the policy of “watchful waiting.” 



Composed originally of members affiliated with the 
majority party, the bloc had, for its leaders, men of inde. 
pendent minds, who expressed openly the conviction that 
there should be no partisanship in the determination of 
the provisions of the Constitution, and that there should 
be as much freedom of speech as possible in the debates. 

It was not exactly a closely-knit body where the minoN 
ity was bound by the decision of the majority; for, under its 
rules, the members were free to dissent from the majority 
opinion, in the halls of the Convention. It was more or 
less of the nature of a fraternal organization. 



Originally started as a club composed of members be- 
longing to the majority party, the bloc grew in its mem- 
bership, with additions both from the minority and the ma- 
jority parties as the Convention days went on. It held 
periodical meetings for the discussion of provisions per- 
taining to the Constitution. It also arrived at agreements, 
after discussions in which every member was given the 
opportunity to express freely his opinion. From its organ- 
ization to the closing days of the Convention, the bloc func- 
loned as a body to fight for a non-partisan discussion of 
o proposed provisions of the Constitution and to secure 
equal opportunity for all in the deliberations, thereby help- 
ing in the framing of a good constitution. 

There was the suspicion generally entertained up to 
e c osing days of the Constitutional Convention that the 
oc was a body organized for systematic opposition to the 
ea ers o the Assembly, including President Recto. The 
suspicion was, of course, groundless. While there were 
times when the bloc found itself against President Recto on 
certain questions, the opposition was based on a conscien- 
tious conviction arrived at after thorough deliberations by 
the bloc members in their meetings. And it was not al- 
ways the case that all the members of the bloc were 



THE ORGANIZATION OF THE CONVENTION 



75 



united when the questions were brought to the floor for 
discussion. 

Recto and Roxas in the Constitutional Convention. — 
With such a large body as the Constitutional Convention, 
composed of 202 members, most of whom were of inde- 
pendent minds. President Recto experienced no little diffi- 
culty in his work of organization, direction, and manage- 
ment. In the early weeks of the Convention days, with the 
Convention rather slow in its work, there were many who 
doubted the ability of President Recto as a leader. There 
was a growing dissatisfaction against him, sometimes for 
his alleged arbitrary methods of conducting the proceed- 
ings; at other times, for his failure to inspire discipline 
among the delegates. But as the Conventoii time advanced, 
the leader that was in President Recto gradually mani- 
fested himself, the leader who was respected and admired 
by all for his tact and pleasing personality. The closing 
days of the Convention came, with President Recto loved 
and admired even by the very men who, in the early weeks, 
were his own enemies. 

In his work of securing the harmonious cooperation 
of all the members of the Convention and the orderly func- 
tioning of the body. President Recto was greatly helped by 
that great leader and patriot, Manuel Roxas, the leader of 
the minority party in the Constitutional Convention. 

From the very beginning. Delegate Roxas cooperated 
with the majority party in the most effective way he could, 
his cooperation inspired by a conscientious conviction that 
the national welfare demanded the throwing overboard of 
narrow partisanship in the drafting of the fundamental 
law. 

In critical moments, when the entente cordiale with 
which the Convention had been inaugurated was thi*eatened. 
Delegate Roxas was freely consulted by the Convention 
President ; and they always managed to pilot together the 
Convention through troublous waters. In critical moments. 



76 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



when the Convention was proving to be unruly, both Ma. 
nuel Roxas and Claro M. Recto would bo seen at their best, 
one of them at the presiding chair, the other at the session 
floor. And with them together at work, u.sually it waj 
found easy to direct the Convention to the desired goal. 



As one of the delegates to the Convention, the author 
had the pz'ivilege of working together with Delegate Ro.xaj 
in some of the Convention committees, in the preparation 
of the first draft of the Constitution, on the floor of the 
Convention, and in the special committee on style that 
took charge of putting the Constitution to its final form. 
He was specially struck, as others were, by his great pas* 
Sion for service to the country through the framing of the 
onstitution. One of the most consistently hard-working 
niembers of the Convention, studying conscientiously and 
every one of the proposed provisions for 
e Constitution until its final completion, he was a great 
pi ar to the Assembly, whose w'ealth of information, ac- 
quired from experience as a public man and increased by 
1 igent study and investigation during the Convention 
ays, proved of incalculable value in the framing of the 
fundamental law. 



of great tact, inspired by patriotic motives 

® , ighest degree, Manuel Roxas, like Claro M. Recto, 
naired and loved by all throughout our Convention 



anim ^ Recto and Manuel Roxas as leaders, both 

desire to turn out the best constitution 
° ^ statesmen of proved ability, with a great 
hpcf mi °^^^ffization, the Convention had two of the 
makino-^^^^^^^^ success in its task of constitution- 



CHAPTER VI 

THE CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION AT WORK 

The Proposal to Hold the Sessions behind Closed 
Doors. — Since the election of delegates, there were some 
suggestions for the holding of the sessions of the Conven- 
tion behind closed doors. It was argued that such a pro- 
cedure would greatly facilitate the completion of the Con- 
stitution within the shortest time possible, without neces- 
sai'ily sacrificing individual freedom of debate which was 
highly prized by the delegates. It was recalled that the 
Amei'ican federal constitution was framed in 1787 by a 
Convention meeting behind closed doors, with the American 
people knowing of its provisions only after that body had 
completed its work. 

But the idea of seci'et sessions was insistently opposed 
by the sector of the press ^ and was finally killed by Pi'es- 
ident Recto, who, in a speech delivered before the Sen- 
ate on July 31, 1934, on the occasion of his i*eception by 
that body, condemned it in no uncertain terms. 



1 The Philippines Herald, in its issue for July 23, 1934, under 
the heading, “The Part of the Press” said: 

“Secrecy in the deliberations of the forthcoming' constitutional 
convention has been suggested, and it is recalled that the consti- 
tution of the United States was formulated behind closed doors. 
The reason for such a suggestion is the fear that publicity- 
seekers among the delegates are likely to think of themselves 
more than of the success of the convention and its work. 

“It is clear that the intention is not necessarily to keep 
anything from the newspapers but to save the convention from 
self-seekers who might use the constitutional assembly as a 
means to their personal popularity. The newspapers, no doubt, 
can do a lot to aid the cause of men who are disposed to make 
a lot of noise about themselves and their merits. 

“But if the cooperation of the newspapers is what is being 
sought, it would not be impossible to obtain it. The newspapers 
know, by this time, who are the solid men in our puolic life and 



78 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

The Prelinunary Activities of the Constitutional Con* 
vention. — During the organization period of the Conven- 
tion and even for some time while the committees were still 
busily working on the subjects assigned to them for their 
investigation and recommendation, in accordance with the 
Convention rules, the plenaiw sessions of the Convention 
were spent primarily for the delivery of speeches on consti- 
tutional subjects by the delegates, in the exercise of what 
was popularly' known as the onr-half hour privilege, and 
for the introduction of proposed precepts for the Consti- 
tution. This period in the historj' of the Constitutional 
Convention was devoted primarily to the gathering of tha 
materials for the Constitution. 

The speeches that were delivered during this period 
of the Convention days were generally well-prepared and 
instructive, expounding the philosophies of the speakers on 
constitutions and constitution-making. It may be said of 
hem that they served at least to stimulate the thinking 
o the Convention on the aspects of the Constitution therein 
ea t with. In many cases, they helped influence the di- 
rection of thought of the Convention, through the wealth 

o in ormation that they brought to the attention of the 
members. 



A 

\ 



I 



I 

I 

i 



1 



th ° demagogies. They also can point unerringly to 

^ hopelessly recalcitrant by temperament and who 
^ us apt to delay the work of the convention. 

is to the responsible members of the Press have to do 

to se their ^ard against swaggering and noisy men eager 

is to ^ uames in the news columns. If all that is desired 

A iuiportance to such publicity-seekers, the newspapers 

can ao their part. 

Press cannot be irresponsible in its attitude toward this 
Th^ ^^Portant gathering in the political annals of this nation. 

e ress ^11 be critical, but it is not out to obstruct a serious 
usiness. n the contrary, it feels it can help, but it can help 
on y 1 nothing is kept away from its knowledge, and if it is 
not compelled to guess what is being done with the fundamental 
document wnich is the concern of everyone of us.'' 



I 

i 

I 

I 

i 

i 



1 



THE CONVENTION AT WORK 



79 



Like the speeches, the proposed precepts ai'rested the 
attention of tiie members, proving in the majority of cases 
of great educational value to them. In accordance with 
the general plan of the Convention, these proposed consti- 
tutional precepts were referred to the appropriate commit- 
tees for their study and investigation. A great number of 
these precepts found their way into the committee reports 
upon v.'hich was largely based the first draft of the Con- 
stitution. There are very few provisions of the Constitu- 
tion as finally approved that could not trace their begin- 
nings to the constitutional precepts introduced, altogether 
9096 in number, and to the speeches delivered during this 
period of our Convention days. 

With the plenary sessions of the Convention held in 
the afternoon, the Convention committees met in the morn- 
ing or in the evening or both, to work on their respective 
assignments, according to their “terms of reference.” Some 
committees held their meetings behind close doors, adopt- 
ing, however, the geneml practice of advising the public to 
send whatever memoranda it might wish them to consider. 
Many of the memoranda furnished to the committees were 
specially informational, particularly those furnished by the 
different agencies of the government. Other committees 
held public hearings on the points covered by their “terms 
of reference. The committees prepared their reports on 
the basis of the constitutional precepts referred to them, of 
their independent studies in the light of their discussions in 
committees, and of the information facilitated by the 
public. 

The Sponsorship Committee of the Constitutional 
Convention. With the great majority of the committees 
having submitted their reports, the sponsorship committee 
began its work. 

Under the rules of the Convention, the function of the 
sponsorship committee was “to prepare and formulate, for 
submission to the Convention, the draft of the Constitution, 
after considering the partial drafts submitted to it by the 
different committees.” 



80 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



What was the real province of the sponsorship com- 
mittee? That was one of the first problems of the mem- 
bers of the committee, with some members contending that 
its work was purely one of coordination, piecing together 
systematically the reports of the different committees, with 
no power to make any substantial alterations in them; with 
others holding that it had the power to reconsider the con- 
clusions arrived at by the committees, in brief, that it was 
3, convention within a convention. 

Working on the general understanding that it had the 
power to prepare a draft of the Constitution after consid- 
ering, although not necessarily being bound by, the par- 
tial drafts submitted to it by the different committees, the 
sponsorship committee began its work by considering the 
preamble submitted by the committee on preamble of the 
Convention. 



It took the sponsorship committee several days to be 
a e to agree, by a majority vote, on a preamble to be sub- 
mit ed for the consideration of the Convention. The pre- 
^ agreed upon was substantially different from 
f ®^°^itted by the preamble committee. Then, it pro- 
° the report of the committee on terri- 

ria delimitation, adopting it substantially for submis- 
° . ^o^vention. Later, it took up the report of 

the citizenship and naturalization. This was 

v-ao ^®^”^^ttee report that the sponsorship committee 
v/as able to consider. 



Was becoming increasingly evident that to follow 
proce ure laid out by the sponsorship committee of 
consi ering over again the reports of the different com- 
ees in ependently of their conclusions would un- 
ecessan y retard the work of the convention, especially 
ecaui>e e members of this committee were at liberty to 
dissent from the final report of the same to the Convention, 
Moreover, it was becoming apparent that the other 
members of the Convention did not seem to look with relish 
at the idea that the reports of the committees should be re- 



THE CONVENTION AT WORK 



81 



considered by the sponsorship committee the power of 
which, in their opinion, was just to '‘coordinate the different 
committee reports.” There was brewing in the Conven- 
tion a spirit of revolt against the sponsorship committee. 

There were some delegates who wanted to abolish the 
sponsorship committee and to have the committee reports 
submitted directly to the Convention for consideration. In 
fact, there was a resolution submitted to this effect by 
Delegates Bueno and Salumbides, signed by more than 
eighty delegates, although this was never formally taken up 
by the Convention. 

From this time of the Convention days, the Convention 
leaders were faced with the problem of how to expedite 
the work of the Convention. 

The Creation of the Sub-Committee of Seven and the 
Sub-Committee of Technical Ad\"isers. — A movement was 
launched by the Lopez bloc for the creation of a com- 
mittee of seven, presided by President Recto, to prepare 
a di’aft of the Constitution to serve as a basis for dis- 
cussion by the Assembly. At a caucus of the majority 
party delegates, the plan of creating a drafting committee 
of seven was approved; but President Recto, after a con- 
ference with Delegate Roxas, refused and rightly did so, 
to become the chairman of the drafting committee, con- 
tinuing at the same time to be the President of the Con- 
vention. With President Recto refusing, the leaders of 
the movement chose Delegate Elpidio Quirino, who would 
have been surely the chairman of the drafting committee 
but for the timely action by the members of the sponsor- 
ship committee. 

While the chairmanship of the proposed drafting com- 
mittee was still pending consideration, several members 
of the sponsorship committe under the leadership of 
Delegate Miguel Cuaderno met at a luncheon at the 
Philippine Columbian association building and decided 
to form a sub-committee from their own members to be 
presided by Delegate Filemon Sotto, chainnan of the spon- 



82 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



sorship committee, to prepare a draft of the Constitution 
on the basis of the different committee reports. 

A resolution for the creation of a sub-committee of 
seven and another for the creation of a sub-committee of 
technical advisers to the sub-committee of seven were ap- 
proved by the sponsorship committee on October 0, 1934. 

The following delegates were designated as members 
of the sub-committee of seven. 

Filemon Sotto, Cfuiirman Manuel C. nrionos 

Manuel Roxas Miguel Cuademo 

Vicente Singson Encarnacion Jose P. Laurel 

Norberto Romualdez 

Owing to the inability of Delegate Jose P. Laurel to attend 
to the work for the time during which the sub-committee 
was rer4uired to prepare the draft, Delegate Conrado Beni- 
tez was later designated by Delegate Filemon Sotto to take 
his place. 

technical advisers to the sub-committee of seven, 
he following members were appointed : 

Jose M. Hontiveros, Chairmati Ricardo Ncpomuceno 
Jose P. Laurel Eusebio M. Lopez 

Jose M. Aruego Domingo T. Dikit 

Salvador Araneta Jose C. Locsin 

Jose E. Romero 

, , sub-committee of seven and the sub-committee of 

ec nical advisers worked together for ten days, rendering 

6poi to the sponsorship committee on October 20, 1934. 

The First Draft of the Constitution. — The draft thus' 
repor ed provided for a bicameral legislature. 

But before the report could be acted upon by the 
sponsorship committee, the Convention in its plenary ses- 

^ K ^ ober 22, 1934 voted against the resolution which 
it had been considering since October 9, 1934, consequently 
adopting a unicameral legislative system. 

In view of the decision of the Convention to adopt a 
unicameral legislature, corresponding changes were made 
in the draft. 



THE CONN'ENTION AT WORK 



83 



The draft thus accordingly amended was submitted 
for the formal consideration of the sponsorship committee, 
which approved the same in principle in its session of 
October 25, 1934. The act of approving in pi'inciple the 
draft was caused by the desire of the sponsorsliip committee 
to expedite consideration and action on the Constitution. 
The members of the sponsorship committee by resolution 
of that body were, however, given the privilege to intro- 
duce amendments to the draft during the debates thei'eon 
by the Convention. 

The first draft of the Constitution, in the words of 
Delegate Filemon Sotto, chairman of the sponsoi'ship com" 
mittee and of the sub-committee of seven, was prepared 
“after a careful study and consideration of the reports 
submitted by the various committees of the Constitution 
referred to the Sponsorship Committee, as well as of drafts 
of the Constitution submitted by individual members.” 

It was substantially an embodiment of the repoi'ts of 
the diffeient committees, haz'monized together in form and 
substance into one complete constitution. Of course, not 
all the committee repoi'ts could be embodied in their en- 
tiiety. Some of them were included almost in their en- 
tirety, with others, only partially; while still others were 
entiiely left out. This had( to be done in order that the 
Constitution could be made to follow certain general philos- 
ophies. 

On November 6, 1934, Delegate Filemon Sotto reported 
the first diaft of the Constitution to the Convention for its 
consideration. In a speech lasting for about one-half hour, 
he recited the history of the first draft— of the efforts of 
the members of the sub-committee of seven and' the sub- 
committee of technical advisers in the preparation of a 
draft out of the committee reports to serve as a basis for 
discussion by the Constitutional Convention. 

Debates on the Fii*st Draft of the Constitution. — Im- 
mediately after he had made his report, the debates on 
the totality of the Constitution began, in accordance \vith 



86 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



Juan Bocar, Dclcj^atc W. Q. Vinzons, Delegate Enrique So- 
brepena, Delegate Miguel Pio, Delegate Mateo Canonoy, Del- 
ogate Miguel Gumangan, Delegate P. D. Melendez, Dele- 
gate Jose S. Reyes, Delegate Juanito Maramnra, Delegate 
Paulino Gullas, Delegate Fclismcno Rivera, Delegate Euse- 
bio M. Lopez, Delegate A. J. Montesa, Delegate Antonio 
Guzman, Delegate Antonio Villarama, Delegate Tomas Con- 
fesor, Delegate Miguel Binag, Delegate Sixto A. Gacrlan, 
Delegate Bias Villamor, Delegate A. Escarcal, Delegate 
Adolfo Grafilo, Delegate Sofronio Flores, Delegate Florcn- 
tino Chioco, Delegate Jose dc Guzman, Delegate Bornabe 
de Guzman, Delegate Vicente Lopez, Delegate Teodulfo Su- 
ncr, and Delegate Jose Velasco. 

*‘In presenting the resolution, Delegate Aruego, with 
the sanction of his 39 colleagues, said, 

‘In our opinion, the people expect a non-partisan 
consideration of the proposed provisions of the Consti- 
tution. Although the majority of the delegates have 
been elected with the aid of the machineries of political 
parties, it has never been the intention of the sovereign 
people that the individual delegates should consider 
proposed provisions of the Constitution by their effects 
upon the fortunes of the political parties. c under- 
stand the will of the people to be that we should vote 
individually for what we think is best for the interests 
of the country, not only now but for all limes. The 
nature of the Constitution demands that the delegates 
should rise above the level of parties in their actuations 
at the Convention. It is very necessary that they do 
so in order to insure the national character of that 
document. 



‘To inject partisanship in the consideration of pro- 
posed provisions of the Constitution would be to sow 
the seed of its impermanence and instability. All ef- 
forts should be exerted to make this fundamental law 
strong, firm, and permanent. 



‘The country should be given the assurance that 
all the provisions of the constitution that will finally 
be drafted are there because their presence is demand- 
ed by the best interests of the country, not of tliis 
party or that party. Let it not be said that certain 
proposed constitutional provisions have not been includ- 
ed in the constitution although their inclusion would 
have been better for the country as a whole, because 



1 






% 

; 

I 



I 



I 



THE CON\nSNTION AT WORK 



87 



of the fear that their inclusion might affect the for- 
tunes of certain political aggrupations!” 

The resolution presented read as follows: 

**Rcsolution callhig upon all libcral-mhidcd delegates of 
the Philippine Constitutional Convention to help check the 
growth of partisan spirit in the discussion of provisions of, 
or matters affecting, the Constitution, 

‘‘Whereas the delegates to the Philippine Constitutional 
Convention have been elected by the people with the great 
hope and faith that they would draft a Constitution, with 
an eye single to tlie welfare of the entire Filipino people; 

“Whereas as members of the Constitutional Convention, 
both by the nature of tlieir responsibility and by the man- 
date of the people, they are representatives primarily of 
the entire nation, and secondarily, if at all, of minor aggru- 
pations; 

“Whereas as such representatives, it is incumbent upon 
them to sacrifice, if needs be, local or group loyalty if de- 
manded by their loyalty to the country and to the people; 

“Whereas there have been indications justifying the 
fear that, unless checked at the start, the spirit of parti- 
sansliip may invade the discussions and influence the con- 
sideration of the provisions of the Constitution; 

“Be it resolved, as it is hereby resolved. That the lib- 
eral-minded delegates of this Convention should exert all 
efforts within their power to check the growth of partisan 
spirit in the discussion of provisions of the Constitution or 
of matters affecting the Constitution and to encourage the 
development of independent tliinking among the members 
of the Convention. 

Be it resolved, further. That a copy of this resolution 
be filed with the secretary of the Convention and that copies 
of the same be forwarded to President Claro M. Recto, to 
Delegate Filemon Sotto, chairman of tlie Sponsorship Com- 
mittee ,and to Delegate Manuel Roxas.’' 

The movement of this group of liberal-minded dele- 
gates was highly commended and endorsed by the sector 
of the press. The La Opinion, a newspaper of nation-wide 
circulation, commenting on the movement on September 
26, 1934, said: 

“The resolution presented yesterday by a group of 40 
members of the Constitutional Convention, asking that all 
show of partisanship be stifled in the consideration of all 



88 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



fundair.cntal malti^rs relating to the Constitution which is 
being prepared, comes to be a very opportune salutary 
monition of liberalism against certain reactionary eloments 
of narrow judgment, who, it seems, claim to profess the 
false jirinciplc of ‘right or wrong, my party first.’ 

“This resolution fits perfectly into the thought of the 
President of the Convention, Hon. Claro M. I'ccto, who, in 
his inaugural address, said the following solemn words: 
‘I trust, fellow delegates, that before parsing throu^ 
these historic doors, wc had stripped ourselves of our par- 
tisan trappings and washed our hands a hundred times, not 
in the wash-basin of a pretorium but in the jortlan of toler- 
ance, of respect, and of mutual understanding.* 

“The resolution of the 40 delegates strengthens this 
longing for solidarity in common national aspirations and 
maintains the faith of the people in the capacity of their 
representatives in the Convention to deliberate upon great 
Questions above the petty spirit of partisanship, blind and 
intransigent. 



‘If the Constitutional Convention permits itself to be 
dominated by this spirit, its work would be unstable as the 
resolution says, and we would have a government of the 
Commonwealth erected on a shifting foundation.*’ 

The presence of a dominating number of young inde- 
pendent-minded delegates in the Constitutional Convention 
seijed powerfully to prevent the formation of party cleav- 
ages during the debates on the Constitution. They were 
le delegates very hard to be brought together by the whip 
o party discipline to support propositions which did not 
con oim to their* conviction. It was not very uncommon for 
one to hear them say openly in revolt : — “With respect to 
ne organization of the Convention, I am a party man; but 
wi respect to the provisions of the Constitution, I am 
my o\\ n master. One would easily be inclined to believe 
a , were it irot for the fortunate presence of the independ- 
ent-minded delegates, the Constitution would now contain 
traces of partisanship, or the Convention would have ad- 
journed after the completiorr of its task, with memories of 
the Convention days not so pleasant as those which are of 
the delegates today. 



4 






CONSTITUTIONAL CON\TENTION AT WORK 



89 



Procedure in the Consideration of the First Draft of 
the Constitution. — In the consideration of the draft, the 
procedure was generally followed of designating the chair- 
men of the different committees to act as sponsors (ponen- 
tcs) in the debates on sections coiTesponding to their com- 
mittee reports. In many cases, the members of the sub- 
committee of technical advisers were assigned to speak iii 
defense of the provisions of the draft. But the burden of 
defending them was borne primarily by the members of the 
sub-committee of seven, although, in many cases, they 
found themselves at loggerheads, a fact which spoke of 
their sincere desire to bring out the best possible constitu- 
tion for the country. 

The provisions of the draft and all proposed amend- 
ments to the same were freely debated by the members of 
the Convention, with President Recto cai’efully managing 
to see to it that no member of the Convention was unneces- 
sarily muzzled in the expression of his views. 

President Recto in the Debates of the Constitutional 
Convention. Throughout the Convention period. President 
Recto took the floor to speak on the Constitution only three 
times. The first time was when he opposed tenaciously 
and vigorously, delivering a brilliant speech against, the 
proposition, presented by Delegate Araneta, for the crea- 
tion of a committee of accounts the majority of the mem- 
bers of which were to be from the minority party in the 
National Assembly, to be vested with the power to examine 
and audit the accounts and expenditui'ss of the different 
divisions and branches of the government. The second was 
during the time when the proposition of creating the com- 
missions of appointments and impeachment was pending 
reconsideration. At this time, he limited himself to inter- 
pellating Delegate Roxas, who was then speaking on the 
necessity of the creation of the commissions, asking him 
leading questions. The third time was when he, as chair- 
man of the special committee on style, explained and de- 
fended the changes made by the latter to the Constitution 
as approved by the Convention on Januai-y 31, 1935. 



90 



FRvVMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



But although he did not participate frequently in the 
debates on the Constitution on the door of the Convention, 
through the skill with which he presided over the sessions 
cf that body and through his frequent conferences with the 
delegates, President Recto contributed effectively in detei^ 
mining the course of the votes on the respective questions 
brought for discussion therein. To him is credited the pa- 
temity of some of the provisions of the Constitution. 



Other Presiding Officers of the Convention.— Either 
v.'hen President Recto was absent from the sessions or 
when he took the floor to participate in the discussions or 
while he seated himself now and then among the delegates, 
the Convention was presided over at one time or another 
by other delegates, among them being Montinola, Sandiko, 
Nepomuceno, V,, Hontiveros, Roxas, Sotto, F'., Piang, Sing* 
son Encarnacion, Delgado, Kapunan, Gutierrez David, La- 
brador, Millar, Guevara, Romero, Cuenco, Romualdez, 5Io- 
rales, Araneta, and Briones. 



The Sessions of the Constitutional Convention. — While, 
m the early period of the Convention days, the plenary 
sessions were held primarily in the afternoon, in the latter 
^r , they were held more frequently in the morning and in 
e a ternoon to the evening hours. As a general rule, a 
STea majority of the delegates were in regular attend- 
ance at the sessions, some of them frequently absenting 
emse in the latter part of the Convention time, forced 

y le financial sacrifices entailed by membership in the 
Gonvention. 



. Death of Delegate Aguilar. — All the 202 delegates 

to the Convention except one lived to see the Constitution 
comp e e . Delegate Amancio Aguilar of Masbate, one of 
e mos promising members of the Convention, died on 
ugus , 934. He fell on the very floor of the Conven- 

tion a , a victim of heart disease, dying a few minutes 
later at the Philippine General Hospital to which he had 
been immediately conducted. Only the day before, he de- 
livered before the Convention, in the exercise of the one- 



THE CONVENTION AT \YORK 



91 



half hour privilege, a speech on the independence of the 
judiciary. Funeral sendees were held at the session hall 
in the presence of his bereaved colleagues, with Delegates 
Locsin, Vinzons, and Arellano delivering the funeral ora- 
tions. 

United States Senator Millard F. Tydings and Pies- 
ident Quezon as Guests of the Constitutional Convention. — 
The Convention had the pleasure of having for its guests, on 
December 21, 1934, several members of the United States 
Senate, headed by Senator Millard F. Tydings. In behalf of 
the senatorial commission. Senator Tydings addressed the 
Convention, dwelling on the political and economic prob- 
lems of independence as viewed by the members of the mis- 
sion, warning the people against the dangers that they must 
face and the problems that they must solve upon assuming 
an independent existence. Likewise, as its guest of honor. 
President Quezon addressed the Convention on February 
5, 1935, extolling the merits of the Constitution about to be 
approved fomially and in its entirety by that body. 

The Press and the Constitutional Convention. — The 
activities of the Constitutional Convention were reported 
to the public thi'ough the columns of the press by the dif- 
ferent press representatives assigned to “cover” the Con- 
vention. Of them were Eusebio Reyes of the La Vanguar- 
did, Vicente Ruiz Navai'ro of the TTibune, Jose A. Lansang 
and Aproniano C. Borres of the Philippines Herald, Ramon 
Escoda of the El Debdte, and Juan C. Orendain of the 
Mdnild Ddily Bulletin, who were with the delegates from 
day to day, patiently noting down their observations foi' 
transmittal to the public. It was primarily through their 
efforts that the people were kept informed of the daily de- 
liberations of the Convention. 

The Closing Days of the Constitutional Convention. — 
The Convention finished the debates on the first draft of \ 
the Constitution on January 31, 1935. It was then referred t 
to the special committee on style which undertook to re- 
vise the same in form as well as in substance. The changes 



92 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



made by the committee were reported by President Recto 
to the Convention on February* 7, 1935. The Constitution 
was approved by the Convention on Februar>' 8, 1935, al- 
though the ceremonies surrounding the signing of the same 
did not take place until February 19, 1935. All the living 
delegates to the Convention, with the exception of Tomas 
Cabili, signed the Constitution. 

Altogether, the Convention worked on the Constitution 
for six months and nine days, taking a recess for the holi- 
day season for sixteen days from December 22, 1931, and 
resuming its sessions on January 7, 1935. 






%; 

♦* 

V 







CHAPTER VII 



THE GENESIS OF THE PHILIPPINE 
CONSTITUTION 

Historical Basis of the Constitution. — The Philippine 
Constitution has its roots in the past of the Filipino peo- 
ple. The political institutions that it set up and the 
political philosophies woven through its provisions were not 
struck off for the first time by the delegates in convention 
assembled; they had been tested in the crucible of expe- 
rience of the people, particularly during the last three de- 
cades of their constitutional development. 

Historical Approach to Constitution-making. — The 
Convention was beset with temptations to engage in polit- 
ical theorizing and institutional experimenting, to be in 
every respect original. However, it preferred to be gener- 
ally conservative in its' task of constitution-making, believing 
that wisdom in constitution-making lay not in the ability to 
set up a system never before known or tried in any country 
but in the establishment of a system best suited to the con- 
ditions of the countiy for which the constitution was in- 
tended. It believed that, in order to be stable and perma- 
nent, the Constitution must be moored to the experience of 
the people, providing for institutions which were the nat- 
ural outgrowths of the national life. It held that for a peo- 
ple already politically organized, with political institutions 
of their own already developed, buttressed with national 
traditions, the Constitution was not a place for venturing 
experiments. Rather, it was a place where institutions 
tested by time and the experience of the people should be 
sanctified, where the practical and the substantial rights 
of the people should be confirmed. 

Institutions and Philosophies of the Constitution 
Familiar to the People. — Accordingly, the institutions 
and philosophies of the Constitution are, generally speak- 
ing, those with which almost every Filipino is familiar. 






94 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

The Constitution drew rather heavily from the different or- 
ganic acts under which the Filipino people had been gov- 
erned for the last three and a half decades, particularly 
the Jones Law enacted by the Congress of the United 
States on August 29, 191G. Where Philippine precedents 
were lacking, rather than attempted to set up institutions 
or followed political philosophies never set up or adopted 
before in any other countiy, the Convention considered pi'e- 
cedents of American origin that might with advantage be 
incorporated into our political system ; and this, with rea- 
son, in view of the fact that our political heritage was 
lai’gely dominated by American politicaL thought. But, 
even in this case, the Convention carcfulh>' considered the 
piecedents from the point of view of their adaptability 
or suitability to Filipino psychology and traditions- 

^ Influence of Foreign Constitutions. — But while the 
dominating influence was American, the Constitution beam 
W’aces, in some respects, of the influence of the Malolos . 
^onstitution of the ephemeral Philippine Republic, the 
german Constitution, the Constitution of the Republic of 
pain, the Mexican Constitution, and the Constitutions of 
several South American countries, and the English unwrit- 
en constitution all of which had been frequently consult- 
ed during the Convention days. 

The Limitations in the Tydings-McDuffie Law.— The 
^be Convention to determine the contents 
., ,f ilippine Constitution was subject only to the li- 
,, forth in the Tydings-McDuffie Law which 

, ,, , of the same. That law enjoined 

^ ^^stitution should be republican in form, should 
+L ^ ^ I'i&hts, and should contain, either as a part 
u ^ appendage thereto, certain provisions some 

intended to define the relations between the 
Phi ippines and the United States during the Common- 
wealth period of ten years, with others, those after the 
inauguration of the Philippine Republic. 



* 



THE GENESIS OF THE CONSTITUTION 95 

But the adoption of a republican constitution and the 
insertion of a bill of rights in the Constitution should by 
no means be attributed to the mandatory provisions of the 
Tydings-McDuffie Law. With or without such provisions, 
the Constitution would have been republican because of the 
happy experience of the Filipino people with republican 
institutions; it would have contained just the same a bill 
of rights because of their familiarity with the role of a bill 
of rights in the different organic acts for their government. 

The ordinances appended to the Constitution were in 
compliance with the mandatory pi'ovisions of the Tydings- 
McDuffie Law. 

The Paternity of the Constitution. — The Philippine 
Constitution was the product of the combined efforts of 
the delegates of the Filipino people to the Constitutional 
Convention. To all of them was due the paternity of the 
fundamental charter into the making of which everyone 
contributed a share, either thi'ough the introduction of pre- 
cepts which became the basis of the work of the different 
committees into which the Convention was divided in the 
early part of the Convention days or through participation 
m the determination of the contents of the different com- 
mittee reports upon which was based the first draft of the 
Constitution or through cooperating in the improvement 
of the first draft of the Constitution during its considera- 
tion by the Convention by amendments to add, suppress, 
or alter in any other manner or through working in the 
special committee on style of the Convention, which greatly 
helped in determining the final form and substance of the 
Philippine Constitution. 

While the nature and the extent of the contributions 
of some of the delegates may be gleaned from the wi’itten 
records of the Convention, those of the others have re- 
mained unrecorded. They fought for the inclusion of their 
pet ideas in the different committee reports- Once included 
in the first draft of the Constitution, they worked for the 
approval of their ideas not through speeches delivered by 






96 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

them on the floor of the Convention but through effective 
pei-sonal canvassing among the delegates, using their moral 
and political influence. To them as well as to those whose 
speeches grace the records of the Convention belongs the 
paternity of the Constitution. 



CHAPTER VIII 

THE SCOPE OF THE CONSTITUTION 

Introduction. — Should the Constitutional Convention 
draft a constitution for the Philippine Commonwealth only 
or one which would be for the Philippine Commonwealth 
and the Philippine Republic scheduled in the Tj-dings-Mc- 
Duffie Law to come at the expiration of the Commonwealth 
period of ten yeai's? This was the first constitutional ques- 
tion that engaged the attention of the delegates. 

The determination of this question one way or another 
was deemed necessary because the content of a constitu- 
tion for the Philippine Commonwealth would necessarily 
be different from that of a constitution intended' for both 
the Philippine Commonwealth and the Philippine Republic. 
It was deemed necessary because the question went to the 
veiy root of the authoi'ity of the Assembly as defined in 
the Tydings-McDuffie Law, the ascertainment of which 
must have to be made at the beginning in view of the fact 
that, according to the law, the Constitution was yet to be 
submitted to the President of the United States, who would 
approve it only if found to conform substantially to its pro- 
visions. 

The Osias Resolution. — The question was placed 
squarely before the Convention by Delegate Camilo Osias, 
who introduced on August 28, 1934 Resolution No. 60, 
reading as follows: 

“RESOLUTION 

expressing the sense of the Constitutional Convention that 
the constitution to be drafted and formulated shall be a 
constitution for the Philippine Commomoealth and the Phil- 
ippine Republic to be known as ‘The Constitution of the 
Philippine Islands.’ 

“Whereas it is necessary to define the scope of the 
Constitution to be framed for the guidance of the members 
of the various Conrunittees and of the Constitutional Con- 
vention ; 



98 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



'"Whereas the demands of economy and statc5maa^; 
require that a Constitution be now made for the 
ment of the Commonwealth and for the Government of :h: 
Republic upon the advent of independence; 

"U7<creas the Independence Act authorizes the man- 
datory pro\*isions to be placed in an ordinance oppeoc>\: 
to the Constitution; 

"Whereas the same Independence Act provides that xV? 
independent provernment shall be proclaimed under the Gcr.- 
stitution in force at the time of the advent of independence 
Now, therefore, be it 

"Resolved, That the Constitutional Convention now as- 
sembled draft and formulate a Constitution for the Philip- 
pine Commonwealth that is to be semi-sovereign and seiru- 
independent and for the Philippine Republic that is to tc 
sovereign, free, and ’"independent, the same to be known 
‘‘The Constitution of the Philippine Islands 

"Resolved further. That the various Committees of the 
Convention be furnished copies of this resolution for thc;r 
guidance/' 

The resolution was introduced by Delegate Osias prh 
niarily for the purpose of securing, in the categorical deci- 
sion of the Convention, a guide for the Convention in it-> 
plenary sessions and for the committees in the deterniina- 
tion of the content of their reports, in view of the f^^ct that, 
at the time, there seemed to be a confusion, evidenced by tho 
reporte then completed and by the discussions in the other 
committees, as to the character of the Constitution. For 
some of the committee reports contemplated a constitution 
only for the Commonwealth ; while others, one for both the 
Commonwealth and the Philippine Republic. It was hoped 
at, with the decision of the Convention on the resolution, 
e committee reports could be so determined in their scope 

Would fit into the nature of the constitution de- 
Cl e upon. The resolution, of course, contained a propo- 
sition that, in the interest of economy and statesmanship, 
the constitution to be drafted should be for the Government 
of the Commonwealth and for the Government of the Ro, 
public upon the advent of independence. 

Debates and Issues j — The debates following the intm- 
duction of the resolution, under the leadership of Delegate 



THE SCOPE OF THE CONSTITUTION 



99 



Roxas and Delegate Kapunan for the proponents and the 
opponents respectively, brought forth four issues : 

1. Was the Constitutional Convention authorized to 
H-ame a constitution that would be operative for both the 
Commonwealth and the Republic, or was it authorized just 
to frame a Constitution for the Conunonwealtli? 

2. Was tlie Constitutional Convention autliorized by the 
Fihpmo people to frame a constitution only for the Com- 
monwealth or one for both the Commonwealth and the Re- 
public? 

3. Was it wise for the Constitutional Convention to 

frame a constitution also for an independent Philippines, 
w lie the Philippines would still be a subject of the United 
States, with all the restrictions included in the Tvdin°'s- 
McDuffie Law? ‘ “ 



4. Was the taking of a vote on the resolution necessary? 

fi, Authwity. — There was a division of opinion in 

e ©ven among the legal luminaries themselves, 

as to the legal authority of the Constitutional Convention 
o frame a constitution that would be operative bevond the 
Commonwealth period. 

proponents of the resolution, among them being 
Delegates Osias, Roxas, Perfecto, Nepomuceno, V., Briones, 
Romualdez, and Perez, J., contended that, if it desired to, 
the Constitutional Convention had the power to frame a 
constitution for both the Commonwealth and the Philip- 

upon the provisions 

of the Tydings-McDuffie Law: 



1. The Act, according to its title, was one intended “to 
provide for the complete independence of the Philippine Is- 
lands, to provide for the adoption of a Constitution and 
a form of government for the Philippine Islands.” 

2. Section 2 (A) provided that the provisions mentioned 
therein, in addition to the requirement that the Constitution 
formulated and drafted should be republican in form and 
should contain a Bill of Rights, should be included, either 
as a part thereof or as an ordinance appended thereto. It 
was concluded that should the Convention desire to frame 
a constitution for the Commonwealth only, these items would 



100 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



be inserted in the main part of the Constitution; but shosW 
it desire to frame a Constitution for both the Commonwtilti 
and the Republic, it might include them as an ordinu** 
appended thereto, showing that for the Commonwealth !»■ 
riod, the Constitution, complete in itself, would be subject I* 
those restrictions. 



3, Section 2 (b) provided that the Constitution shoaW 
contain the provisions mentioned therein, to be effective ai 
of the date of the proclamation by the President, recot^’ 
ing the independence of the Philippine Islands, as provide! 
in Sec. 10 of the Law. lt< was asked, If the Constitution eoa* 
templated was one only for the Commonwealth period, 
what use would the inclusion of such provisions be, to he 
effective as of the date of the proclamation of independ- 
ence? Why not have them included in the Constitution to be 
later on drafted for the I‘hilippine Republic if that had bee? 
the intention of the American Congress? 

4. Section 2 (b), par. 2, provided that the official.- 

elected and serving under the Constitution should be consti* 
tutional officers of the free and independent government o. 
the Philippine Islands and qualified to function in aU 
respects as if elected directly under such government. It 
was argued that this provision contemplated a constituti« 
in force at the expiration of the period, defining the jur.^ 
diction, powers, and duties of those officers. Unless the 
Convention framed one expressly for that purpose, there 
would be no such constitution; and those officers "oul- 
have no jurisdiction, no power's, no duties to exercise. 

Those who argued that the Constitutional Convention 
was without such legal authority relied upon the following 
points : 



1- Sec. 1 of the Tydings-McDuffie Law authorized the 
Constitutional Convention to formulate and draft a consti- 
tution for the government of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippij|e Islands, subject to the conditions and qualifica- 
tions prescribed in the Act. If the intention of Congress, it 
was contended, had been that the Constitution which the Con- 
vention was to for-mulate under the Act would also be ope- 
rative under the future Philippine republic, it would hav« 
said that the Constitutional Convention should formulat* 
and draft a constitution for the government of the Common- 
wealth and for the free and independent government of the 
Philippine Islands. 



THE SCOPE OF THE CONSTITUTION 



101 



2. liie Congress of the United States could not have 
intended that the Convention authorized in the Tydings-Mc- 
Duflie Law would have the power to frame a Constitution 
for the Philippine Republic too, for it could not be sure 
that the Filipino people would desire to have the independ- 
ence of the country. The Cong^ress must have considered 
the possibility that the government of the Commonwealth 
might not be established here; for section 4 of the Tyding^- 
McDuffie Law stated that the Constitution whicli the Con- 
vention would draft, once approved by the President of the 
United States, should be submitted in a referendum to the 
people, and that, if the majority of the votes cast would 
be against the constitution, the existing gfovernment of the 
Philippines should continue, the provisions of the law not- 
withstanding. There was, therefore, the possibility that the 
Commonwealth might not be established here, and, conse- 
quently, the independence of tJie Philippines might not be 
proclaimed under the Tydings-McDufJfie Law. 

3. The Congress of the United States could not have 
contemplated the authority of the Convention to draft a 
constitution operative also during the Republic, for the com- 
ing of the Republic itself was still not a certainty. It 
might be that the failure of the Filipinos to comply with 
all the mandatory requirements might cause the United 
States to change its mind or that the Filipinos opposed to 
independence might succeed in putting obstacles in the course 
toward final independence. 

Moral and Political Authority. — A majority of the 
delegates to the Convention maintained the view that it 
was within the authority of the Assembly to frame a con- 
stitution of such a chai’acter that it could seiwe the Philip- 
pine Republic as well ; but of them, there was a group 
which believed that the Convention, for moral and political 
reasons, should not adopt a constitution to seiwe also for the 
Philippine Republic. The others believed that the resolu- 
tion was unnecessary, although in their opinion the Con- 
vention should not shirk the resppnsibility of framing a 
constitution for both the Commonwealth and the Re- 
public. 

Delegate Godofredo Reyes, a prominent member of the 
Convention, objected strenuously to the idea of having the 
Constitution of the Philippine Republic submitted to the 



102 



FPvAMING OF THE I^ILirPINE CONSTITUTION 



sovereign of another free nation- In the coui*se of h 
speech, he asked: 



“For u'hat reason do wc have to submit to a forcigistr 
be he the President of the United States or the Prcsi-_ 
of Congo, for what reason do wc have to submit our o 
Constitution which has to be the expression of all our ide« 
of all our hopes, of all our aspirations, the exclusive «• 
pression of our sovereignty, without limitations or rcstrie* 
tions?” 

He emphasized the fact that, under the Tydings-McDuf 
Law, the Constitution would be submitted to the Presiden 
of the United States, who would have the power to obj 
to certain provisions and to recommend the changes to 
made to the same. Should the latter happen, we woul' 
be permitting an outsider to impose certain provisions in 
the Constitution of a sovereign Philippines. The Presiden 
could place limitations and restrictions upon our constitu. 
tion then that we were still a subject people; but, said 
Delegate Reyes, he should never impose restrictions in tl\e 
constitution which would govern an independent counti, 
in which we would be exclusively sov^ercign. 

A minority group objected to the fx*aming by the Con. 
vention of a Constitution intended also fo the Republic 
as being an unwise step. Delegate Cuaderno expressed the^ 
view of this minority in the following tenor: 

“But it is not only the fact that we are face to face 
with a sad reality which is the insuperable reality of tho 
inanclatory provisions of the Independence Law which 
niust observe in drawing our constitution; a law whicli tells 
us the ‘‘character of the constitution*' which we are to 
raft; a law which tells us the name of the Constitution 
that we are about to write; a law that tells us what is to 
G the name of the government that is to be established. 



Perhaps the proponents of the resolution under di$» 
cussion would be nearly right if they contend that we could 
write into this proposed constitution a few precepts that 
are expressive of your own feelings and which might be 
made permanent throughout and after the transition period 
of the Commonwealth government; perhaps, they are right 
when they say that the President of the United States, tlio 
supreme arbiter of our labors, might not see fit to question 



THE SCOPE OF THE <<50NSTITUTI0N 



103 



a few provisions entirely our owti if they are not to become 
effective until our country is ushered into a free existence. 
And I would even concede, Mr. President, that the consti- 
tution that we are about to consider may and could still 
be in force after the transition period. But after the 
transition period, when our government and people shall 
breathe the free and independent atmosphere of the young 
republic on this side of the globe, might not our people 
then wish we had not been too high-handed to have de- 
clared, as the resolution now under discussion would have 
us declare, that we had made this constitution for them 
and that it ought to be good enough for them — a constitu- 
tion which, however dexterous we here might be in drafting 
it to reflect our own native feelings mid desires, never- 
theless, is responsive and may even yet be subservient to 
the ideals and desires of another foreign and I may say 
superior nation? Why go on record now in a manner that 
will go dowm to posterity that we arc forever to have for 
our spiritual, political, social, and economic guidance, an 
instrument conceived under such a colonial atmosphere? 
Have we not the right — and those that are to take our places 
in the public life of our country — to amend and even change 
entirely this constitution that we are about to consider, be- 
fore and after the transition period of ten years?’’ 

The last of the groups opposing the resolution predi- 
cated their opposition upon the fact that a vote on the res- 
olution was unnecessai’y, although, in their opinion, the Con- 
vention should undertake to fi*ame a constitution operative 
not only during the Commonwealth pei'iod but also during 
the Republic, until the people would deem it wise to abi'o- 
gate the same. 

The Lim-Guzman Resolution.— As the debates on the 
proposition dragged on from day to day, it was becoming 
increasingly evident that the spirit of partisanship was 
slowly creeping into the consideration of the resolution and 
that President Recto was apparently being influenced by 
the partisan attitude of some of the outstanding leaders of 
the majority party, shown by them in the majority caucuses 
held for the purpose of deciding what action to take on 
the resolution. 

It was a fact known to many that the paternity of the 
resolution reckoned much in the objection of no small 



104 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



number of the delcffates be!onj?injr to the majority party. 
For this reason, the majority party delegates worked 
busily for a formula which would sui)ei*sede the Osias re- 
solution, without defeating, however, the idea embodied 
therein — that the constitution should be for both the Com- 
monwealth and the liepublic. They thought that they 
found it in the resolution introduced by Delegates Manuel 
Lim and Alejandro de Guzman, endoi*sed by more than 
100 delegates and approved in the caucus of the majority 
party, reading as follows: 

"Resolution expressitiff the sense of the Const ifMtioiwl 
Convention that the provisions of the Tyilinffs-McDuffie Low 
are clear and definite as to the rtaticre and scope of tAi 
constitution to be drafted. 

‘‘Resolved, that it is the sense of the Constitution!! 
Convention, after hearing the arguments adduced by th^ 
speakers for and against the P. R. No. 60 that, inasmuch 
as the provisions of the Tydings-McDuffic Law arc clear 
ancl definite as to the nature and scope of the Constitution 
which this Convention is authorized to draft, the taking of 
^ on the P. R. No. 60 is unnecessary.*' ^ 

original of this resolution before it was revised in the 
caucus was : 

“RESOLUTION 

cx'pressino the sense of the Constitutioiial Convention thot 
the provisio7is of the Tydings-McDuffic Law are clear and 
definite that the Constitution will be in force during ami 
Cl f ter the period of the Commonwealth. 

Whereas the provisions of the Tydings-McDuffie La^v 
are clear and definite that the Constitution which this Com 
vention is authorized to draft will be in force during and 
after the period of the Commonwealth, until otherwise 
amended by the Filipino people; Now, therefore, be it 
Resolved, That it is the sense of the Constitutional 
onvention that, inasmuch as the provisions of the Tydings* 
dcDuffie Law are clear and definite that the Constitution 
which this Convention is authorized to draft will bo in 
force during and after the period of the Commonwealth 
until otherwise amended by the Filipino people, the taking 

of a vote on the resolution under consideration is unneces- 
sary; 



THE SCOPE OF THE CONSTITUTION 



105 



The Crisis.— The action taken by the majority party 
caucus in approving the Lim-Guzman resolution to super- 
sede the Osias resolution proved of great disappointment to 
Delegate Roxas, the leader of the proponents of the resolu- 
tion. His disappointment was made greater by the fact that 
it was President Recto who told Delegate Roxas, after Dele- 
gate Osias had delivered his thirty-minute addi’ess on “The 
Fundamentals of Constitution-Making,” wherein he fonn- 
ally broached the idea for the first time, that if a resolu- 
tion would be introduced embodying the proposition men- 
tioned in that speech. President Recto would entertain it. 
When informed by President Recto on the floor of the 
Convention, in a conversation with him, of the passage of 
the resolution by the majority party caucus. Delegate Ro- 
xas told President Recto to have the matter reconsidered in 
another caucus before the minority party would decide 
what action to take. 

The Convention was on the threshold of a crisis. In 
a gathering of delegates, sympathizers of the I'esolution, 
called by Delegate Roxas, the latter said, “If the majority 
party choose to be partisan in this Convention, the minor- 
ity party would engage in acts of filibustering; and let us 
see if we could finish the Constitution even in two yeai’S.** 

The closing days of the debates on the resolution were 
both thrilling and exciting. With the majority party bent 
on pushing through the Lim-Guzman resolution and' the 
proponents of the Osias resolution determined to block the 
consideration of the same to compel direct action on the 
Osias resolution, with the spirit of partisanship effectively 
steering the course of the Convention leaders, there was a 
veritable ciisis. The minority pai'ty delegates saw party 
jealousies in the attempt to push through the Lim-Guzman 
resolution. Many of the delegates were becoming pessimistic 
about the continuation of the non-pa.rtisan spirit which 
marked the opening of the Convention. 

“Resolved, further, That copies of this resolution be 
furnished to the several committees of this Convention for 
their information and guidance.*' 



106 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

The Crisis Solved. — On September 21, 1931, the n 1 ajo^ I 
ity party delegates decided at a caucus to end defmiielf , 
the debates on the Osias resolution, which wei*e turning for 
the worst. The plan agreed upon was to postpone indo* 
finitely the consideration of the Osias resolution, together 
with all proposed amendments. 

In the afternoon session of that day, a resolution to 
that effect was introduced by Delegate Elpidio Quirino, on 
y,'hich the leaders of the proponents of the Osias resolution, 
including Delegates Roxas and Osias, concurred. Put ton 
vote, the Quirino motion was approved overwhelmingly" 
Thus was solved the crisis which threatened the harmony 
of the Convention. 

The Scope of the Constitution as Drafted.— Nu- 
merically, those in favor of drafting a constitution for 
both the Commonwealth and the Republic were greater 
than those who wanted to frame one for the Commonwealth 
only. The debates on the Constitution, beginning with the 
fust draft, were clearly based on the assumption that the 
Constitution being framed was for the Commonwealth and 
the Republic, until otherwise amended by the people. 

As it was drafted, the Constitution was intended for 
both the Commonwealth and the Republic. The Con- 
stitution is that of the Philippine Republic; but to make 
^ Commonwealth period, in accoi'dance with 
^e Imiitations included in the Tydings-McDuffie Law, the 

Convention appended an ordinance to the Constitution, 
reading : 

Notwithstanding the provisions of the fci'egoing Con- 
stitution, pending the final and complete withdrawal of the 
sovereignty of the United States over the Philippines — 

(1) All citizens of the Philippines shall owe allegiance 
to the United States. 

(2) Every officer of the Government of the Common* 
wealth of the Philippines shall, before entering 
upon the discharge of his duties, take and subscribe 
un oath of office, declaring, among other things, 
that he recognizes and accepts the supreme authors I 



THE SCOPE OF THE CONSTITUTION 



107 



ity of and will maintain true faith and allegiance 
to the United States. 

“(3) Absolute toleration of religious sentiment shall be 
secured and no inhabitant or religious organization 
shall be molested in person or property on account 
of religious belief or mode of worship. 

^*(4) Propeity owned by the United States, cemeteries, 
churches, and parsonages or convents appurtenant 
thereto, and all lands, buildings, and improvements 
used exclusively for religious, cliaritable, or edu- 
cational purposes shall be exempt from taxation. 

‘'(5) Trade relations between tlie Philippines and the 
United States shall be upon tlie basis prescribed 
in section six of Public Act Numbered One Hun- 
dred and twenty-seven of the Congress of the 
United States approved Marcli twenty-four, nine- 
teen hundred and thirty-four, 

“(6) The public debt of the Philippines and its subordi- 
nate branches shall not exceed limits now or here- 
after fixed by the Congress of the United States, 
and no loans shall be contracted in foreign coun- 
tries without the approval of the President of the 
United States. 

*‘(7) The debts, liabilities, and obligations of the present 
Government of the Philippine Islands, its provinces, 
municipalities, and instrumentalities, valid and sub- 
sisting at the time of the adoption of the Consti- 
tution, shall be assumed and paid by the Govern- 
ment of the Conunonwealth of the Philippines. 

^*(8) The Government of the Commonwealtli of the 
Philippines shall establish and maintain an adequate 
system of public schools, primarily conducted in 
the English language. 

‘‘(9) Acts affecting currency, coinage, imports, exports, 
and immigration shall not become law until ap- 
proved by the President of tlie United States. 

‘‘(10) Foreign affairs shall be under the direct supervis- 
ion and control of the United States. 

“(11) All acts passed by the National Assembly of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines shall be reported 
to the Congress of the United States. 

“(12) The Philippines recognizes the right of the United 
States to expropriate property for public uses, to 



108 



FRAMING OP THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 






“(13) 



“(14) 



maintain military and other reservations and 
armed forces in the Philippines, and, upon order 
of the President of the United States, to call into 
the service of such nrnu*<l forces all military forces 
organized by the Government of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines. 

The decisions of the courts of the Philippines shall 
be subject to review by the Supreme Court of the 
United States as now provided by law, and such 
review shall also extend to all eases involving the 
Constitution of the Philippines. 

Appeals from decisions of the Auditor General may 
be taken to the President of the United States. 



(15) The United States may, by Presidential proclama- 
tion, exercise the right to interv’cnc for the pres- 
ervation of the Government of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines and for the maintenance of the 
Government as provided in the Constitution thereof, 
and for the protection of life, property, and indi- 
vidual liberty and for the discharge of Government 
obligations under and in accordance with the pro- 
visions of the Constitution. 

“(16) The authority of the United States High Conunis- 
sioner to the Government of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines as provided in Public Act Num- 
bered One Hundred and twenty-seven of the Con- 
gress of the United States approved March twenty- 
j four, nineteen hundred and thirty-four, is hereby 
1 recognized. 

(17) Citizens and corporations of the United States shall 
onjoy in the Commonwealth of the Philippines all 
the civil rights of the citizens and corporations, 
respectively, thereof. 

(18) Every duly adopted amendment to the Constitution 
of the Philippines shall be submitted to the Pres- 
ident of the United States for approval. If the 
President approve the amendment or if the Pres- 
ident fail to disapprove such amendment within 
SIX months from the time of its submission, tha 
amendment shall take effect as a part of sucii 
Constitution. 

(19) The President of the United States shall have 
authority to suspend the taking effect of or the 
operation of any law, contract, or executive order 




















V 

I 









1 















THE SCOPE OF THE CONSTITUTION 109 

of the Government of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, which in his judgment will result in 
a failure of the Government of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines to fulfill its contracts, or to meet 
its bonded indebtedness and interest thereon or to 
provide for its sinking funds, or which seems likely 
to impair the resers’es for the protection of the 
currency of the Philippines, or which in his judg- 
ment will violate international obligations of the 
United States. 

‘‘(20) The President of the Commonwealth of the Philip- 
pines shall make an annual report to the Pres- 
ident and Congress of the United States of the 
proceedings and operations of the Government of 
the Commonwealth of tlie Philippines and shall 
make such other reports as the President or Con- 
gress may request.’' 

And in Article XVII, it is likewise provided: 

“The government established by tliis Constitution shall 
be known as the Commonwealth of the Philippines, Upon 
the final and complete %\ithdrawal of the sovereignty of the 
United States and the proclamation of Philippine Indepen- 
dence, the Commonwealth of the Philippines shall thence- 
forth be knowm as the Republic of the Philippines.” 



CHAPTER IX 



THE PREAMBLE OF THE PHILIPPINE 
CONSTITUTION 

The Draft of the Convention Committee on Preamble. 
— The first draft of the preamble of the Philippine Con- 
stitution was that submitted to the sponsorship committee 
by the Convention committee on preamble of which Dele- 
gate Norberto Romualdez was chairman, which read as 
follows : 

‘‘We, the people of the Philippine Islands, in deep gra- 
titude to Almighty God, in appreciation of the opportunity 
offered us by the government and people of the United 
States of America to become free and independent, and in 
recognition of the labors and sacrifices of our patriots for 
the emancipation of a united Philippines, in order to 
strengthen the solidarity of the Nation, maintain justice, 
insure peace and tranquility, provide for the national de- 
fense, promote progress and the general welfare, and se- 
cure to ourselves and our posterity the blessings of liberty 
and democracy, do ordain and establish this Constitution 
for the Philippine Islands.*' 

The Draft of the Sponsorehip Committee. — After about 
two weeks of deliberations on the proposed preamble, the 
sponsorship committee agreed to report to the Constitu- 
tional Convention a modified form of the same, the sub- 
stantial change made being the omission of the phx’ases 
expressing Filipino gratitude to the United States for 
the opportunity to become free and independent and 
recognizing the labors and sacrifices of our patriots for 
the emancipation of the united Philippines. The report of 
the sponsoi’ship committee, formally submitted to the Con- 
vention on October 1 , 1934 , by Delegate Filemon Sotto, 
chairman of the committee, was as follows: 

“We, the people of the Philippines, invoking the guid- 
ance of Divine Providence, in order to maintain the unity 
of our nation, establish justice, insure peace, provide for 
the national defense, promote progress and the general wel- 



112 FR/iMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

fare, and secure to ourselves and our posterity the bles* 
sings of liberty and democracy, do ordain and promulgate 
this Constitution for the Philippines.” 

Immediately after the submission of the report, there 
were proposed amendments to the same, the most important 
ones being those of Delegate Abordo, restoring the phrases 
omitted by the sponsorship committee, regarding the ex- 
pression of gratitude to the United States and the recog- 
nition of , the labors of Filipino heroes. The proposed 
amendment expressing our gratitude to the United States 
was defeated, the delegates making it clear that, while they 
v/ere grateful to the United States for the opportunity of- 
fered them to become free and independent, they believed 
that such a gratitude could better and more appropriately 
be expressed in a resolution separate from the Constitution. 
Moreover, the Constitution, they contended, should not con- 
tain anything foreign to the purposes of such a document, 
intended for an indefinite length of time. And so that 
there might be no mistaking of this fundamental reason, 
the proposed amendment to the effect that we should ex- 
press our recognition of the sacrifices of our heroes was, 
upon the advice of Pi’esident Recto, withdrawn by the 
main proponents of the same. 

Besides the Abordo amendments, there were others 
the consideration of which threatened to take verj’- much 
more time of the Convention. In order to save time and 
in view of the fact that there appeared to be a strong op- 
position to the form of the preamble as it had been drafted, 
upon the advice of President Recto, who planned to draft 
a compromise preamble, the proposed preamble of the spon- 
sorship committee was withdrawn from the calendar by 
Delegate Filemon Sotto on October 4, 1934. 

The Recto Draft — President Recto’s proposed pre- 
amble, submitted to a great number of the delegates to the 
Convention, read in Spanish as follows : 

Nosotros, el Pueblo de las Islas Filipinas, invocando 
a la Divina Providencia, a fin de establecer un gobierno cu- 
yas institucior.es expresen nuestro genio peculiar, afianzar 



THE PREAMBLE OF THE CX)NSTITUT10N 



113 



nuestra unidad, mantcncr la paz y el orden, provecr a nues- 
tra defensa comun, salvagruardar y acrecentar el patrimonio 
nacional, fomentar el progreso y el bienestar colectivos, y 
asegurar para nosotros y nuestra posteridad las bendicio- 
nes de la independencia y de un regimen de justicia, liber- 
tad y democracia, ordenamos y promulgamos esta Consti- 
tucidn.*' 

The Draft of the Sub-Committee of Seven. — \Miile the 
Convention was working on a compi'omise preamble, there 
was created, by the sponsorship committee, the sub-com- 
mittee of seven for the purpose of preparing the first draft 
of the Constitution. 

The first draft of the Constitution, prepared by the 
subcommittee of seven, contained a preamble, largely in- 
spired by President Recto, which read as follows : 

“The people of the Philippines, imploring the aid of 
Divine Providence, in order to establish a government that 
shall embody their ideals, strengthen their unity, maintain 
peace and order, conserve and develop the patrimony of the 
nation, promote progress and the general welfare, and secure 
to themselves and their posterity the blessings of independ- 
ence under a regime of justice, liberty, and democracy, do 
ordain and promulgate this Constitution.” 

The same was submitted for the consideration of the 
Convention on November 12, 1934, and was approved on 
the same day almost in its entirety, the only amendment 
that was approved being the Perfecto amendment for the 
insertion of the word, eqxuLlity, between liberty and demo- 
cracy. As it was thus approved, the preamble read: 

The people of the Philippines, imploring the aid of 
Divine Providence, in order to establish a government that 
shall embody their ideals, strengthen their unity, maintain 
peace and order, conserve and develop the patrimony of 
the nation, promote progress and the general welfare, and 
secure to themselves and their posterity the blessings of 
independence under a regime of justice, liberty, equality, 
and democracy, do ordain and promulgate this Constitution." 

The Draft of the Special Committee on Style Which 
Was Finally Approved by the Convention* — In the special 
committee on style to which the Constitution as approved 



il4 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

by the Convention on second I'eading was refen*ed during 
the closing days of the Convention, the preamble as ap- 
pi-oved by the Convention on November 12, 1934 suffered 
several changes. 

The expression. The Filipino People, was substituted 
for the original term. The People of the Philipqnnes, upon 
the suggestion of Delegates Aruego and Cuaderno. 

The word, equality, the insertion of which had been 
approved twice by the Convention, was struck out over the 
strenuous objection of Delegate Perfecto because it was 
believed that the idea which it signified was already em- 
bodied in the term, democracy. From the cliaft were h "e- 
^vise struck out, by the special committee, the expression, 
strengthen their unity, because the Filipinos, it was sai , 
were already united ; and the expressions, maintain peace 
and. order and progress, because these objectives weie al- 
ready implied from the objective, to promote the general 
n) elf are. 

1 The draft of the special committee on style, which was 
i finally approved by the Convention, read : 

“The Filipino people, imploring the aid of Divine Pro 
vidence, in order to establish a government that shall em- 
body their ideals, conserve and develop the patrimony of 
the nation, promote the general welfare, and secure to them- 
selves and their posterity the blessings of independence un- 
der a regime of justice, liberty, and democracy, do ordain 
and promulgate this Constitution.” 

Conclusion. — The Preamble is a solemn announcement 
of the spirit of the Constitution. Herein is an assertion 
of the oneness of the people, the Filipino people, attained 
through having lived a common experience in their heroic 
struggles for the liberation of the country. Thus united, 
through their overwhelming ratification, they have ordain- 
ed and promulgated the Constitution — a national compact—^ 
drafted by the Constitutional Convention, composed of their 
own elected representatives. In this document, the dele- 
gates sought to establish a government rooted in the ex- 



THE PREAMBLE OF THE CONSTITUTION 



115 



perience, ideals, and traditions of the Filipino people. It 
is a government the objecti\-es of which are (1) to con- 
serve and develop the patrimony of the nation; (2) to pro- 
mote the general welfare; and (3) to secure to the Filipino 
people and their posterity the blessings of independence un- 
der a regime of justice, liberty and democracy. 

In the Constitution, the delegates outlined, in some 
respects, the future policies of the government they were 
erecting, with a view to the realization of these national 
objectives. 



CHAPTER X 

THE NATIONAL TERRITORY 



Sources. — The article on national territoiy of the 
Philippine Constitution was based largely on the draft of 
the sub-committee of seven, which in turn was borrowed 
mainly from the report of the Convention committee on 
territorial delimitation as rephrased in the report of the 
sponsorship committee. 

The Definition of the National Territory in the Report 
of the Convention Committee on Territorial Delimitation — 
The Convention committee on territorial delimitation of 
which Delegate Nicolas Buendia was chairman, in its re- 
port, defined the national territory as follows: 

“Sec. 1. The territory of the Philippine Islands shall 
comprise the former Spanish colonies known as the Phil- 
ippine Archipelago, the boundaries whereof are as follows: 

A line running from west to east along or near the 
parallel of 21® 25' north latitude, and through the middle 
of the navigable channel of Bashi, from the 118th to the 
127th meridian east longitude, thence south along the lat- 
ter meridian to the parallel of four degrees and forty-five 
minutes (4® 45') north latitude, thence west along the 
parallel last mentioned to the 120th meridian east longitude; 
thence south along the one hundred and twentieth meridian 
of longitude (120) east of Greenwich to its intersection with 
the parallel of four degrees twenty-three minutes (4° 23') 
north latitude, thence west along the parallel of four de- 
grees twenty-three minutes (4® 23') north altitude to its 
intersection with the meridian of longitude one hundred 
and nineteen degrees (119® O') east of Greenwich; thence 
north along the meridian of longitude one hundred and nine- 
teen degrees (119® O') east of Greenwich to its intersec- 
tion with the parallel of four degrees and forty-two minutes 
(4° 42') north latitude; thence by a direct line of appro- 
ximately forty-five degrees and fifty-four minutes (N 45° 
54') to the intersection of the parallel of five degrees and 
sixteen minutes (5® 16') north latitude and the meridian 
of longitude one hundred and nineteen degrees and thirty- 



118 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



five minutes (119’ 35') east of Greenwich; thence by a di- 
rect line of approximately 31-1“ 19' (N 45 
intersection of the parallel of six degrees (6 0 ) of noilh 

latitude to its intersection with the meridian of longitude 
one hundred and eighteen degrees and fifty minutes (118 
50') east of Greenwich, thence west along the parallel of 
(6° O') north latitude to its intersection with the meridian 
of longitude one hundred and eighteen degrees and twenty 
minutes (118® 20') east of Greenwich, thence by a line of 
approximately 307® 40' (N 52® 20 ' W), passing between 
the islands of Little Bakkungaan and Great Bakkungaan, 
to the intersection of the parallel of six degrees and seven- 
teen minutes (6® 17') north latitude and the mer»d,an of 
longitude one hundred and seventeen degrees and fifty-eight 
minutes (117® 58') east of Greenwich, thence north along 
the meridian of longitude one hundred and sev^teen e 
grees and fifty-eight minutes (H'7° 58') east of Green wch 
to its intersection with the parallel of six degrees and y- 
two minutes (6® 52') north latitude, thence by a direct line 
of approximately 315° 16' (N 44® 44'W) to the intersection 
of the parallel of seven degrees, twenty-four minutes an 
forty five seconds (7® 24' 45") north latitude wnth tlie 
meridian of longitude one hundred 

twenty-five minutes and thirty seconds (117 25 30 ) east 

of Greenwich; thence by a direct line of approximately 
300° 56' (N 59° 04') to the Mangsi Channel betw’cen the 
Mangsi Great Reef and the Mangsi Islands, to the inter- 
section of the parallel of seven degrees and forty minutes 
(7° 40') north latitude and the meridian of lon^tudue one 
hundred and seventeen degrees ( 117 ^ O') east of Greemvi^; 
thence west along that parallel to the meridian of 1 
east longitude, thence by a direct line to the intersection 
of the parallel of 10® north latitude with the meridian of 
118° east longitude, thence north along that meridian to the 
point of beginning.! 

“Sec. 2. Other territory may be added to the country 
by law if the inhabitants thereof, exercising the right of 

self-determination, shall so desire. 



ceded^tn^ technical description embraces the islands 

1898 States by the Treaty of Pans of December 10, 

1898, and those by the Treaty of Washington of November 7, I99O, 
having been maL to the north boundary so as to m- 
elude the Batanes Islands alleo-pd bv the members of the Committee 
to have been omitted "rthe dfscri^^ in Article III of 

the Treaty of Paris, in addition, it embraces the Turtle and-Mangsee 
Islands, object of the treaty between the United States and England 
on January 2, 1930. 




THE NATIONAL TERRITORY 



119 



In its report on the national boundaries, the committee 
invited attention to an alleged erx'or in the definition of 
the northern boundaries of the Philippine Archipelago, ap- 
pearing in Article III of the Treaty of Paris between Spain 
and the United States on December 10, 1898. As a result 
of this error, it was alleged that there were not included, 
within the national boundaries, the Batanes Islands, which 
had since time immemorial been an integral part of the 
Philippine Archipelago and over which the then Philip- 
pine government had been exercising jurisdiction. The re- 
port of the committee was accordingly so prepai-ed that 
the Batanes Islands would be included within the noi*thei*n 
boundaries just as much as would be included, within the 
southern boundaries, the Turtle and IVIangsee Islands, which 
had been the object of the treaty between the United States 
and Great Britain on Januai*y 2, 1930. 

The Definition of the National Territory in the Report 
of the Sponsorship Committee. — Owing to the technical 
character of the article on national territory as x'eported 
by the Convention committee on territorial delimitation, 
the sponsorship committee deliberated over the subject 
carefully, even going to the extent of inviting to its meet- 
ings Father Ila, famous geographer. It felt that a slight 
mistake in the laying out of the boundaiy lines might pi'ove 
prejudicial to the Philippines. 

After careful deliberations, the sponsorship committee 
agreed to report to the Convention the folloArtng proposed 
article on the national territory: 

“The Philippine Islands comprises all the territory ceded 
to the United States by the Treaty of Paris concluded be- 
tween the United States and Spain on the 10th day of De- 
cember, 1898, the limits of whicli are set forth in Article 
III of said treaty, together with all the islands embraced 
in the treaty concluded at Washington, between Uie United 
States and Spain on the 7th day of November, 1900 and 
in the treaty concluded between the United States and 
Great Britain on the 2nd day of January, 1930, and all 
territory over which the present Government of the Phil- 
ippine Islands exercises jurisdiction or which may hereafter 
be acquired by the Philippines.” 



120 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

The article on national territory' as drafted by the 
sponsorship committee embraced substantially all the tex'ri- 
tories included in the report of the Conventon committee 
on territorial delimitation, only avoiding the technical 
phrasing of the latter because of the possibility of making 
a technical error. As it was drafted, it embraced the 
territories mentioned in the Tydings-McDuffie Law over 
which the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philip- 
pine Islands would exercise jurisdiction; the islands 'vhich 
were the object of the treaty between Great Britain and 
the United States on January 2, 1930, but about \vhich the 
Tydings-McDuffie Law was silent; other territory over 
which the then government of the Philippines was exei- 
cising jurisdiction — the Batanes Islands ; and all others 
which might thereafter be acquired by the Philippines.^ 

The Definition of the National Territory in the Draft 
of the Sub-Committee of Seven. — The di'aft on the national 
territory submitted by the sub-committee of seven was the 
same as that prepared by the sponsorship committee, with 
the addition, upon suggestion of President Recto, of the 
phrase, including its jurisdictional waters and aerial zones. 
The draft of the sub-committee read : 

“Section 1. The Philippines comprises all the territory 
ceded to the United States by the treaty of Paris concluded 
between the United States and Spain on the 10th day of 
December, 1898, the limits of which are set forth in Article 
III of said treaty, together with all the islands embraced 
in the treaty concluded at Washington, between the United 
States and Spain on the 7th day of November, 1900, and in 
the treaty concluded between the United States and Great 
Britain on the 2nd day of January, 1930, and all territory 
over which the present Government of the Philippines exer- 
cises jurisdiction, including its jurisdictional waters and 
aerial zones, or which may hereafter be acquired by the 
Philippines.” 



1 This report of the sponsorship committee never reached the 
Convention floor as a committee report because the sub-committee 
of seven was afterwards created to prepare an entire draft of the 
Constitution as a basis for discussion. But it was embodied in the 
draft of the sub-committee of seven. 



THE NATIONAL TERRITORY 



121 



Debates on the Nation;il Territor>'. — The draft of the 
sub-committee of seven was submitted for the considera- 
tion of the Convention on November 13, 1934. Irnniediate- 
ly after its submission, debates ensued, centei*ing chiefly on 
the following points: — (1) Should the national teri'itoiy be 
delimited in the Constitution; (2) Might Philippine terri- 
tory be alienated ; and (3) Might the extent of the teri'itory 
defined in the Constitution be increased thi-ough acquisi- 
tion? 

Should the National Territory Be Delimited in the 
Constitution? — This question was presented squarely to the 
Convention in an amendment introduced on November 13, 
1934 by Delegate Aruego, for the suppression of the article 
on national territory. 

The amendment was defended by Delegates Aruego 
and Palma on the ground that the proposed article was su- 
perfluous, being unnecessary to the purposes of a constitu- 
tion, namely, to define the organization of the government, 
to determine the distribution of governmental powex'S, to 
establish certain fixed principles governing the operation 
of the government, and to define the rights of individual 
citizens; that the inclusion of more islands than what had 
actually been given to the Commonwealth in the Tydings- 
McDuffie Law for her to exei'cise jurisdiction over might 
cause a delay in the approval of the Constitution by the 
President of the United States; that to define the extent 
of our territory in the Constitution might prove prejudicial 
to the interests of the Philippines because of the danger 
of omission of certain islets logically belonging to us under 
the accepted rules of international law but still remaining 
undiscovered ; and that, whether or not we defined it in the 
Constitution, our territory remained the same, neither de- 
creased nor increased, because its extent would be deter- 
mined not by the rules of constitutional law but by the 
principles of international law. Consequently, they con- 
tended, the inclusion of such an article would only tend to 
make our constitution unnecessarily long. 



122 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



The defenders of the article, chiefly Delegates Buendia, 
Ysip, and Singson Encarnacion, zealously argued that it 
was necessary to define in our constitution the extent and 
frontiers of our territory in order to pi'event confusion 
about them. This was especially true, they added, because 
some of the islands over which the Philippine Government 
had been exercising jurisdiction were not in fact included 
in our official national boundaries. But the most persua- 
sive argument in defense of the article was that advanced 
by Delegate Singson Encarnacion, through whose insistence 
the aiticle on national territory had been included in the 
first draft of the Constitution. It was his speech which 
swayed most decisively the Convention to a vote in favor 
of the article on national territory. In the course of his 
stirring speech. Delegate Singson Encarnacion said : 

“And you should not forget that at this time the 
United States is in the best of mood and temper and 
will to give us that which is ours. Nevertheless, we could 
not be sure that such a goodwill would still exist m 
the future. It might be that in the future the officials 
of the United States would not be in such a good temper 
as they are now. These same islands which they secure 
from the treaty of Washington might be discussed over 
again because in the future the new officials elected by 
the American people might say that, since they were not 
included in the Tydings-McDuffie Law, they should not 
form part of our territory. But if we include them now and 
the inclusion would be approved by the President of the 
United States, no official of the United States elected by 
the American people could say in the future that these 
islands were not included because they were not found in 
the Tydings-McDuffie Law. 

“This is the principal reason why we should put in this 
Constitution the delimitation of the national territory, so 
that it is not a superfluous matter. 

“I consider that these islands recognized by England to 
be part of the Philippine Archipelago belong to us; but,, 
what I fear is that, if in the future there would be a conflict 
of interests between Filipinos and Americans or when Ame- 
rica will have a special interest to own anyone of said 
islands, they will adhere to the letter of the Tydings-Mc- 
Duffie Law, which speaks nothing of the treaty between 



THE NATIONAL TERRITORY 



123 



the United States and England. And, as you very well know, 
in this world there is no real international law based on 
strict justice. It is based on the force of cannons. It is, 
therefore, evident that from now we should fortify our- 
selves.*' 

When put to a vote on the same day, the amendment 
for the suppression of the article on national territory was 
defeated. 

On November 14, 1934, Delegate Enriquez px*e- 
sented an amendment for the exclusion, from the boun- 
daries set forth in the article, of the Las Palmas Islands, 
reasoning out that, although the latter were included witliin 
the boundaries set foi'th in the Treaty of Paris of December 
10th, 1898, the jurisdiction over them was already recog- 
nized to be in Holland by vii'tue of an arbitration agree- 
ment between Holland and the United States. However, 
the amendment was objected to, especially by Delegates 
Cuaderno, Locsin and Ysip, who contended that it would be 
unwise to make any mention in the article of the exclusion 
of the Las Palmas Islands because the Tydings-McDuffie 
Law was silent about them and because it would make it 
harder to include them again in the Constitution within 
the boundaries of the Philippines should such islands be 
given to the Philippines by Holland as a result of an ar- 
rangement that might be had with the latter or of the dis- 
covery of any mistake that might have been made in the 
arbitration agreement. The proposed amendment was con- 
sequently defeated. Likewise was defeated the amend- 
ment proposed by Delegate Castillejos for the exclusion 
from the national territory, thus defined in the article, of 
the Yamas Islands, which, according to him, wei^e within 
the jurisdiction of the Japanese government. 

May Philippine Teia-itory Be Alienated? — On Novem- 
ber 14, 1934, Delegate Bautista introduced an amendment 
to the article on national territory, reading as follows: 

“The territory of the Philippines forms an indivisible 
unit, and its frontiers may be altered only by enactment of 
the constitutional convention for the purpose." 



124 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



In defense of his amendment, Delegate Bautista argued 
that there was a necessity for clarifying the condition un- 
der which the territory might be alienated in view of the 
fact that the Constitution was silent w'ith respect to the 
same in that portion referring to the treaty-making power 
of the President and in that defining the ppwer of the 
legislative department. In objecting to the pioposed 
amendment, Delegate Roxas, in behalf of the sub-cornmitUe 
of seven, contended that it w'as not necessai*y to me ude 
in the Constitution any provision to this effect ecause, 
after all, the National Assembly did not have the power 
to alienate territory without any express authority , t le 
power to alienate territory not being included m the legis- 
lative pow'er; nor could such an authoiity be in erre lom 
the treaty-making power of the Chief Executive. 

Delegate Cuenco amended the Bautista amendment so 



that it would read : 

“The territory of the Philippines forms an indivisible 

unit, and its frontiers may be altere on y ^ ^ 

the qualified voters of the Philippines in a plebiscite called 

for the purpose.'^ 

Whether or not the territory of th^ Philippines may 
be alienated under any condition whatsoever was not de- 
cided squarely by the Convention because the consideration 
of the Bautista-Cuenco amendment was, by a resolution or 
the same, postponed until it could come to the title cori*es- 
ponding to the powers of the legislature, and the amend- 
ment was never taken up again in the subsequent debates 
on the Constitution. 

May the Extent of the Territory Defined in the Con- 
stitution Be Increased through Acquisition?— On November 
14, 1934, an amendment was presented by Delegate Vin- 
zons and several others, reading ns follows : 

“Section 2. Other territories may be incorporated into 
the Commonwealth by law if their inhabitants, exercising 
the right of self-determination, so desire. 



The Vinzons amendment was very enthusiastically de- 
bated by the delegates to the Constitutional Convention. 
Several delegates argued that it was a necessary corollary 



THE NATIONAL TERRITORY 



125 



to the proposed draft on national territory, the last part of 
which read: 

“Or which may hereafter be acquired by the Philip- 
pines.” 

It was explained by the proponents of the amendment 
that their purpose was to limit the acquisition of territory 
by the Philippines only to those cases in w’hich the inhabit- 
ants of the territory, in the exercise of the right of self- 
determination, desired to be incorporated. The amendment 
was, however, vigorously objected to by other delegates 
and was finally disapproved by the Convention not because 
the Convention did not wish the extent of the national ter- 
ritory to be increased in the future but because of the fol- 
lowing reasons: 

First, it was not considered prudent that a new nation 
just bom should declare w'hat might be interpreted by 
other countries to be an announcement of a career of terri- 
torial imperialism. 

Second, the approval of the amendment yvould exclude 
other methods for acquiring territory in the future should 
the Philippines so desire, like the method of purchase or 
of forcible annexation of certain unoccupied areas the in- 
corporation of which might be considei*ed necessary for the 
advancement of the country. 

Third, whether or not there was a provision in the 
Constitution, like the Vinzons amendment or one similar to 
the same, the Philippine Republic would have the power to 
acquire territory by the methods recognized by international 
law; namely, discovery and occupation, cession through 
purchase, gift or exchange, prescription, accretion, or con- 
quest. 

When put to a vote on November 16, 1934, the Vin- 
zons amendment was defeated. The defeat of the amend- 
ment was, it should be repeated, due to the fact not that 
the delegates did not wish to see the Philippine Republic 
increase its territory, but that such an amendment was 
considered superfluous and unnecessary, the delegates 



128 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

being of the conviction that, even without it, the Philipn 
pines would have the power to increase its territoiy by any 
method recognized by international law, including that spe- 
cifically stated in the proposed amendment. 

As a consequence of the defeat of the Vinzons amend- 
ment and in view of the arguments presented in the 
debates on the same, the Villarama amendment which pro- 
posed to eliminate from the draft the phrase, which viay 
hereafter he acquired by the Philippines, was passed by 
the Convention on November 16, 1934. 

The Definition of the National Territory as Approved 
by the Convention on November 16, 1934.— As approved 
by the Convention on November 16, 1934, the article on 
national territory read: 

“THE NATIONAL TERRITORY 
“Section 1, The Philippines comprises all the territory 
ceded to the United States by the treaty of Paris concluded 
between the United States and Spain on the tenth day of 
Uecember, eighteen hundred and ninety-eight, the limits of 
which are set forth in Article HI of said treaty, together 
with all the islands embraced in the treaty concluded at 
Washington, between the United States and Spain on the 
seventh day of November, nineteen hundred, and in the 
treaty concluded between the United States and Great Bri- 
tain on the second day of January, nineteen hundred and 
thirty, and all territory over which the present government 
of the Philippine Islands exercises jurisdiction, including its 
jurisdictional water and zones.” 

The Definition of the National Territory as Revised 
by the Special Committee on Style and as Finally Ap- 
proved by the Convention : — In the special committee on 
style, the expression, includhng its jurisdictional tvaters 
and air zones, was taken out because it was believed that 
the territory of the Philippines thus defined was under- 
stood to include all jurisdictional waters and air zones. 

The change was approved by the Convention. The 
definition of the national tei’ritoiy as it was revised by the 
special committee on style, which was finally approved by 
the Convention read: 



THE NATIONAL TERRITORY 



127 



“THE NATIONAL TERRITORY 
“Section 1. The Philippines comprises all the territory 
ceded to the United States by the treaty of Paris concluded 
between the United States and Spain on the tenth day of 
December, eighteen hundred and ninety-eight, the limits of 
which arc set forth i.n Article III of said treaty, together 
with all the islands embraced in the treaty concluded at 
Washington, between the United States and Spain on the 
seventh day of November, nineteen hundred, and in th<^ 
treaty concluded between the United States and Great Bri- 
tain on the second day of January, nineteen hundred and 
thirty, and all territory over whicli the present Government 
of the Philippine Islands exercises jurisdiction.” 



CHAPTER XI 



THE DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES OF THE 
PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

Sources. — The article on declaration of principles of 
the Philippine Constitution was based largely upon the re- 
ports of the committee on declaration of principles, the 
committee on national defense, the committee on labor 
and social welfare, and the committee on the conserva- 
tion of natural resources of which were chairmen, respec- 
tively, Delegates Palma, Alejandrino, Delgado, and Locsin, 
and upon the suggestions of President Recto. In turn, 
these reports were inspired by the different constitutional 
precepts introduced in the Convention by the delegates and 
by provisions of the constitutions of Germany, Spain, and 
other countries of continental Europe. 

Declaration of Prindples in the First Draft of the Sub- 
committee of Seven. — In the first draft of the Constitution, 
the article on declaration of principles read: 

“Section 1. The Philippines is a republican state. Sove- 
reignty resides in the people and all government authority 
emanates from them. 

“The flag of the Philippines shall be white, blue and 
red with a sun and three stars, now commonly accepted and 
honored by the people and recognized by law. 

“The Philippines renounces war as an instrument of na- 
tional policy and adopts the generally accepted principles 
of international law as a part of the Jaw of the nation. 

“All public officials and members of the armed forces 
must take an oath to support and defend the Constitution." 

Declaration of Principles in the Second Draft of the 
Sub-Committee of Seven. — Owing to the objections launched 
informally by the delegates among themselves as well as 
in the press against the form and the substance of the 
declaration of principles in the first draft of the Consti- 
tution, the consideration of Article II of the Constitution — 
Declaration of Principles — was postponed indefinitely until 



130 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



after the sub-committee of seven could finish the necessary 
revision of the same, the Convention in the meantime pro- 
ceeding to the consideration of Article HI — the Bill of 
Rights — of the draft. 

On January 17, 1935, the sub-committee of seven sub- 
mitted to the Convention, in mimeographed form, a revised 
draft of the article, the contents of which were as follows: 

“Sexjtion 1. The Philippines is a republican state. 
Sovereignty resides in the people and all government author- 
ity emanates from them. 

“Sec. 2. The Philippines renounces vsrar as an instru- 
ment of national policy and adopts the generally accepted 
principles of international law as a part of the law of the 
Nation. 

“Sec. 3. The defense of the State is the prime duty of 
government, and in the fulfillment of this duty all citizens 
may be required by law to render personal military or civil 
service. 

“Sec. 4. The rearing of the youth in physical, mental, 
moral, and social efficiency, is the duty and natural right 
of parents and should receive the aid and support of the 
State. 

“Sec. 5. The promotion of social justice is one of the 
primary duties of the State.” 

Declaration of Principles in the Third Draft of the 
Sub-Committee of Seven.— On Januaiy 22, 1935, the sub* 
conmittee of seven resubmitted, in printed form, another 
revised draft of the article, containing exactly the same 
provisions as the second draft, with section 5 of the same 
slightly altered to read: 

‘Sec. 5. The promotion of social justice, to foster the 
well-being and economic security of all the people, should 
be the concern of the State.” 

The last three provisions of the article on declaration 
of principles in the second and third drafts of the sub- 
committee of seven were simply transferred from Article 
XIII General Provisions — of the first draft of the Consti- 
tution. 

Debates on the Declaration of Principles. — The debates 
bn the artide on declaration of principles opened on Jan- 



THE DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES 



131 



•uary 22, 1935, with the amendment to strike out from the 
Constitution the ax*ticle, on the ground that it was un- 
necessary because the principles of the Constitution were 
.already interwoven throughout the document. The ar- 
ticle was maintained, however, after a plea for its i*eten- 
tion by Delegate Palma, chainnan of the committee on dec- 
laration of principles, who ai'gued that it was necessary 
to make in the Constitution a declaration of our national 
ideals. The debates on this article lasted to the next day, 
•with the Convention approving the provisions of the same 
as they appeared in the third revised draft of the sub- 
committee of seven. 

Declaration of Principles in the Draft of the Consti- 
tution Finally Approved by the Convention. In the spe- 

cial committee on style, the article suffered only a slight 
change in style in its fourth section. As it was revised 
by the special committee on style and as it now appears 
in the Constitution as finally approved by the Convention, 
the article on declaration of principles reads: 

“ARTICLE II — DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES 
- • Section 1. The Philippines is a republican state. 

[ Sovereignty resides in the people and all government author- 

• ity emanates from them. 

Sec. 2. The defense of the State is a prime duty of 
government, and in the fulfillment of this duty, all citizens 
may be required by law to render personal military or civil 
' service. 

“Sec. 3. The Philippines renounces war as an in- 
, . . strument of national policy, and adopts the generally ac- 

; ■ ■ cepted principles of international law as a part of the law 
of the Nation. . . 

“Sec. 4. The natural right and duty of parents in the 
rearing of the youth for civic efficiency should receive the 
aid and support of the Government. 

“Sec. 5. The promotion of social justice to insure 
■ the well-being and economic security of all the people 

, should be the concern of the State.” 

The First Declaration of Principle of the Philippine 
Constitution. — The first declaration of principle of the 
Philippine Constitution is to the effect tfiat the Philips 



132 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

pines is a, republican state ayidL that sovereignty resides in 
the people, with government authority emanating from 
them. This was just a reaffirmation by the Convention of 
its faith in republican institutions and in the ultimate wis- 
dom of the rule of the people, preferring a democratic gov- 
ernment to an aristocratic, oligarchical, autocratic, or mon- 
archical government. 

That the Constitution should be republican in form 
was one of the mandatory requirements of the Tydings* 
McDuffie Law, operating to limit the plenary power of 
the Convention. But even if the Tydings-McDuffie Law 
had been silent about this matter, with the happy experi- 
ence of the Filipino people with republican institutions un- 
der the American regime in the Philippines, the Convention 
could not have done otherwise than provide for a republican 

government. 

A republican state was taken by the Convention to 
mean what it was commonly understood to be at the time 
of the framing of the Philippine Constitution. In the 
words of James Madison, 

“We may define a republic to be a government which 
derives all its power directly or indirectly from the grea 
body of the people; and is administered by persons holding 
their offices during pleasure, for a limited period, or ur 
ing good behavior. It is essential to such a government 
that it be derived from the great body of the society, not 
from an inconsiderable proportion, or a favored class of it. 
It is sufficient for such a government that the persons ad- 
ministering it be appointed either directly or indirectly, by 
the people; and that they hold their appointments by either 
of the tenures just specified.” 

During the consideration of Article II of the Constitu- 
tion, Delegate Aruego objected to the inclusion of this dec- 
laration of principle owing to the fact that, while it 
would be true for an independent Philippines, it would 
not be true during the Commonwealth period because the 
Philippines could not as yet be considered a sovereign state. 

What would be the status of the Philippines during 
the Commonwealth period? This became the subject of a 



THE DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES 



133 



debate between Delegate Roxas and Delegate Aruego, with 
the former contending that, even during the Commonwealth 
period, the Philippines would be a sovereign state, an in- 
ternational personality, with all the rights and obligations 
attendant to membership in the concert of nations; and. 
the latter upholding the view that the Philippines would 
not yet be sovereign as the term, sovei-eignty, was under- 
stood to be in international law. 

In his enlightening discoui*se. Delegate Roxas contend- 
ed that, even during the CommonNS'^alth period, the Plulip- 
pine Commonwealth would already be considered a sov- 
ereign state, although its sovereignty would be limited by 
the provisions of the Tydings-McDuffie Law; that it would 
be an international personality from the point of view of 
international law, having the right to enter into relations 
with foreign countries, just like Cuba under the Platt 
amendment. It had been the intention of the American 
Congress, according to hun, that from the inauguration 
of the Philippine Commonwealth we could send as a matter 
of right to foreign countries public ministers chosen by us 
in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution, with 
the full power to represent us, subject only to the limitation 
in paragraph 10 of section 2 of the Tydings-McDuffie Law, 
which stated that the foreign affairs of the Commonwealth 
should be under the direct supervision and control of the 
United States. 

As one of the Philippine officials who worked for the 
approval of the Har^Hawes-Cutting Law, reenacted with 
some modifications into the Tydings-McDuffie Law, he 
pointed out that the provision of the law had been in- 
tended to be an improvement on the Fairfield Bill under 
which the foreign affairs of the Philippines was to be 
under the exclusive control of the United States. He 
pointed out that the phrase, direct supervision and control, 
had been borrowed advisedly from the text of the Jones 
Law with the phrases of which the Filipinos were already 
familiar, to show that under the Constitution the Filipi- 
nos would have complete power to enter into treaty and 



134 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

other diplomatic relations with other countries, with the 
only limitation that such power should be exercised under 
the direct supervision and control of the United States. Of 
course, he admitted, it woud be necessarj,’’ to negotiate with 
the American department of state for a modiis vivendi. 

In reply. Delegate Aruego contended, however, that, 
during the Commonwealth period, the Philippines would 
still be a dependency of the United States, with sovereignty 
still residing in the government of the latter. He pointed 
out that all doubts as to whether or not the United States 
would still be sovereign in the Philippines should be cleared 
by the fact that the Tydings-McDuffie Law% in section 2(a) 
regarding the enforcement of the mandatoi*y provisions, 
used the phrase, 'pending the final a'nd complete tvithdrawol 
of the sovereignty of the United States; and in section 
10(a) regarding the recognition of independence, the 
phrase, the President of the United States shall be procla- 
mation 'withdraw all 'right. . . . of so'v>er&ignty the'ti exist- 
ing a'nd exercised by the United States in and over the 
territory and people of the Philippine Islands. 

In order to be a state, he said, the Philippines should 
be sovereign. But it could not be sovereign as long as the 
United States would be sovereign in the country; for sov- 
ereignty was exclusive,' indivisible, and inalienable. Con- 
sequently, the Philippines could not be considered as yet 
a State, much less an international personality with the 
powers already referred to by Delegate Roxas. 

He then drew a distinction between a state de facto and' 
a state de jure in international law, adding that only states 
de jure were considered as members of the concert of na- 
tions, with the concomitant powers of independence, equal- 
ity, property, jurisdiction, and diplomacy. Not until after 
a state had become he added, could it be con- 

sidered a state de jure. And. as long as the Philippines 
constituted a dependency of the United States, it could not 
be recognized as a state.. The Philippines would become 
a state in international law only after American sovereignty 



THE DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES 



135 



I 



had been withdrawn. Under the provisions of the Tydings- 
McDuffie Law, that sovereignty would be drawn on the 4th 
day of July of the tenth year following the inauguration 
of the government set up in the Constitution. 

He maintained that not until after American sover- 
eignty had been withdrawn from, the Philippines and the 
latter given recognition by the states of the world could 
the Philippines have as a matter of right the power to con- 
clude treaties with other countries and to send diplomatic 
representatives to them. With the consent of the govern- 
ment of the United States and with the other states con- 
cerned approving, of course, he admitted, the Philippines 
mighli conclude treaties and send public ministers of her 
own. But her power to conclude treaties and to send pub- 
lic ministers in that case would flow not from the fact 
that it was a sovereign state, an international personality, 
which it was not, but from the fact that it was permitted 
to do so by the sovereign mother country and by the other 
states concerned. 

The logical conclusion of all his statements, he stressed, 
was the fact that, during the Commonwealth period, the 
Philippines would be not a sovereign state, but still a de- 
pendency of the United States, a part of the United States 
for international purposes, with no international person- 
ality of her own. 

The Second Declaration of Principle of the Philippine 
Constitution. — The second declaration of principle of the 
Philippine Constitution is to the effect that the defense 
of the State is a prime duty of gove-rnment, and in the fid- 
filhnent of this duty all citizens may he required by Imo 
to render personal military or civil service. 

This declaration of principle was based upon the re- 
port of the committee on national defense of which Dele- 
gate Jose Alejandrino was chairman. The report was in 
turn inspired by section 37 of the Constitution of the Span- 
ish Republic and by other constitutions of continental 
Europe. 



136 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



The committee report read in part: *'The State may 

in accordance with law require all citizens to rauier per- 
sonal military or civil se'rvice.” In submitting its report, 
the committee on national defense stated : 

**Your Committee has seen fit to recommend this con- 
stitutional precept for various reasons: 

‘‘First. It is a clause relative to compulsory military 
service contained in almost all the constitutions of free na- 
tions, regardless of form of government, and although this 
duty is not specified in the Constitution of the United States, 
it was nevertheless required during the World War. 

“Second. Compulsory military service is most in accord- 
ance with the modem democratic spirit, because all citizens, 
without distinction of class, are obliged to defend the coun- 
try. 

“Third. The volunteer system is not suitable for a 
poor country which cannot afford to pay the army well 
enough to attract well qualified, able-bodied young men to 
the service. The volunteer system involves the objection- 
able feature of entrusting the sacred mission of defending 
the country to men lacking in capacity who have proved 
failures in other fields of activity. The volunteer system 
is undemocratic, because the cannon fodder, with very few 
exceptions, consists of proletarians. The sons of the wealthy 
can evade the sacred duty of defending their country , 
though it is they who enjoy the advantages obtained 
through the service rendered and blood spilled by men to 
whom fortune has been unkind. A high morale, which 
only a person fighting for an ideal can possess, is very 
necessary in an army, and with mercenaries fighting for a 
pittance, such a morale cannot be attained. 

“These are some of the many reasons for which we 
must adopt compulsory military service. Your Committee 
does not adduce further arguments, for the reason that 
the consensus of public opinion is in favor of the measure 
proposed. 

“In recommending the inclusion in that clause of com- 
pulsory civil service, which shocks many people, your Com- 
mittee has no intention or desire to implant obligatory gra- 
tuitous labor in this country. Its only purpose is to vest 
the Legislature of the Commonwealth with a clean and un- 
disputable power not susceptible to interpretation that may 
give rise to legal controversies. 



THE DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES 



137 



**If, for instance, after considering the Stambulisky 
plan which is unique and has given very good practical re- 
sults in Bulgaria, our future government should see fit to 
send a commission there to study the organization and oper- 
ation of the Stambulisky plan and that commission should 
recommend its adoption, our Legislature would not be pre- 
vented by the Constitution from establishing in our country 
a similar plan, adapted to our idiosyncracy and social con- 
ditions. 

‘The clause recommended by us is copied literally from 
the organic law of democratic Spain, a Republic of laborers 
of all classes who organized a government of liberty and 
justice. 

“This fact alone is sufficient proof that compulsory 
civil service is not a violation of the interests and rights 
of the proletarian, but tends rather to abolish the privileges 
enjoyed by the bourgeois because of their wealth. In spite 
of the insertion of the compulsory civil service provision in 
its constitution, Spain has, as far as we know, not yet re- 
sorted to the enforcement of such service; but the Spanish 
Government reserves to itself the right to do so when it 
may see fit, by means of a law that cannot be challenged 
as being unconstitutional. 

“If the Committee were asked to choose between com- 
pulsory military service and compulsory civil service, it 
would without hesitation choose the latter. Our reasons 
would be the following: 

‘First. War is at present waged with explosives, 
gases and other chemicals, with fragile armaments that 
last but little, such as airplanes, cannon and other arms 
of precision which consume a fearful amount of am- 
munition. 

‘Second. An army, however numerous and well 
trained it might be, would be useless for an effective 
and lasting resistance if it lacked some of the many 
elements required which only an eminently industrial- 
ized country can supply. The modern 3-inch anti-air- 
craft guns of the United States fire 25 shots a minute, 
or 1,500 an hour. One day^s resistance would mean a 
consumption of 36,000 rounds of ammunition per gun. 
A half-inch anti-aircraft machine gun fires 500 shots 
a minute, which is 30,000 an hour or 720,000 per ma- 
chine gim for each day’s resistance. These figures 
give an idea of the necessity of manufacturing at least 
ammunition if a vigorous resistance of some duration 
is contemplated. 



138 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



Tf the Legrislature elected at the beginning of the 
transitory period saw fit to militarize our Constabulary 
and increase its strength to 10,000 men, for instance, 
providing, in accordance with the Constitution, that the 
members of that corps must serve for one year, the 
Constabulary would become a real school of practical 
military training and in ten years we should have 
100,000 properly trained men, ready to render efficient 
service in any form of defense that might be decreed 
by the republic. 

*'On the other hand, if the Legislature should then 
decide to also undertake the great task of developing our 
natural resources and fostering the basic industries essen- 
tial for national defense, utilizing the labor of the excellent 
annual quota of young men of a certain age, taken from 
those who are subject to service under arms, and following 
a system something like the five-year program of industrial 
and economic development of Soviet Russia, we should, at 
the close of the ten years of the transitory period, have, if 
not all, at least some of the elements required to provide 
for the most urgent needs of the defense of our future 
nation. 

“If, in addition to this, the Legislature of the Common- 
wealth were to determine that the compulsory labor service, 
and supposing that the excess number of young men an- 
nually attaining to the age fixed, taken from those chosen 
for military service, aggregated only one hundred thousand, 
we should at the close of the ten-year transitory period 
^ve a million of laborers trained in all kinds of trades 
an^d work and useful not only to the State but to themselves. 
I^hey would be better fitted for the hard struggle for exist- 
ence awaiting them having to compete with the other orien- 
a nations surrounding us, with whom we shall have to 
ive, whether we want to or not, considering the geograph- 
ical situation of our country and the political and economic 
conditions that will probably exist in the Pacific when our 
in ependent republic shall be proclaimed/' 

Writing on April 3, 1936, Delegate General Alejan- 
rino, ather of the national defense idea of the Constitu- 

on the compulsory civil service provision 
of the Constitution as follows: ’ 

As far as the Philippines is concerned, if we want to 
adopt in our government a similar institution that is har- 
moniously attuned to the peculiar genius of the race, and 
customs, we can do no better than' to carry out that pro- 






THE DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES 



139 



vision in the Constitution requiring compulsory civil service 
to the state. 

“Communal labor in the Philippines dates back to the 
dim beginnings of our people. We have in our dialects 
such words as saknun(; and dalo in Tagalog, sugu in Pam- 
pango, and lihog in Visayan, all meaning voluntary and 
gratuitous aid rendered to a neighbor in time of need. When 
a poor man has to transfer his house and does not have 
means to pay for labor, or when a farmer is late in his 
sowing, friends readily come to his aid and make common 
labor of the job until it is done. A charming touch is added 
to the whole procedure when native ballads are sung to the 
accompaniment of a guitar while the work is being done. 

“Despite the layers and layers of Western influences 
that have settled upon the original native traits of our peo- 
ple, I am quite convinced that certain of our beautiful tra- 
ditions, such as this one of loving cooperation with a fellow 
in need, will never die out. On this fundamental trait of 
our people may be erected, as a structure on a firm founda- 
tion, the institution of compulsory labor for the state. All 
that is necessary is to give it a new meaning, an orientation 
in consonance with the needs of the country at present. 

“Compulsory civil service is not a theoretical idea. It 
has been in force all these years in Soviet Russia where 
individualism has been reduced to the minimum and labor 
of the state as well as of the social unit is carried out on 
communal basis. It is the secret of the success of the Five 
Year Plan. 

In Bulgaria, under the inspiration of the great Stanh- 
bulisky, compulsory civil service has been responsible for 
the rapid progress made towards economic sufficiency and 
political power. Stambulisky, agrarian leader, conceived the 
idea of putting the youth of the land, irrespective of 
social caste, to compulsory labor for the state for certain 
periods. The result has been the development of a real 
democracy among the young generation, resulting from the 
frequent rubbing of ^elbows together in the fields, the son 
of a wealthy patrician hoeing the same row of potatoes 
with the son of a farmer. 

“The same thing is true in Spain. Article 37 of the 
Socialist Republic of Spain requires compulsory military 
and civil service of the citizens. The same provision is 
found in Article 133 of the new German Constitution. 

“Assuming that the National Assembly, at its regular 
session which opens in June, enacts a law enforcing the 



140 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

compulsory civil service provision of the Constitution, it 
IS easy to figure out how big an army of efficient laborers 
the country will have at its disposal at the end of ten 
years. Let us say that of the young men who reach a cer- 
tain age and eligible for military training, 100,000 will be 
available for state labor every year. In ten years we shall 
have about one million healthy young men trained in the 
professions, crafts, and other forms of skilled labor. 

‘‘This class of men will be fully equal to all the exi- 
gencies of competition with other Oriental nations in the 
fields, the factories, commerce, and trade, and other econo- 
mic undertakings. They are self-respecting, industrious, 
zealous of their civic obligations, and dependable citizens 
of the Philippine Republic that shall be." 

This provision of the Constitution was readily ap- 
proved by the Convention when it was submitted to it for 
consideration. 

The primary object of the insertion of this provision 
was to authorize the enactment of a law requiring all citi- 
zens to render personal military or civil service. Under 
it, citizens may be required to render personal service not 
only in the military division but also in the civil adminis- 
tration division of the government. And this in time of 
peace as well as in time of war. 

President Quezon, who especially favored the retention 
in the Constitution of this constitutional precept during 
the preparation of the last drafts of the article on decla- 
ration of principles, commenting on this declaration of prin- 
ciple, in his address as guest of honor of the Convention on 
February 5, 1935, said. 

There is one provision in this Constitution, Mr. Pres- 
1 ent, which is of sufficient importance to warrant my say- 
ing a few words about it so that the country may take 
ue notice thereof, and our people may fully realize how 
ar you have gone in your desire to safeguard our national 
integrity and independence. I refer to the clause in the 
Constitution which permits the government of the Common- 
wealth or the government of the Republic to require the 
services of our citizenry both in war as well as in peace. 
This clause, I am sure, does not only express your own 
individual feeling and thought as to the duty of every ci- 



THE DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES 



141 



tizen to his country and to the state. It would have been 
impossible for such a grathering as this to have inserted 
in the Constitution with unanimous vote a provision of this 
sort if you have not truthfully and loyally represented the 
sentiment and conviction of your respective districts and 
of the people at large." 

And a little later — on February 12, 1935 — before the 
student body of the University of the Philippines, he re- 
peated : 

"Few will deny that, in time of war under any consti- 
tution or form of firovemment, the state may demand mili- 
tary or civil service from its citizens. The inclusion of tliis 
section in the Constitution clearly show’s the purpose of the 
framers to empow^er the government, for the furtherance 
and protection of its national existence or interest, to re- 
quire the personal service of every one of its citizens, both 
in time of peace and in time of war. Our country is not 
a large country; our population is small; our national re- 
sources, while rich, are neither developed nor unlimited; 
and our national security is not entirely beyond the danger 
of aggression, either from within or from wthout. That 
we may build a nation worthy of the dreams and the sac- 
rifice of our forefathers and w^hich will insure the free- 
dom, prosperity and safety of our descendants, it may be 
necessary for the Philippine Commonwealth now and the 
Philippine Republic later, to husband all our resources, — 
both material and in man power. Some nations have al- 
ready compulsory military training and are requiring of 
their citizens to render civil service. It wrill be the duty 
of every school, college or university to instill in our youth, 
as the keynote of our educational citizenship training, the 
idea that the well-being of the state is paramount to and 
above every personal interest, and for this reason, every 
man and woman should ever be ready to answer the call 
of the country. 

"It is not for me at this time to say in what manner 
the Philippines should attempt to promote its welfare and 
safeguard its national security. But I am prepared to state 
that I am infinitely glad that, by virtue of this provision 
in the Constitution, there shall not be and cannot be any 
question as to the right or power of the State to compel 
its citizens to render whatever service may be required 
of them." 



142 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

The Third Declaration of Principle of the Philippine 
Constitution. — The third declaration of principle of the 
Philippine Constitution is to the effect that the Philippines 
renounces war as an instirument of national policy and 
adopts the generally accepted principles of international 
law as a part of the law of the Nation. 

This declaration of principle embraces two parts 
(1) the renunciation of war as an instrument of national 
policy; and (2) the adoption of the generally accepted prin- 
ciples of international law as a part of the law of the Na- 
tion. 

The first part of this declaration was inspired by the 
famous Kellogg-Briand Pact, already si^ed by almost ^1 
the countries of the world, which had also been embodi^ 
in Article 6 of the Constitution of the Spanish Republic, 
one of the constitutions that influenced the content ana 
philosophy of the fundamental law. 

The proposition to include in the Constitution this dec- 
laration of principle was severely criticised by a cei*tain 
sector of the press. Anent this matter, the Philippines 
Herald, in its issue for January 21, 1935, said: 

“THE CONSTITUTION IN HISTORY 
“Renunciation of war as an instrument of national 
policy is one of the articles which would be written into 
the declaration of principles of the Constitution. In the 
same constitution it would be stated that the citizens of 
this country may be required to render service to the State 
in a military way, the defense of the country being con- 
sidered the paramount duty of the government. 

“Any time in the future, a subject of this government 
may refuse to take up arms in defense of his State on the 
ground that one of the principles declared by the Constitu- 
tion is that the nation renounces war as an instrument of 
its policies. Is there any reason why the defense of the 
nation should not be the paramount policy of the govern- 
ment? And why should war be outlawed as an instrument 
of such a policy, if w© find ourselves in the position of hav- 
ing to go to war or see our country gobbled up by a strong 
foreign power? 



THE DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES 



143 



"There is, then, glaring inconsistency in renouncing war 
and at the same time requiring our citizens to stand ready 
to render military service to the nation. But this inconsist- 
ency is really not the whole point. More important is the 
way we would tie our hands in the future wnen war may 
be either necessary or inevitable. 

“The more reasonable attitude is not to commit our- 
selves definitely on the war question. We cannot tell what 
our attitude will be in the future, and to state now what 
we must do in the days to come is at best a futile attempt 
to control the possible course of history. 

“This is not in defense of war, but it is necessary that 
we understand that the forces producing war are not with- 
in the orbit of a viagna. charta. A Constitution is one 
thing and Society is another. The former embodies the ar- 
chitecture of go%’ernment and the ideology of that govern- 
ment; the latter is something vital— the organism of the 
people’s dynamic forces. 

“Let us admit at the very outset that the Constitution 
of the Philippine Commonwealth is a political document, in- 
tended to regulate our life but not to frustrate our racial 
dynamism. Let us say right now that it is not a bulwark 
against Society but rather a bulwark for the Society 
When therefore that Constitution shall have become too 
small to contain the vital progress of our people, it must 
go and yield place to something newer and bigger. 

“The usefulness of the Constitution will depend upon 
the possibility of its provisions. It is idle, in the political 
sense, to advocate something that cannot be e.xecuted. to 
adopt a policy not in keeping ^\^th reality. 

“Like all political documents, a Constitution must first 
understand what it wants, and understand it clear. Sin- 
cerity, not make-believe, must be its language. To make it 
the symbol of our dreamings, is to write it into puerility 
And what, in the light of contemporary tendencies, is a de- 
claration against war in general but an idle dream?” 

The objections by the Philippines Herald found them- 
selves repeated in the Convention. It was because of these 
objections that Delegate Cloribel presented an amendment 
for the suppression from the Constitution of this part of 
the declaration of principle, adding that it was also incon- 
sistent with the provisions giving the National Assembly 
the power to declare war and the President the authority 
to act as commander-in-chief of the army and navy. But 



144 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

the Convention approved the provision which, according to 
it, referred not to defensive war but to aggressive war. 
The opinion of the Convention that this provision contem- 
plated an aggressive war was expressed by Delegate Osias, 
who, in answer to Delegate Cloribel, said: 

'T think the opposition to this section arises from a mis- 
apprehension of its meaning. The fact that a country re- 
nounces war as an instrument of national policy does not 
preclude that country from engaging in a war of defense. 
And so I think the observations of the gentleman from B(^ 
hoi are beside the point. 

‘‘It should be refreshing to read section 3 in connection 
with section 2, which expressly provides that the defense of 
the State is the prime duty of government, and in the ful- 
fillment of this duty all citizens may be required by law to 
render personal military or civil service. That provision 
specifically admits that, in case of unwarranted invasion 
against the Philippine Islands, every citizen, every able- 
bodied citizen of this coimtry is in duty bound to take up 
arms in defense of the integrity of our territory and the 
rights of our people." 

In this connection, it may be said that the report of 
the committee on declaration of principles, which was one 
of the bases of the article on declaration of principles of 
the Philippine Constitution, stated: 

“The Government of the Commonwealth holds that all 
war is unlawful and will resort to arms only when the sc- 
curity of the State requires it. 

The provision regarding the renunciation of war as an 
instrument of national policy was consequently adopted by 
the Convention with the intention to make it applicable 
only to aggressive war, but never to war in self-defense. 
It was for this reason that this portion of the third declara- 
tion of principle was considered consistent with the second 
declaration of principle and with the other provisions of the 
Constitution referring to war. 

The second part of this declaration of principle — ^the 
adoption of the generally accepted principles of interna-^ 
tional Jaw as a part jai the law of the Nation — was bor- 




>.t) 




THE DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES 



145 



rowed from section 4 of the German Constitution and sec- 
tion 7 of the Constitution of the Republic of Spain. 

The intention of the framers of the Constitution was to 
incorporate expressly into the system of municipal law the 
principles of international law, the obseiwance of which 
would be necessary to the preseiwation of the family of 
nations which the Philippines was expected to join at the 
expiration of the Commonwealth period in the Tydings- 
McDuffie Law. 

This provision is a foi-mal declaration of what is con- 
sidered to be the primordial duty of every member of the 
family of nations, namely, to adjust its system of muni- 
cipal law so as to enforce at least within its jurisdiction 
the generally accepted principles of international law. " 

The Fourth Declaration of Principle of the Philip- 
pine Constitution. — The fourth declaration of principle of 
the Philippine Constitution is to the effect that the natural 
right and duty of parents in the I’earmg of the youth for 
civic efficiency should receive the aid and siipport of the 

goveTume^t. 

This provision, worded in its present phraseology by 
the special committee on style, was inserted in the first draft 
of the Constitution, upon the suggestion of President Recto 
of the Convention. The provision in that draft read: 

The rearing of the youth in physical, mental, moral, 
and social efficiency, is the highest duty and natural right 
of the parents, the accomplishment of which shall receive 
the aid and support of the State.’’ 

This provision in the draft was in turn inspired by Article 
120 of the German Constitution, the content of which was 
as follows: 

“The rearing of the rising generation in physical, men- 
tal, and social efficiency, is the highest duty and natural 
right of the parents, the accomplishment of which is watched 
over by the community of the State.” 

In the special committee on style, there were some 
discussions among the members as to the phrasing of the 
expression, physical, mental, moral and social efficiency, 




J 



146 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

until at last they hit on the phrase, civic efficiency, as being 
a better term having an equivalent meaning. There were 
no further debates in the Convention on this change of 
style in the draft of the Constitution approved on second 
reading. 

This declaration of principle is a recognition of the 
fact that it is the natural right as well as the duty of pa- 
rents to rear their children in civic efficiency. The parti- 
cipation of the state is limited to the giving of aid and sup- 
port in the carrying out of this natural right and duty of 
parents. The philosophy of this provision was partly ex- 
pressed by Delegate Benitez in a speech against the amend- 
ment to suppress the provision presented by De ega e i- 
llareal, in the following words : 

“In individualistic society, we consider that it is 
duty of the parent to educate his children; but in a socialis- 
tic society, we consider it the duty of the State. u e 
State may go further and -laim that duty and deprive the 
parents of their natural right to take care of their children. 
Hence, this compromise. There is, for example, Russia. That 
is a concrete example of absolute socialism where the parents 
have not almost the right to take care of the children. We 
do not want to go that far. Therefore, the philosophy of 
this draft.” 

The Fifth Declaration of Principle of the Philippine 
Constitution._The fifth declaration of principle of the 
Philippine Constitution is to the effect tJuit the pi’omotion 
0/ social justice to insure the well~being and economic se- 
curity of all the people should be the concern of the State. 

. The idea of social justice in the Philippine Constitu- 
tion was initiated in the Convention by Delegate Locsin, 
who, in his participation in the deliberations of that body, 
continually harped on the necessity for insuring through 
the Constitution social justice for the less fortunate classes 
of the people. To him more than anybody else is due the 
paternity of the idea of raising to the dignity of a consti- 
tutional mandate the promotion of social justice as one of 
the main concerns of the State. 




THE DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES 



147 



This declaration of principle followed in the train of 
demands so frequently made and so insistently repeated, 
especially in the years immediately prior to the drafting 
of the Philippine Constitution, upon the powers that were, 
to improve the lot of the common classes of the people. 

The idea of social justice in the Constitution was de- 
veloped in the course of the debates to mean justice to the 
common tao, the “little man” so-called. It means justice 
to him, his wife, and children in relation to their emplo- 
yers in the factories, in the fai'ms, in the mines, and in 
other employments. It means justice to him in the edu- 
cation of his children in the schools, in his dealings with 
the different offices of the government, including the courts 
of justice. In other words, it means justice to him in his 
relations with the more fortunate classes of the people. 

Of what forms this justice should take the Convention 
did not deem it necessaiy to make a compendium, limiting 
itself to enunciating the general understanding that social 
justice implied the improvement of the lot of the common 
man. It partly attempted, however, to show what it meant 
by the term, social justice, through the inclusion in the 
Constitution of the following provisions: 



1. No person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or prop- 

erty without due process of law, nor shall any person be 

denied the equal protection of the laws.” (Article III Sec- 
tion I ( 1 ) lAriicie 111, O..C 



for non-payment 



2. ‘‘No person shall be imprisoned, 
of a poll tax.'' (Article III (12) 

3. “No involuntary servitude in any form shall exist 
except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall 
have been duly convicted." (Article III (13) 

4. “No person shall be held to answer for a criminal 
offense without due process of law." (Article III (16) 

5. “Excessive bail shall not be required." (Article III 

(16) 



6. “Excessive fines shall not be imposed." (Article III 

(19) 

7. Free access to the courts shall not be denied to any 
person by reason of poverty." (Article III (21) 



148 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



8. “Appointments in the Civil Service .except as to thoM 
which are policy-determining, primarily confidential or high- 
ly technical in nature, shall be made only according to merit 
and fitness, to be determined as far as practicable by com- 
petitive examination.” (Article XI (1) 

9. “The National Assembly may authorize, upon pay- 

ment of just compensation, the expropriation of Ian s o 
be subdivided into small lots and conveyed at cos o in 
viduals.” (Article XII (4) . 

10. “The Government shall establish and maintein a 

complete and adequate system of public education, an 
provide at least free public primary instruction, an ci 
ship training to adult citizens. The State sha crea s 
arships in arts, science, and letters for specia y gi e ci 
zens.” (Article XIII (5) . „ 

11. “The State shall afford protection to labor, especially 
to working women and minors, and shall regu ate e re 
tions between landowner and tenant, and between a or an 
capital in industry and in agriculture. The State may pro- 
vide for compulsory arbitration.” (Article XIII ( ) 

The Convention hoped that with the promotion of 
cial justice the well-being and economic security of all the 
people would be insured. 



CHAPTER XII 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE PHILIPPINE 
CONSTITUTION 

Introduction. — The inclusion of a bill of rights in the 
Philippine Constitution was made mandatory in the Ty- 
dings-McDuffie Law. But even if that law had been silent 
about it, the Convention would in all probability have in- 
cluded in the Constitution a bill of I'ights; for, by the 
time of the dx*afting of the Constitution, the Filipino peo- 
ple had already been accustomed to look upon a bill of rights 
as a palladium of their rights and liberties. All the poli- 
tical documents under which they had liv^d — the Malolos 
Constitution, President McKinley’s Instructions to the Phil- 
ippine Commission, the Philippine Bill of 1902, and the 
Philippine Autonomy Act of 1916— —contained a bill of 
rights. 

Sources. — The px'ovisions of the bill of rights of the 
Constitution were reproduced largely from the report of 
the committee on bill of rights, presided by Delegate Jose 
P. Laurel. 

^ The report of the committee on bill of rights was 
largely a reproduction of the provisions of the bill of 
rights of the Jones Law, which in turn were borrowed 
from American constitutions. Other provisions of the 
committee report were drawn from the Malolos constitu- 
tion and from the constitutions of the Republic of Spain 
Italy, and Japan. 

The report was struck on a philosophy of conserva- 
tism, the same philosophy that pervaded the debates on 
the same in the Convention. In submitting its draft of 
the bill of rights to the President of the Convention, the 
committee on bill of rights said : 

“Adoption and adaptation have been the relatively fa- 
cile work of your committee in the formulation of a bill or 



150 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

declaration of rights to be incorporated in the Constitution 
of the Philippine Islands. No attempt has been made to 
incorporate new or radical changes. Radicalism, no matter 
how democratic, may prove detrimental. It were better that 
we “Keep close to the shore: let others venture on the deep. 

“The enumeration of individual rights in the present 
organic law (Acts of Congress of July 1, 1902, August 29, 
1916) is considered ample, comprehensive and precise en- 
ough to safeguard the rights and immunities of Filipino 
citizens against abuses or encroachments of the Government, 
its powers or agents. Your committee, therefore, has not 
been allured by attractive innovations that are found in 
some modern constitutions, lest our Constitution suffer from 
the defect of an admixture of “declarations and declama- 
tions” in the enunciation of constitutional dogmas. 

“Modifications or changes in phraseology have been 
avoided, wherever possible. This is because the principles 
must remain couched in a language expressive of their his- 
torical background, nature, extent and limitations, as con- 
strued and expounded by the great statesmen and jurists 
that have vitalized them.” 

Debates on the Bill of Rights of the Constitution.— 
The debates on the bill of rights of the Constitution last6d 
for six days — November 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 1934- 
drawing into them the legal luminaries of the Convention. 
Further debates were held on the bill of rights on February 
7, 1935, on the amendments made by the special committee 
on style. 

Owing to the importance of the bill of rights arising 
irom its nature as the definition of the rights and immun- 
1 les of the people against the abuses and the encroach- 
ments of the government, the Convention deliberated on 
the proposed draft of the bill of rights with unusual in- 
terest and extreme caution, patiently analyzing the more 
than one hundred proposed amendments intended to im- 
prove the same. Delegate Jose P. Laurel, by virtue of his 
being the chairman of the committee on bill of rights, was 
designated by the sub-committe of seven to be the sponsor 
{ponente) of the bill of rights. As such sponsor, it fell to 
his lot to defend the provisions of the draft. Very fre- 
quently in the debates, the Convention was swayed visibly 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE CONSTITUTION 



151 



by the well-considered opinions of Delegate Laurel, whose 
knowledge of constitutional law especially equipped him to 
guide the Convention in making many of its decisions on 
this particular section of the Constitution. His reputa- 
tion as an authority on constitutional law easily won over 
to his side many of the delegates of the Convention, espe- 
cially those not trained in the law. 

The Convention was generally conservative in its con- 
sideration of the bill of rights, avoiding insistently the 
inclusion of any provision whatsoever not tested in the 
crucible of experience of the Filipino people and oppos- 
ing attempts even only to recast the phraseology^ of well- 
known provisions of the bill of rights under which the Fili- 
pinos had lived. 

Delegate Aran eta prepared another bill of rights for 
the Constitution, for which he had secured in advance the 
support of several delegates — a dr-aft in which he attempted 
to restate in more definite and more easily understandable 
language some provisions of the bill of rights of the Jones 
Law. The Araneta draft likewise contained provisions 
new to the political experience of the Filipino people but 
believed by Delegate Araneta to be in keeping with the 
fundamental philosophies of the first draft of the Consti- 
tution. 

But the Convention was firm in its conser\'ative at- 
titude to retain the phraseology of well-known provisions 
of the Jones Law because of the jurisprudence that had 
been built up about them. 

With the defeat of the Araneta amendments to the 
d^ie process and the eqvxil protection clauses of the first 
draft of the Constitution, the movement for a revision of 
the bill of rights of the first draft, primarily in the phrase- 
ology and to some extent in the contents, gradually dimin- 
ished in strength. The debates throughout the remaining 
period taken up for the bill of rights were carried on under 
the influence of the philosophy of conservatism struck in 



152 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



the report of the committee on bill of rights and pounded 
upon repeatedly by Delegate Laurel in defense of the same 
report. 

In the following chapters, an attempt will be made to 
show the spirit of the provisions of the bill of rights, in- 
fused into them by the Convention.* 



* In the following chapters on the bill nn!l 

hniit himself to tracing the sources of the different ^ 

the history of the same in the Convention and consequently shown^ 
the intentions of the framers of the Constitution. He wll Pn^POsely 
try to keep them out from becoming commentaries on constitutional 
law in order to keep the book within the bounds of its title, t w a 
brief legal commentary on the bill of rights, see Dfegate Laurel s 
speech in defense of the same in the Convention. It is includea as 
one of the appendices of this book. 



CHAPTER XIII 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE PHILIPPINE 
CONSTITUTION (Continued) 

Due Process of Law and Equal Protection of the 
Laws. — The Philippine Constitution reads: 

“No person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or prop- 
erty without due process of law, nor shall any person be 
denied the equal protection of the laws.” 

This provision was borrowed substantially' from the 
Philippine Bill of 1902 and the Philippine Autonomy Act of 
1916, but it follows the phraseology of corresponding pro- 
visions of American constitutions. 

The report of the committee on bill of rights repro- 
duced exactly the provision of the Philippine Bill of 1902 
and the Philippine Autonomy Act of 1916, wliich read as 
follows : 

“That no law shall be enacted in said Islands whicn 
shall deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without 
due process of law, or deny to any person therein the equal 
protection of the laws.” 

However, the sub-committee of seven restated this provi- 
sion into the present provision of the bill of rights, follow- 
ing the phraseology of corresponding provisions of Amer- 
ican constitutions ; and it was in this form that it was ap- 
proved by the Convention. The reason for the change in 
phraseology was to make it clear that the prohibition ap- 
plied to_ the government in all its bi’anches and_instru.- 
menta lities. 

In view of the rather flexible and at times elusive in- 
terpretations in the past given to it, some delegates, led 
by Delegate Araneta, attempted to clarify the phrase, due 
process of law. They sought to secure this clarification 
in the passage of two substitute amendments which read as 
follows: 



154 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

“(1) No person shall be deprived of his life nor im- 
prisoned, unless in conformity with a reasonable law and by 
order of a competent court of justice decreed after reason- 
able procedure and hearing prescribed by law. 

'*(2) No public officer shall curtail in any way the 
liberties and rights of an individual nor deprive him of his 
property unless in conformity with the reasonable la>\ an 
procedure.” 

The proposed amendments, zealously defended by De- 
legates Araneta, Lim, and Abordo, required that in no case 
should a man be deprived of his life or of his liberty \nth- 
out the intervention of a competent court which shou 
order the same, the principal aim being to prohibit impris- 
onment for contempt by the legislature or imprisonment 
by order of any administrative officer. In this respect, the 
proponents were only trying to embody a provision of the 
Malolos Constitution, which read : 

“No Filipino could be imprisoned except by virtue of 
the order of a competent court.” 

But with respect to the taking of property of persons, the 
proponents did not require the intervention of a court; it 
would be sufficient that the taking be in conformity to a 
reasonable law and procedure. 

In defense of the provision of the draft. Delegate 
Laurel contended that the amendments were objectionable 
ecause they were giving the courts the function to deter- 
^hat were reasonable laws when the legislature 
snould be the one to pass upon their wisdom, reasonable- 
ness, and expediency, leaving to the court only the power 
that they would be in conformity to the Con- 
stitution. And even if the word, reasonable, were struck 
out, he said that he would still object, although there were 
judges and members of the bar divided om the meaning 
of the term, due process of law. He continued: 

“But we must take into account, Mr. President, that 
one of ^e merits of the American Constitution, especially 
of the bill of rights, is that, through the use of well-known 
phrases, the tribunals of justice are given a very wide field 
for the very purpose of enabling them to interpret the 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE CONSTITUTION 



155 



meaning and the extent of the words used in the Constitu- 
tion, thereby givdng room for what Chief Justice Mar- 
shall called ‘judicial statesmanship’. But the fact is that 
there are many phrases and many words used in the Con- 
stitution purposely to give to the tribunals of justice a wide 
sphere of action in the interpretation of our laws, so that 
their decisions may respond to the changes of circumstances 
and of time and to the progress of the nation.” 

And in answer to Delegate Orense who asked him if with 
the word, reasonable, omitted, the sub-committee would ac- 
cept the amendment. Delegate Laurel said that pei*sonally 
he was still opposed. To quote him: , 

“First, because, as I have already said, if we change 
this phrase for another, we would be giving way to a change 
probably in some interpretations and probably it would be 
necessary to reverse decisions consecrated since time imme- 
morial, from the time of Marshall, and also decisions handed 
down by our tribunals of justice in this jurisdiction. In the 
second place, and the second reason is that I am not sure if, 
with the introduction of the change, the sense and the ex- 
pression or even the language used in this draft of the Con- 
stitution which is now submitted to the Assembly would be 
improved.” 

An amendment proposed by Delegate Cinco for the 
insertion, in the provision of the draft, of the phrase, with, 
the exception of cases of contempt punishable by laio, was 
defeated. 

There was likewise a strong opposition to the approval 
of the provision of the present bill of rights, which provides 
that no person shall be denied the equal protection of the 
laws. The opposition to this provision was due primarily 
to judicial decisions both in the United States and in the 
Philippines declaring unconstitutional legislative measures 
intended primarily to protect labor, on the ground that they 
violated the equal protection of the laws provision of the 
constitution. In order to make possible the passage of leg- 
islative measures similar to those which had already been 
declared unconstitutional by the courts both in the United 
States and in the Philippines and of laws nationalistic in 
their character in keeping with the spirit and philosophy 



156 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

of the first draft of the Constitution, Delegate Araneta 
proposed the following substitute provision for the bill of 
rights: 

“No law shall be enacted which unreasonably discri- 
minates against a class of persons.” 

The pi'oposed amendment was vigorously defended by 
Delegates Araneta, Lim, and Vinzons, who emphasized the 
fact that the equal protection of the latvs provision of the 
Jongs Law, incorporated in the first draft of the Constitu- 
tion, had been a bulwark of capitalism, preventing the en- 
actment of social legislation favorable to labor and ma- 
ternity. 

In opposition to the proposed amendment and in de- 
fense of the equal protection of the la^vs provision of the 
draft. Delegate Laurel contended, however, that, even under 
this provision of the Constitution, it would still be possible 
for the legislature to pass measures similar to those already 
declared unconstitutional by the courts, like those protect- 
ing women laborers in the period of mateniity and those 
excluding aliens from employment in factories, in view of 
the presence of collateral provisions in the Constitution 
especially intended to guarantee social justice in the Phil- 
ippines. 

The question regarding the constitutionality of laws 
intended to protect pregnant women working in factories 
was presented squarely in the following portions of the 
debates on the bill of rights: 

Delegate Confeaor. — Supposing that a law would bo 
enacted to the effect that pregnant women working in fac- 
tories, should they become pregnant legitimately, be paid 
three months or two months’ salary after delivery. Would 
that be constitutional under the present draft as submit- 
ted by the Committee? 

Delegate Laurel. — I was, Mr. President, going to that 
point. In this connection, I want to say that one criticism 
against the bill of rights... is that we are adhering to the 
necessities of natural law when, as a matter of fact, we 
should give proper consideration to social justice and to other 
rights of the state. 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE CONSTITUTION 



157 



“I want to say, however, that, as this draft is made, we 
have taken care of that social justice, part of the Constitu- 
tion providing in Article 13, sections 9 and 10, tliat it shall 
. be the duty of the legislature to give special protection and 
consideration to labor problems, to child labor, to labor and 
capital, to landlords and tenants. We are socializing and 
nationalizing many things that are incorporated here; and 
I want to say that under this Constitution, under this pro- 
vision, in \dew of the collateral pro\dsions, that decision of 
the Supreme Court (regarding pregnant women), I think, 
cannot any longer stand because under this draft it will be 
perfectly proper, even under due process of law and equal 
protection of the laws, for the legislature to enact legisla- 
tion calculated to protect the interest of labor and solve the 
problems involving lands and tenancy and the like ” 

The question regarding the constitutionality of laws 
prohibiting the employment of aliens in factories was pres- 
ented squarely in the following portions of the debates: 

**Delegatc J. Perez , — Would the law which would pro- 
hibit the employment of aliens in any factory or establish- 
ment be valid under the clause that no person shall be de- 
prived of the equal protection of the laws? 

**Delegate Laurel, — That might be also a subject of legis- 
lation. Now, there are certain fundamental rights. You will 
obseiwe, Mr. Delegate, that the law refers to persons — ^no 
person shall be deprived of his life, liberty, and property — 
because the right to life, liberty, and property and other 
protection of our laws is not aimed exclusively at our citi- 
zens, because, as I stated to you, not only our citizens are 
protected, but the foreigners are also protected in their 
rights. 

‘‘Now of course, right here in this draft, we are discri- 
minating on a certain fundamental question against for- 
eigners. And we are not doing that for the first time. 

We have been doing that from the start. Foreigners cannot 
vote because they lack political attachment. We discrimi- 
nate right now, even without that provision in this law. 
Foreigners cannot own or purchase public lands. So 
that... we are discriminating against foreigners in the ex- 
ercise of political and civil rights. Nobody has raised a 
question as regards the constitutionality of such a provision 
enacted here by Congress or by our own Legislature. And 
right here, as I have said, we have provided for the conser- 
vation of our natural resources as one of the fundamental 
philosophies of the draft of the Constitution. 



158 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



“Delegate Perez . — The gentleman, I think, has stated 
that there is jurisdiction on this subject. Has he not gone 
over In re Case 116 Pacific 1037; Blake v. McLung, 172 
U. S. 239; Sully vs. American National Bank, 178 U. S. 
289, decided by the Supreme Court of the United States, 
declaring that such a law would not be constitutional be- 
cause it would be a violation of the law which provides 
that no person shall be denied the equal protection of the 
laws? If we incorporate it in this Constitution, our Leg- 
islature. cannot pass a law which w'ould prohibit the em- 
ployment of aliens in factories and establishments. 

“Delegate Laurel . — It will be a matter of interpretation. 
I suppose, Mr. President, that we will not be necessarily 
bound by the decisions of the state courts. (It) is a matter of 
policy for the courts to be guided by the national policy 
which is outlined and given by the Legislature... That is 
to say our courts are not supposed to interpret the law 
blindly; but they are supposed to be necessarily obliged by 
the philosophy of this Constitution which we adopt. And 
the legislature will, it is expected, enact laws in harmony 
with the tendency and with the philosophy of this Consti- 
tution. . . . 



“Delegate Perez . — Does the gentleman mean to say that, 
in interpreting these laws which we have borrowed from 
the federal constitution, we may destroy the jurisprudence 
in the United States in cases of this nature? 

'Delegate Laurel . — Our Constitution may not only des- 
troy, but it may lay down doctrines which are adapted to the 
needs, traditions, and idiosyncracies of our people. But not- 
withstanding the .facts that we have borrowed these provi- 
sions from the United States, we are not bound necessarily 
by the interpretation that they have given.'' 

. In the course of the debates Delegate Laurel was also 
interpellated by Delegate Santos, regarding the effect of 
the provision on labor legislation. 



“Delegate Santos. — For an information. Does the 
gent eman believe that this provision will not be an obstacle 

^ ^ ®^slation or such laws intended for the protection 
of labor?. 



Delegate LaureL — It will not be an obstacle." 

In view of the explanations of Delegate Laurel, believed 
faithfully by the delegates of the Convention, of the fact 
that notwithstanding the presence of the provision, nor 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE CONSTITUTION 



159 



shall any person be denied the equal protection of the laws, 
owing to the pi-esence of collateral and nationalistic pro- 
visions regarding the protection of women and minor labor- 
ers it would be constitutional for the legislature to pass the 
social measures declared unconstitutional by American and 
Philippine courts for being in violation of the equal pro- 
tection of the laws provision, the Convention voted to i-eject 
the Araneta amendment by 70 votes against 48 votes in 
favor and to maintain the provision of the draft. 

The Right of Eminent Domain.— The Philippine Con- 
stitution I'eads: 



"Private property shall not be taken for public use 
without just compensation." 

This provision, embodied in the report of the com- 
mittee on bill of rights and incorporated in fhe first 
draft of the Constitution, was bori'owed from the Jones 
Law. There were amendments proposed for this pro- 
vision — that by Delegate Diez requiring previous pay- 
ment, and that by Delegate J. Perez requiring previous as- 
sessment and tender — amendments inspired by the sad ex- 
perience of many people in the past whose property had 
been expropriated ; but the amendments were, after heated 
debates, defeated because the Convention believed that it 
was better to keep intact the phraseology and the spirit of 
the provision of the Jones Law in order not to offer diffi- 
culties to the government in case of necessity. 

Security Against Unreasonable Searches^ etc. The 

Philippine Constitution reads: 





"The right of the people to be secure in their persons, 
houses, papers, and effects against unreasonable searches 
and seizures shall not be violated, and no warrants shall 
issue but upon probable cause, to be determined by the 
judge after examination under oath or affirmation of the 
complainant and the witnesses he may produce, and partic- 
ularly describing the place to be searched, and. the persons 
or things to be seized.” 



The. provision of the Jones Law regarding security 
against unreasonable searches has been clarified by the 



160 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



K- 



adoption of the phraseology of the American Constitution. 
As thus clarified, it read: 

“The right of the people to be secure in their persons, 
houses, papers, and effects against unreasonable searches 
and seizures shall not be violated, and no warrants shall 
issue but upon probable cause, supported by oath or af- 
firmation, and particularly describing the place to be 
searched, and the persons or things to be seized.” 

This change in phraseology, recommended by the conunit- 
tee on bill of rights and embodied in the first draft of the 
Constitution, was readily approved by the Convention. 

During the debates on the draft. Delegate Francisco 
proposed an amendment which was Adopted by the Conven- 
tion, the amendment being the insertion of the words, to 
he determined by the judge after examination under oath 
or affirmation of the complainant (und the witnesses he 
may produce. The idea in the Francisco amendment was 
not new in the Philippines ; for it was provided for in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure of the Philippines. The dig- 
nification of the idea into a constitutional provision was 
zealously insisted upon, in order to make the principle more 
sacred to the judges and to prosecuting officials. The 
amendment was intended to be a remedy for the evils 
pointed out in the debates, caused by the issuance of search 
warrants, many of which were in blank, upon mere affida- 
vits on facts most of which were generally found after- 
wards to be false. 



An amendment presented by Delegate Arellano requir- 
ing the examination to be reduced in writing was defeated, 
the Convention intending to leave to the National Assembly 
the authority to prescribe the conditions under which the 
examination should be in writing and when it should not 
be, in order to make the Constitution flexible. 

Liberty of Domicil. — The Philippine Constitution 
reads : 

“The liberty of abode and of changing the same within 
+V.O limits prescribed by law shall not be impaired.” 




1 ^ 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE CONSTITUTION 



161 



This is one of the hew provisions of the bill of rights, 
borrowed substantially from the Mnlolos Constitution and 
the Constitution of the Republic of Spain, although the idea 
had been deeply embedded in the jurisprudence of both the 
United States and the Philippines. It was included in the 
report of the committee on bill of rights and embodied 
in the first draft of the Constitution. It was readily ap- 
proved by the Convention as a provision serving to con- 
firm and strengthen an already existing right in Philip- 
pine jurisprudence. 

Privacy of Communication and Correspondence.— The 
Philippine Constitution reads: 

^ “The privacy of conxmunication and correspondence 

shall be inviolable except upon lawful order of the court or 
when public safety or order require otherwise.” 

^ Like the foregoing provision, this is a new ‘provision 
not found either in the Jones Law or in the American 
Constitution. It was borrowed from the Malolos Consti- 
tution and the constitutions of Spain, Italy, and Japan. 
Recommended by the committee on bill of rights, it was 
included in the first draft of the Constitution and was ap- 
proved readily by the Convention. As it was approved 
by the Convention on second reading, the provision read: 

“The privacy of communication and correspondence 
shall be inviolable except upon lawful order of the Court.” 

The special committee on style, however, added the 
clause, or xohen public safety or order require otherxoise, 
in order to protect the state against subversive propaganda 
against the government, coursed through the mail. This 
change was readily approved by the Convention. 

As it was thus finally approved, the provision read : 

“The privacy of communication and correspondence 
shall be inviolable except upon lawful order of the Court 
' or when public safety or order require otherwise.*’ 












h 






M 












> 





,*:i 



CHAPTER XIV 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE PHILIPPINE 
CONSTITUTION (Continued) 

The Libei'ty of Association. — The Philippine Constitu- 
tion reads: 

/ , “The right to form associations or societies for pur- 

fC . poses not contrary to lav? shall not be abridged.” 

' ^ *' 

This is one of the ^e\v provisions of our bill of rights, 

borrowed substantially fr^m the Malolos Constitution and 
the Constitution of the Republic of Spain. Although it had 
never been dignified into a constitutional provision in the 
Organic Acts of the Philippines, the right was deeply em- 
bedded in Philippine and American jurisprudence. 

The amendment presented by Delegate Ventenilla for 
the suppression of the phrase, for purposes not contray'y to 
law, was vigorously debated in the Convention, with Dele- 
(/ gates Roxas, Perfecto, and Godofredo Reyes arguing for it5 
suppression, and with Delegates Laurel, Kintanar, and 
Francisco defending its retention. 

The objection to the retention of the phrase, for pur- 
poses not contrary to kixv, was based upon the fact that 
it would be in effect defeating the very purpose of the 
provision because under it the legislature would have the 
power to define what should be the purposes of associations 
or societies and indirectly to lay down what associations 
or societies should be formed. The proponents of the re- 
tention of the phrase, particularly Delegate Laurel, said, 
however, that it was not the intention to vest” absolute 
power in the legislature to determine the purposes of asso- 
C’ ciations. Delegate Laurel emphasized the fact that the 
phrase, for purposes not contrary to laio, was equivalent to 
^ the limitations imposed hy the police potoer of the state; 

! in other words, that the phrase was inserted just to show 
s that the right of association guaranteed in the Constitu- 



164 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



tion was subject to the dominating police power of the 
state. He said that under this provision the legislature j[ 

would not have the absolute power to determine by law | 

what should be the purposes of associations or societies, 
holding others illegal, thereby consequently dictating what | 

associations or societies should be formed ; for in the first 
place, the law should be valid, so that when a proper case 
would be brought to the courts the question would be F 

whether or not the law was a proper exercise of the police | 

power of fhe state. He added that, although it was im- j 

plied in the Constitution, it was necessaiT to have the 
police power incorporated therein through the provision, to 
serve as a guide to citizens and other* residents in the for- ^ 

mation of associations or societies so that the government 
would Jre on e of law s and not of m en. 

The inclusion of the phrase, for purposes not contrary 
to law, was approved by 84 votes against 69 votes. 

Freedom of Religion. The Philippine Constitution 

reads : 

“No law shall be made respecting an establishment of 
religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof, and the 
I I f free exercise and enjoyment of religious profession and wor- 
ship, without discrimination or preference, shall forever be j 

allowed. No religious test shall be required for the exercise 
of civil or political rights.” 

This provision was borrowed from the Johes La^y. It ; 

was included in the report of the committee on bill of 
rights and incorporated in the first draft of the Constitu- 
tion. It was approved readily by the Convention. j 

The remaining part of the provision of the Jones Law * 

on religious freedom, reading: ' 

“No public money or property shall ever be appro- | 

priated, applied, donated, or used directly or indirectly, foi f 

the use, benefit, or support of any sect, church denomina- | 

tion, sectarian institution, or system of religion or for the ) 

use, benefit, or support of any priest, preacher, minister, ( 

or other religious teacher or dignitary as such” 

was, upon the recommendation of the committee on bill of | 

rights, transferred to the article on legislative department 



A 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE CONSTITUTION 



165 



of the first draft of the Constitution and, with certain 
amendments, approved readily by the Convention. 

Freedom of Speech, of the Press, and of Assembly. — 
The Philippine Constitution reads : 

I “No law shall be passed abridging the freedom of 

speech, or of the press, or the right of the people peaceably 
,, to assemble and petition the Government for redress of 
y grievances." 

This provision of the bill of rights was borrowed liter- 
ally from the Jones Law; the provision in the latter was 
in turn a copy of the corresponding pi'ovisions of Ameri- 
can constitutions. — - 

The provision, in its present phraseologj% was recom- 
mended by the committee on bill of rights for incorpora- 
tion in the first draft of the Constitution. But although 
it incorporated the portions referring to the freedom of 
speech or the right of the people peaceably to asse^nble 
and petition the Govemvment for redress of grievances, 
the sub-committee of seven, at the instance of President 
Recto, proposed the following provision for the liberty of 
the press: 

“There shall be no limitations to the freedom of the 
press except those required by good morals and public order. 
No publication shall be suppressed except by final decision 
of a competent court.” 

While some members of the sub-committee of seven 
and the sub-committee of technical advisers were going 
over the proposed provisions for the first di'aft of the 
Constitution, the proposed provision for the liberty of the 
press caught the attention of a press representative, who 
immediately brought the matter to the attention of the 
public through the columns of the press. That was before 
the release of the first draft of the Constitution and long 
before the debates on the bill of rights. 

The opposition to the provision for the press in the 
first draft of the Constitution was started by the Phil- 
ippine press. A symposium of opinions was conducted in 
the columns of several newspapers among which was the 



166 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



Philippines Herald, \vith many leading delegates partici- 
pating. The symposium brought to public attention the 
danger to the liberty of the press lurking in the proposed 
provision. The opposition was kept alive up to the period 
of the debates on the bill of rights. 

In its editorial for November 20, 1934, the Philippines 
Herald said: 

*'The precept now before the Constitutional Convention 
governing the freedom of the Press says: 

'There shall be no limitations to the freedom of the 
press except those required by good morals and public 
order. No publication shall be supressed except by final 
decision of a competent court/ 

“As far as the first sentence goes, no possible objection 
could be raised, but the second sentence gives room for very 
grave doubts. By stating that no publication shall be sup^ 
pressed^ the implication is that a publication may be sup- 
pressed. 

“The present organic act of the Philippines says nothing 
to that effect, so that the precept presented at the conven- 
tion would really introduce a new interpretation into the 
fundamental document of our laws. The Press has not 
known suppression to this day, but henceforth, if the new 
doctrine is adopted, a publication may be suppressed. 

“There is thus a serious threat against the freedom of 
written expression in this country and that is more than 
we have expected this Constitutional Convention to do. The 
courts would be given an arbitrary power they have not 
heretofore exercised, for not only would they be made to 
pass judgment on cases of libel but also order a publication 
to stop. 

“It is realized that there are publications that cor- 
rupt morals, and that there are sheets run by irresponsible 
individuals bent on poisoning the public mind. But we 
believe that, if a constitutional precept preventing such a 
kind of publications from pandering to the morbid tenden- 
cies of man is a necessity, the continued existence of the 
responsible! Press need not be endangered by a sweeping 

generalization.” 

As the debates on the bill of rights continued, the op- 
position among the delegates was gaining rapidly in 
strength. There was no attempt of any kind to check the 



m 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE CONSTITUTION 167 

tide of the opposition, not even by the members of the 
sub-committee of seven and the sub-committee of technical 
advisers, nor even by President Recto liimself. The 
strength of the opposition was so evident that when the 
Convention came to this part of the bill of i-ights, Pi-esident 
Recto, sensing the futility of defending it, suspended the 
session after having counselled the authors of amendments 
for the restoration of the Jones Law provision on the li- 
berty of the press to confer vdth Delegate Laurel, spon- 
sor of the bill of rights, regarding a provision for the li- 
berty of the press. 

When the session was resumed, the Convention ap- 
proved without debate the amendment for the substitution 
of the Jones Law provision on the liberty of the press, 
presented jointly by Delegates Abordo, Cabarroguis, Reyes, 
(J.), Ventenilla, Perez, (J.), Calleja, Confesor, Ventura, 
Maramara, Ocampo, Guzman, (B.), Diez, Nepomuceno, 
(R.), Araneta, Guzman, (Alejandro), Vinzons, and Juma- 
wan. 

The approval of the amendment was received with re- 
joicing, especially by the sector of the press. The Tribune, 
in its issue for November 24, 1934, said: 

“The press has not won a victory because the consti- 
tutional convention has decided to uphold the freedom of 
the press by writing this provision in the constitution: ‘No 

law shall be passed abridging the freedom of speech, or of 
the press, or the right of the people peaceably to assemble 
and petition the government for redress of gn^evances.^ 

^^The victory belongs to the constitutional assembly. It 
must have dawned upon that body that human liberty is too 
precious to sacrifice and often it is the press that has the 
intuition and courage to stand up for the cause of human 
liberty. 

‘‘Moreover, the constitutional provision just quoted is 
a historic statement of the principle therein postulated. 
hind it are cases upon cases decided by competent authori- 
ties, and in their decisions there is the nearest approach 
to certainty in law. 

“The proposal, which the convention turned down, giv- 
ing to executive authority an unlimited power to censor 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



•press, •was an expression more ot tear d pr?^‘0nan 
of any disbelief in its freedom. We must admit that at 
times that fear is not without justification. In t e ^ » 
of the irresponsible, or in the hands of those who o ey t eir 
masters in politics or in business, the freedom of t e presa 
is abused. But after all, the press is part of a scene arger 
than its ownership and its public, and such forces as ma e 
civilization self-corrective assert themselves to end su an 
abuse.” 




i 



CHAPTER XV 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE PHILIPPINE 
CONSTITUTION (Continued) 



Title of Nobility. — The Philippine Constitution reads: 




‘‘No law granting a title of nobility shall be enacted, 
and no person holding any office of profit or trust shall, 
without the consent of the National Assembly, accept any 
present, emolument, office, or title of any kind whatever 
from any foreign state.*' 






This provision of the bill of rights was taken from the 
Jones Law, the changes made being that the consent, in- 
stead of being given by the Congress of the United States, 
would be given by the National Assembly; and that the 
phrase, foreign state, was used instead of the old phrase, 
any king, queen, prince, or foreign state. The reason for 
the latter change was the fact that the term, foreign state. 



was a more comprehensive term, including king, queen, 
prince, or other officials. 



The provision was intended by the Convention to pro- 
hibit the acceptance by any officer of the Philippine gov- 
ernment without the consent of the National Assembly of 
any present, emolument, office, or title from any forei^i 
official, regardless of whether the latter would be acting in 
behalf of his own state or in his own. The question of 
whether or not any officer of the Philippine government 
may, without the consent of the National Assembly, accept 
any emolument, title, or office from a foreign official was 
presented squarely by Delegate Ricardo Nepomuceno in a 
proposed amendment to add to the provision the phrase, 
or officials. The pertinent portions of the records of the 
Convention were as follows: 

“Delegate Nepomuceno, R . — The object of this amend- 
ment is also to prevent any officer of the Philippine govern- 
ment from accepting any present or emolument from any 
official of any foreign government. It cannot be doubted 
that a present may be offered not only by the government of 



170 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



f. a foreign country itself but also by some official of that 

I, government not acting in an official capacity. We do not 

; wish our officers of government to accept or to yield to 

^ the temptation of accepting any bribe, present, or emolu- 

^ ment not only from any foreign government acting as such 

. but also from officers whether acting in an official capacity 

or not. 

"Delegate Laurel. — Mr. President, I am sorry that the 



Committee cannot accept it because that is practically cov- 
ered by the provisions of the Constitution.’’ 

The Nepomuceno amendment was disapproved on the 
strength of the statement of Delegate Laurel. 

May the consent be given subsequent to the acceptance 
of the present, emolument, or office? An amendment pres- 
ented by Delegate Toribio Perez requiring previous con- 
sent by the National Assembly was disapproved by the 
Convention without debate after his arguments in defense 
of the same. The defeat of the amendment was due more 
than any other thing else to the desire of the Convention to 
have the provision remain intact as it was in the draft. 

Non-Impairment of the Obligation of Contracts. — The 
Philippine Constitution reads: ^ 



“No law impairing the obligation of contracts shall be ^ 
passed.” 



i The provision of the bill of rights, borrowed from the 
Jones Law, was incorporated in the first draft of the Con- 
stitution from the report of the committee on bill of rights. 

It was one of the provisions of the bill of rights most 
vigorously debated in the Convention. 

During the general debates on the totality of the Con- 
stitution,, Delegate Locsin stressed the necessity of suppres- 
sing this provision. With Delegate Jesus Perez, he pres- 
ente'9 later an amendment to that effect. 

The amendment for suppression was defended by Dele- 
gates Locsin, Confesor, Perez, (J.), and I^utero; while the 
provision was defended by Delegates Nepomuceno, (R.), 
Labrador, Lopez, (V.), and Kapunan. 




I 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE CONSTITUTION 



171 



The arguments for suppression were based primarily 
upon the fact that the provision was considered tolbe a sur- 
/ plusage in the Constitution, the idea thereof being already 
included in the due process of l<iw phrase of the same; and 
that its suppression was necessary for the purpose of faci- 
litating legislation embodying the principle and spirit of 
social justice. 

Speaking for the suppression of the provision, Delegate 
Confesor said: 

‘‘The elimination of this clause is essential for the pur- 
pose of facilitating legislation involving the principle and 
spirit of social justice. If we maintain this paragraph un- 
der our bill of rights, we would be erecting a serious ob- 
stacle towards the enactment of legislation for the promo- 
tion of the welfare especially of the working class and of 
the small farmers. With this' clause in our Constitution, 
contracts between a laborer and employer may be effected 
whereby the employee or the laborer may be compelled to 
work for 18 hours a day for 30 centavos a day for his 
wages.” 

The proponents for retention insisted, however, that 
such a clause in the Constitution would make for stability, 
of business conditions in the Philippines. The arguments 
for retention were most lucidly presented by Delegate Ri- 
cardo Nepomuceno during the debates in the following por- 
tions of his speech: 

** . . Mr. President and gentlemen of the Convention, 
I stand firmly against destroying one of the strongest pil- 
lars in the Constitution of the rights and the interests Df 
the citizens of the Philippine government. I think that the 
suppression of that provision in the Constitution referring 
to the impairment of the obligation of contracts, instead of 
being a creative work, is a work destructive of the best in- 
terests of the Filipino people. The question is squarely pres- 
ented before this Assembly whether we should treat the 
obligations of contracts as a mere plaything or whether this 
Constitutional Assembly should stand on the proposition 
that the obligations of contracts have attached to them the 
spirit of sanctity. 

“The argument has been advanced here that, if this 
provision were retained in the Constitution, it would im- 
possibilitate the national legislature from passing socinl leg- 



172 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



islation. But I say, Mr. President, that such is not the 
case. The interests of the laboring classes, the welfare of 
those who are not well-to-do in this country, in case of ne- 
cessity, are covered and protected by the all-pervading po- 
lice power which affects all other provisions of the Federal 
Constitution as well as the Constitution that we are to ap- 
prove 

‘‘(It) is necessary to retain this provision in our Con- 
stitution for the stability of our conditions here precisely 
at this moment when we are about to launch in the danger- 
ous sea of world affairs, an infant republic or common- 
wealth, if you please. We should put all our interest in the 
building of a strong economic condition in this country. 
Capital should be invited and the individuals composing the 
citizenry of this country should know whenever they want 
to enter into business transactions just where they stand. 
They should know beforehand what their rights are, what 
their obligations are. If they know beforehand that what- 
ever obligations theyj have now or they expect from the 
other party to the contract, that whatever right the con- 
tract entered into may give them may some day without 
their consent and against their will be changed or abolished 
by the legislature, the citizens of this country will not be 
encouraged to launch into business enterprises which are to 
the interest of the Filipino people in general. I am very 
sure, Mr. President, that, while it may be true in very rare 
cases that laws passed by the legislature may be interpreted 
by the courts as unconstitutional because they impair the 
obligation of contracts, the situation may also arise when 
the legislature, if we suppress this provision, may instead 
pass legislation favoring not the poor people — the laboring 
class — that do not have the influence and power to ap- 
proach the legislature, but the groups of big business in- 
terests who have the money and influence to overwhelm the 
legislature. This constitutional provision is found in the 
Constitution of the United States. It has stood there for 
years. This constitutional provision is found in our Or- 
ganic Act, and it has stood there for more than a quarter 
of a century, and it has been found useful and effective to 
promote the general welfare and the interest of the inha- 
bitants of this land. Why, Mr. President, I ask, should a 
provision to that effect, should a provision which has been 
found to be salutary in its effects he removed now? What 
would the implication be, Mr. President, if this Con- 
stitutional provision would be suppressed from our Consti- 
tution? It is known all over the world that this constitu- 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE CONSTITUTION 



173 



tional provision is based on the principle of the sanctity of 
contracts. The implication, if this provision is eliminated, 
would be that the wise members of this Constitutional As- 
sembly have changed their minds, have turned their backs 
to the principle that contracts are sacred and that they now 
consider that the obligation of contracts may be played 
with by the legislature, may not even be respected by that 
body.” 

After the closing speech of Delegate Neponiuceno, the 
amendment for suppression was put to a nominal vote and 
defeated by 107 negative votes against 53 affirmative votes. 

Immediately after the defeat of the amendment for the 
suppression of the provision, Delegate Francisco presented 
an amendment adding to the provision the phrase, “except 
in the Imvful exercise of the police poiver or the poioer of 
eminent domain of the State.” 

The object of the amendment was to include the im- 
plied limitations upon this provision of the bill of rights 
as well as other provisions of the same, i-ecognized during 
the debates; in other words, to make it clear that it was 
subject to the exercise by the state of the police power and 
the power of eminent domain. 

Delegate Francisco invited the attention of the Con- 
vention to the fact that in the United States from which 
this clause was borrowed there were two theories I'egarding 
the clause about the impairment of the obligation of con- 
tracts. Accordir^-'to the first theory, the police power of 
the state was a*reserved power; that was to say, the state 
reserved to itself the power to promulgate whatever rules 
it might desire in the exercise of the police power even if 
such rules impaired the obligation of contracts. Accord- 
ing to the second theory, the constitutional provision that 
no law should be passed impairing the obligation of con- 
tracts should be interpreted as a restriction upon the police 
power of the state. He added ; 

'‘If we insert in the Constitution a precept in the sense 
that laws may be enacted which impair contractual obliga- 



174 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



tions if and when those laws have been dictated in the ex- 
ercise of the police power or in the exercise of the right of 
eminent domain, when the question arises whether a crisis 
or an emergency case may be remedied or not through a 
law dictated in the exercise of the police power, with this 
amendment inserted, the Legislature can very well see on 
consulting our Constitution, if it has really the power to 
dictate a law in that sense. And this amendment consti- 
tutes a juridical thing for our tribunals in deciding whether 
or not it is constitutional.’^ 

After analyzing cases in the United States involving 
the interpretation of the contract clause of American con- 
stitutions, including the recent case of Home Building and 
Loan Associations vs. John H. Blaisdell et al, he said: 

“And now, I ask, for our security when there wll 
emerge in the future great economic crises, is it not better 
that we have in the Constitution the exceptions which we 
believe this precept to contain in order that the Legislature 
may be able to guide itself by this limitation upon the 
contractual power and to dictate a law in the exercise of the 
police power? Don’t you believe that the presence of this 
in the Constitution would be the surest way juridically to 
solve conflicts between a law in the exercise of the police 
power and a law which impair.s contractual relations?” 

The amendment was opposed by Delegate Laurel and 
Briones. / 

Delegate Laurel argued that the police power was an 
all-pervading and overwhelming power to which the indi- 
vidual rights in the bill of rights were subjected and that 
the power of eminent domain of the state was understootl 
'to be inherent in the state. He said that the right of emi- 
nent domain and the police pov/er were always understood 
to be limitations upon the provision regarding the impair- 
ment of the obligation of contracts. 

In objecting to the amendment, Delegate Briones said 
that he wished our Constitution to have that flexibility 
which would permit its interpretation in accordance with 
the rhythm of the times and the progressive spirit of the 
same. He continued: 

“Mr. President, if we insert specially in this clause the 
exception which is proposed, we run the risk that later it 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE CONSTITUTION 



175 



be interpreted that we recognize the right of the police 
power only for this clause, for this particular precept of 
the Constitution, when that should not be the case. We 
who are for a liberal and progressive Constitution desire 
precisely that the police power of the State shall be supreme 
and shall apply not only to the question of contracts but 
to all the individual rights. Thence for me tiie wisdom of 
not inserting the exception in any special clause on individ- 
ual rights because in this manner the political and consti- 
tutional principle will be recognized that the police power 
is inherent in the State and can be so revised in exceptional 
cases as to suspend inclusively some individual rights when 
the exercise of those rights becomes markedly anti-social. I 
say that if we insert specially the right of the police power 
only for this clause, it could be interpreted later that we 
do not like the state, to exercise the right of the police 
power on the other individual rights. And this would be 
dangerous to the progressiveness and liberalism of our 
Constitution... I wish that this precept be maintained and 
left latent since after all in all civilized and modernly or- 
ganized countries the police power is recognized to be inhe- 
rent in the .State, the power which is reserved to the State... 
to protect the vital rights of the people in exceptional cir- 
cumstances.'' 

In the course of the interpellations, referring to the 
case of Home Building and Loan Association vs. John H. 
Blaisdell et ah, cited by Delegate Francisco, he said: 

‘‘The Supreme Court has only gathered the spirit whicn 
now animates the American nation, which is a liberal and 
progressive spirit. And I suppose that that is what is going 
to happen in our country. The interpretation of our Con- 
stitution will be in accordance with the spirit of our people. 
If our people would like to give it a liberal and progressive 
interpretation, it could be so. If our people would be re- 
actionary, the interpretation of our Constitution would be 
reactionary. But I insist in what I have said that the 
proposition of your honor, instead of extending it, limits the 
radius of our Constitution because in particularizing the 
exercise by the State of the police power in the particular 
case of contracts and obligations, it seems to me that we are 
excluding the exercise of this power in relation to the other 
rights. I say that this insertion would have the contrary 
effect because it could be interpreted by reactionary tribunals 
against the liberal spirit which we wish to stamp upon our 
Constitution." 



176 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



The Francisco amendment was defeated in view of the 
explanations of Delegate Laurel that^this right, like all 
other rights under the bill of rights, was subject to the 
all-pervading police power and the power of eminent do- 
main of the state, and of Delegate Briones that the inclu- 
sion of the amendment in this part of the bill of rights 
might be interpreted in the future to mean that the other 
rights were not subject to the same limitation and that 
its inclusion would impair the flexibility of the Constitu- 
tion. 

Non-Imprisonment for Debt or Non-payment of a Poll 
Tax. — The Philippine Constitution reads:— ^ 

“No person shall be imprisoned for debt or non-payment 
of a poll tax.” 

The first part of this provision, recommended by the 
committee on bill of rights and incorporated in the first 
draft of the Constitution, was borrowed from the Jones 
Law. The second part prohibiting imprisonment for non- 
payment of a poll tax, one of the new provisions in our bill 
of rights, was the result of the rather popular movement 
during the Convention days to abolish the cedula or poll 
tax in the Philippines. 

There had been several constitutional precepts intro- 
duced in the Convention prohibiting imprisonment for non- 
pasrment of taxes, including poll taxes. But the committee 
on bill of rights to which they had been referred purposely 
did not include a prohibition to this effect because, in the 
words of the committee, 

‘‘We are expected to emphasize in our proposed Consti- 
tution not only the rights but also the duties of Filipino 

citizens. One of these clear duties is the payment of taxes, 
and the extension of the constitutional provision to delin- 
quency in the payment of taxes would not be much of an 
encouragement in the performance of this primary duty of 
citizenship.^' 

In the first draft of the Constitution, this provision 
was, however, included by the sub-committee of seven. The 
provision of the first draft on this point read : 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE CONSTITUTION 



177 



“No person shall be imprisoned for debt or non-payment 
of taxes.” 

It was pointed out in the debates that the prohibition 
against imprisonment for non-payment of taxes was in- 
tended primarily, although indirectly, to prohibit imprison- 
ment because of the inability of a person to pay his poll 
tax. That was why, notwithstanding the brilliant de- 
fenses by Delegates Fx'ancisco and Marabut of the Fran- 
cisco-Lim-Reyes amendment for the suppi*ession of the 
pi'ohibition against imprisonment for non-payment of taxes 
on the ground that such a prohibition would in effect 
alyze the collection of taxes, the amendment was def^ted 
after the defense of the draft by Delegates Cuenco, Cua- 
dei*no, Santos, and Alejandro de Guzman. 

After the defeat of the Francisco-Lim-Rej’es amend- 
ment, Delegate Jesus Perez introduced another amendment 
making the phrase read, or non-paryment of or po 
taxes, reasoning out that the provision of the draft was 
rather broad because it included revenue and inheritance 
taxes. After a brief argument for his amendment by Dele- 
gate Perez, Delegate Lim presented another amendment so 
that the phrase would read, or non-payment of a poll tax. 
Having been accepted by Delegate Pei*ez, the amendment 
was submitted to the Convention without debate and was 
appi'oved by acclamation. Thus was pushed through the 
prohibition against imprisonment for the, non-payment of a 
poll tax, intended primarily to protect the poor man who 
could not really afford to pay a cedula tax and who under 
the laws then existing could be imprisoned for such a delin- 
quency. 

The La Vangtiardia, in its editorial for November 22, 
1934, praised the Convention for the passage of the consti- 
tutional provision. The editorial read: 

“That no citizen delinquent in the payment of a cedula 
tax will be imprisoned is already a constitutional precept. 
It is a very humane precept. In its social aspect, the tre- 
mendous revolution which wonderful mechanical inventions 
are producing in the economic structure of the people cause 
the workers, ousted from work by machinery, to lead a life 



178 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



gradually becoming more precarious, with a wage uncertain 
and insecure. 

‘‘He who collects from the funds of the State or has an 
income derived from property can easily comply with that 
obligation to pay a personal cedula tax and free himself from 
the danger of carrying on his forehead the opprobrious mark 
of a prisoner. But for the mass of workers gradually be- 
coming more bent down by the weight of machines, no. 

“But a tax is indispensable to every citizen who likes 
to live a civilized and free life, and it must be created. What 
is only desired is that it be stripped of that barbarous con- 
cept of the old servitude, and in this respect the Consti- 
tutional Assembly has shown vision in establishing consti- 
tutionally that no citizen should be imprisoned for delin- 
quency in the payment of a personal cedula tax.*’ 

The plan to abolish in the Constitution the poll tax, 
sponsored principally by Delegates Cuenco and Vicente 
Sotto of Cebu, could have easily succeeded had it not been 
for the opposition of the Convention President, expressed 
vigorously in the caucuses of the majority party, due to the 
fact that the cedula tax was one of the best sources of 
revenues and that it was unwise to abolish it until an equally 
satisfactory substitute for it could be found. In fact. Dele- 
gate Sotto had already secured during the first weeks of 
the Convention the signatures of more than one hundred 
delegates to his constitutional precept abolishing the cedula 
tax. 

Under this provision of the bill of rights, no person 
can be imprisoned for debt even if such debt has been con- 
tracted through fraud. Delegate Araneta proposed an 
amendment to make an exception in the case of debts con- 
tracted thx'ough fraud, making the draft of the provision 
as amended to read as follows : 

“No person shall be imprisoned for debt, unless the 
same has been conti’acted by fraud.” 

It was pointed out by Delegates Araneta and Sanchez 
in defense of the amendment that the remedies afforded 
by the penal code and the code of civil procedure of the 
Philippines were not sufficient for defrauded creditors. In 
opposition to the amendment. Delegate Laurel said that. 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE CONSTITUTION 



179 




although the proposed amendment was recognized in the 
California constitution, the majority of the states, includ- 
ing the Philippines, recognized the theoiy under which the 
prohibition against imprisonment for debt applied to debts 
contracted through fraud. In conclusion, he said: 

“The preference of the committee is to leave the law 
as it is — to prohibit imprisonment for debt even in caseo 
of fraud, following the decisions of the Supreme Court-— 
because, as I have said invariably and in all occasions, if 
there is a commission of fraud, the provisions of article 
534 of the revised penal code ^vill cover the case and the 
person guilty of the commission of fraud will be liable under 
the provisions of the penal code.’’ 



The Araneta amendment was consequently defeated by 
acclamation, with the Convention intending that the pi’ohi- 
bition against imprisonment for debt should mean what it 
had always meant in the Philippines — that it was equally 
applicable to debts conti*acted through fraud. 






Ex-post facto Law, Bilf of Attainder. — The Philippine 

/ Constitution reads 7. V ^ i 

*‘No cx post facto law. 'or bill of attainder shall be 
enacted.” 

This provision, incorporated in the first draft of the 
Constitution front the report of the committee on bill of 
rights, was borrowed from the Jones Law. Thei-e being 
no amendment, this provision of the first draft was ap- 
proved by the Convention without debate. 



Involuntary Seiwitude. — The Philippine Constitution 
reads : 

“No involuntary servitude in any form shall exist except 
as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have 
been duly convicted.” 

This provision was borrowed substantially from the 
Jones Law, It was incorporated in the first draft of the 
Constitution from the report of the committee on bill of 
rights. The expression, involuntary servitude in any foim, 
was intended to cover slavery and peonage. The proposed 
insertion during the debates of the word, slavei'y, was de- 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 







i 180 

; 

j feated in view of the following explanation by Delegate 

Laurel : 










“There are two reasons why we have eliminated the 
word, slavery, from the draft. In regard to slavery or in- 
voluntary servitude, the first reason is that slavery as an 
institution, as I have already stated, has never existed in 
the Philippine Islands. The word, servitude, is inserted in 
the draft because servitude is a more comprehensive term 
and includes slavery. Slavery and servitude mean the in- 
voluntary submission of a person to the will of another. 
Peonage is also a form of slavery. Peonage is also a volun- 
tary submission of the person to the will of another to pay 
his indebtedness; that is, a person is submitting himself 
to the will of his master because of his debt. So even dur- 
ing the Spanish revolution, involuntary servitude included 
not only slavery but any other form of slavery, like peonage. 
And this is the reason why the committee eliminated the 
word, slavery.*' 

The Writ of Habeas Corpus. — The Philippine Consti- 
tution reads: vW 

Y “The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not 

be suspended except in cases of invasion, insurrection, or 
rebellion, when the public safety requires it, in any of which 
events the same may be suspended wherever during such 
period the necessity for such suspension shall exist.” 

This provision was borrowed from the Jones Law. It 
was incorporated in the first draft of the Constitution upon 
the recommendation of the committee on bill of rights. 

During the debates on the first draft. Delegate Fran- 
cisco proposed an amendment inserting, as a fourth cause 
for the suspension of the writ of habeas corpus, imminent 
danger of the three causes included herein. When submitted 
to a vot e for the first time, the amendment was carried. 

After hi^motion for a reconsideration of the amend- 
ment w^as approved. Delegate Orense spoke against the 
amendment alleging that it would be dangerous to make 
imminent danger a ground for the suspension of the writ 
of JtO/O0(is coT'pics, In psirt, ho sd.id i 

I '^Gentlemen, this phrase is too ambiguous, and in the 

I hands of a President who believes himself more or less- a 



^ ^ • 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE CONSTITUTION 



sword 













dictator, it is extremely dangerous; it would 
with which he would behead us.” 

In defense of the amendment, Delegate Francisco 
pointed out that it was intended to make this part of the 
bill of rights confoi'm to that part of the draft giving the 
President the power to suspend the writ of kcibeas corptis 
also in the case of an imminent danger of invasion or re- 
bellion. When asked by Delegate Rafols if the phrase, 
imminent danger, might not be struck out from the cor- 
responding provision under the executive power instead, 
Delegate Fi’ancisco answered: 

“Outright, it is possible to eliminate the phrase, inuiii- 
nent danger thereof, in the page I have mentioned. But I 
say, going to the essence and referring exclusively to the 
necessity of including the words, of imminent danger of one 
or the other, I wish to say the follo\ving: that it should 
not be necessary that there exists a rebellion, insurrection, 
or invasion in order that habeas corptis may be suspende . 
It should be sufficient that there exists not a danger but an 
y/ imminent danger, and the word, imminent, should be main- 
tamedT~ When there exists an imminent danger, the State 
requires for its protection and for that of all the citizens 
the suspension of habeas corpz4S.” 

When put to a vote for the second time, the amend 






ment was defeated with 72 votes against and 56 votes m 
favor of the same. 




3 









1 



CHAPTER XVI 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE PHILIPPINE 
CONSTITUTION (Continued) 

Due Process of LaAv in Criminal Cases. — The Philip- 
pine Constitution reads : 

I “No person shall be held to answer for a criminal of- 

w? fense without due process of law.” 

This provision, borrowed from the Jon^s Law, was in- 
corporated in the first draft of the Constitution from the 
report of the committee on bill of rights. 

The amendment presented by Delegate Calleja for 
the suppression of this provision on the ground that it was 
superfluous, being already included in the due process clause 
of the Constitution, was defeated after a brief defense of 
the provision by Delegate Labrador. 

Bail. — The Philippine Constitution reads; 

“All persons shall before conviction be bailable by suf- 
"L ficient sureties, except those charged with capital offenses 

■ when evidence of gruilt is strong. Excessive bail shall not 

be required.” 

This provision was borrowed substantially from the 
Jones Law. It was incorporated both in the report of the 
committee on bill of rights and in the first draft of the 
Constitution. In the report and in the draft, the provision 
read : 

“All persons shall before conviction be bailable by suf- 
ficient sureties, except those^harged with capital offenses. . . 
Excessive bail shall not be required.” 

During the debates on the draft. Delegate Demetrio 
Encarnacion presented an amendment to strike out the 
phrase, except those charged tvith capital offenses, thereby 
making all persons accused of crime bailable before con- 
viction. Without debate, the amendment was defeated. 

After the defeat of the Encarnacion amendment. Dele- 
gate Francisco presented another amendment from which. 



184 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



was evolved by the special committee on style the part of 
the provision, token evidence of guilt is strong. The Fran- 
cisco amendment read as follows: 

except when the person is detained because of an 
accusation for a capital offense, and the proof is evident 
or the presumption of guilt vehement/' 

The Francisco amendment had its background in the 
alleged common practice of some prosecuting officials of 
prosecuting offendex’s for a crime more serious than what 
the proofs adduced — as murder instead of homicide — in 
view of the pi-inciple that a man chai’ged with murder could 
be convicted of homicide, but not vice-versa. Under the 
provision of the draft, it was sufficient to charge an of- 
fender with a capital offense to prevent him from being 
bailed out; under the amendment, it is necessary that the 
evidence of guilt be strong. It would not then be sufficient 
that the crime be labelled as a capital offense ; the ev idence 
of guilt must be strong, otheiwise the accused could still be 
bailSH^out. 



Put to a vote, the Francisco amendment was carried. 



reads : 



Av 



Rights of the Accused. — The Philippine Constitution 

‘^In all criminal prosecutions the accused shall be pre- 
sumed to b^e'innocent until the contrary is proved, and shall 
enjoy right to be heard by himself and counsel, to be 
informed of the nature and cause of the accusation against 
him, to have a speedy and public trml, to meet the witnesses 
face to face, and to have cbmpulsoi*y process to secure the 
attendance of witnesses in his behalf." 



This provision, with the exception of the first part, was 
borrowed substantially from the Jones Law. It was em- 
bodied in the report of the committee on bill of rights and 



in the first draft of the Constitution. 

The part of the provision. In all criminal prosecutiotis 
the accused shall be presumed to he innocent, was recom- 
mended in the report of the committee on bill of rights and 
incorporated in th*e first draft, as ‘‘presumption of inno- 
cence in criminal prosecutions is the starting point in our 




THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE CONSTITUTION 185 

system of criminal procedure.” This provision was adopted 
without debate by the Convention. 

The part of the provision, shxill enjoy the right to be 
heard by himself and counsel, was sought to be amended 
by Delegate Francisco so that it should read, shall enjoy 
the right to be hoard by himself, except in cases where he 
voluntarily absents himself. It was argued in defense of 
the amendment that it was necessary for the speedy admin- 
istration of justice. The amendment was, however, de- 
feated on the ground that it would destroy the accusatorial 
system and that the Convention belieN^ed that it was a mat- 
ter that should be left to ordinaiy legislation. 

An amendment by Delegate Clarin to the provision rel- 
ative to the right of the accused to meet the witnesses face 
to face, denying the right m those cases in xvhich a person 
having died as a conseqtience of a crime made an ante- 
mortem declaration in relation with its perpetiation 
an exception already implied from this provision of the 
American constitution — was likewise defeated on the 
ground that it was an exception already deeply embedded 
in our understanding of this provision of the Organic Acts 
of the Philippines. 

An amendment by Delegate Zavalla to include the right 
to appeal in all cases was defeated because the Convention 
felt that it would be better to leave the matter for the Na- 
tional Assembly to decide in order to give flexibility to the 
Constitution. 

One of the most vigorously debated points on the rights 
of the accused was the proposition sponsored by Delegate 
Arellano later taken up in the amendment by Delegate Ca- 
lleja which read as follows: 

“The accused shall not be compelled to testify against 
himself, and his confession or admission shall not be ad^ 
mitted as evidence unless made in open court during the 
trial of the case.’' 

The amendment was one of the propositions intended 
to insure the establishment of social justice. It was al- 




186 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



leged that such a provision in the Constitution would do 
away witli the practice of using third degree methods in 
securing evidence for the prosecution of the accused. Dur- 
ing the interpellations, there emerged some doubt as to the 
wisdom of including the term admissions. The amendment 
was defeated because the Convention felt that it was a mat- 
ter that demanded more study. It was felt that there 
would be cases where admissions or confessions should be 
admissible and cases where they should not be; and that 
consequently the matter should better be left to legislation. 

Ibid. — The Philippine Constitution reads: 

“No person shall be compelled to be a witness against 
himself.” 

Under the Jones Law as well as in the report of the 
committee on bill of rights and in the first draft of the 
Constitution, the provision applicable to the accused read 
only : 

No person for the same offense shall be twee put in 
jeopardy of punishment, nor shall he be compelled in any 
criminal case to be a witness against himself.” 

The provision of the Constitution as it reads was an 
amendment to the draft, presented by Delegate Lim, so that 
it would apply not only to the accused but also to witnesses 
or other persons in criminal cases. 

Fines and Punishments. — The Philippine Constitution 

TV 

A • \ Excessive fines shall not be imposed, nor cruel and 

unusual punishment inflicted.” 

This provision, borrowed from the Jones Law, was re- 
commended in the report of the committee on bill of rights 
and included in the first draft of the Constitution. 

An amendment by Delegate Rafols to prohibit the im- 
position of fines altogether was defeated after a brief de- 
bate. 

Double Jeopardy — The Philippine Constitution I'eads: 

“No person shall be twice put in jeopardy of punish- 
ment for the same offense, /ff an act is punished by a law 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OP THE CONSTITUTION 



187 



and an ordinance, conviction or acquittal under either shall 
constitute a bar to another prosecution for the same act.” 

/ The first part of the provision was borrowed from the 
V Jones Law. The second part of this provision is one of 
the new provisions of the bill of rights, intended clearly 
and expressly to reverse the doctrine set down by the 
Supreme Court of the PhiTippines in sevei*al cases to the 
effect that if an act was punished by a general law and also 
by a municipal ordinance, the accused might be prosecuted 
under both the general law and the ordinance on the ground 
that there were two offenses — one against the State and 
the other against the municipality. 

The idea in the second part of the provision originated 
in the committee on bill of rights from Delegate Demetrio 
Encarnacion and was incorporated in the report of the com- 
mittee in the provision, 

“No person for the same offense shall in any case be 
twice put in jeopardy of punishment/' 
the phrase, in any case, having been inserted to prohibit a 
second prosecution under a municipal ordinance after con- 
viction or acquittal under a general law or vice-versa. 

During the debates on the bill of rights. Delegate Fran- 
cisco presented an amendment embodying the same idea, 
the amendment reading as follows : 

“If an act is punished by a general law as well as by 
a municipal ordinance, an acquittal or conviction under one 
shall be a bar to a further prosecution under the other.” 

The amendment was defended by Delegates Francisco 
and Laurel. Speaking in its defense. Delegate Francisco 
in part said, 

“What I am saying is that, if the State chooses to ac- 
cuse that person under a general law, this same State under 
a special law cannot accuse him again because the munici- 
pality is just a dependency of the State. Here with us, the 
municipality is just a part of the State, so that the State 
has a jurisdiction which we may call concurrent. What I 
should not like is that, after having been accused under an 
ordinance, still with the same facts and with the same evi- 



188 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



dence, he will be accused again under a general law — a fact 
which I consider unjust and cruel.” 

Delegate Rafols opposed it on the ground that it was 
conducive to discrimination and injustice. 

When put to a vote, the amendment was carried by 60 
votes in its favor with 51 votes against it. 

The provision includes resolutions of the provincial 
board. That was the reason why the special committee on 
style omitted the word, general, retaining only the word, 
law. 

The word, acquittal, embraced dismissals having the ef- 
fect of acquittals. This was taken up in the following part 
of the proceedings: 

**Delegate Joven, — Would the gentleman be willing to 
include also the word, dismissal, so that the amendment he 
proposes would be: the acquittal, dismissal or conviction of 
the case? 

**Delegate Francisco. — I have my doubts because there 
can be a dismissal for lack of jurisdiction of the court over 
the case, although in this case I understand that there is no 
jeopardy. 

**Delegate Joven. — That is, in case of dismissal jeopardy 
would attach as in one of the cases decided by the Supreme 
Court, penned by Justice Abad Santos. It was held that 
there will be jeopardy here in case dismissal is asked by 
the prosecution against the consent of the accused before 
the court. In that case, would not the gentleman include 
it under his proposed precept? 

*Delega,te Francisco. — I am not informed of that doctrine 
of the Court, but if a dismissal has the effect of an acquittal 
in the sense that the court has acquitted {the accused) after 
having heard the evidence, I believe that there is no differ- 
ence between a dismissal and an acquittal in that particular 
case.” 

Where an act constitutes two offenses punishable by 
different provisions of the law, may the acquittal or convic- 
tion in one be a bar to another prosecution for the same 
act? This point was brought out during the debates in the 
course of an interpellation directed to the -ponente by Dele- 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE CONSTITUTION 



189 



gate Joven. The pertinent portions of the i-ecords are as 
follows : 

“Delegate Joven . — But how about a case where an act 
constitutes two offenses, or where an act is punishable by 
different provisions-, of law? For example, a person is alleged 
to have a fraudulent return with the internal revenue.. Now, 
he commits a violation of the internal revenue law and he 
also commits a violation of the penal code. . . m the sense 
that he commits a falsification of a public document. He is 
prosecuted under the internal revenue law and he is acquitted. 
Here comes the fiscal and presents a case for falsification 
of a public document. What would the gentleman say about 
tl*lG CflSG? 

“Delegate Laurel.— Mv. President, that has practically 
been brought up here because some of our delegates suggeste 
that the word, act, be incorporated which would give rise 
to difficulties because one act may constitute different of- 
fenses. But when we retain the word, offense, (in the firs 
draft), there will be distinct offenses, and consequently (it 
is) desirable here to retain what is stated in the draft, that 

is, the word, offense; but as I said... if we accept in prin- 
ciple the fact that no person shall be prosecuted twice for 
violation of a general offense, I think that if you give lati- 
tude to the committee as to the form of expression, we shall 
be able to arrive at that point where we can present a proper 
precept embodying the idea that we shall approve in prin- 
ciple only. I am not in a position to say whether it would 
be advisable to retain it; I do not know whether it would be 
advisable to insert the world, act, because an act may consti- 
tute several offenses. It seems to me that it is for the com- 
mittee to study properly the draft and recommend what it 
thinks best... Well, my suggestion is that we approve in 
principle that a person may not be prosecuted twice in a 
case where there are two laws: one general law and one 
municipal ordinance. That is the idea, the primary idea, and 
that is our recommendation. Now as to how we should word 

it, whether we should retain the draft as it is or we shall 
modify or amplify that and then incorporate the amendment 
suggested by Delegate Francisco, I think it is just a matter 
of style and can be entirely left to the committee on style." 

In the event that, while the case of the accused is 
pending in the court of first instance for the violation of a 
general law punishing an act, the accused goes to the jus- 
tice of the peace court, manages to be accused, and then 



190 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



pleads guilty to the charge for the violation of an ordinance 
punishing the same act, would the proceedings in the court 
of first instance be considered as ipso facto terminated? It 
seems that this point was not definitely decided in the de- 
bates in the Convention. This question was propounded by 
Delegate Rafols upon Delegate Laurel, the part of the re- 
cords being as follows : 

^‘Delegate Rafols. — I shall cite you another case. One is 
accused in the court of first instance of violating the gam- 
bling law. He goes to the court and there the defense pre- 
sents evidence and reasons. The accused, knowing that he is 
going to be convicted, goes to the municipality to request 
the chief of police to prosecute him before the justice of 
the peace for violating the municipal ordinance, and there 
pleads guilty. Now, I ask this fact: will the proceedings of 
the court of first instance be annulled? 

*^Delegate Laurel. — The proceedings of the court of first 
instance cannot be annulled because it is the court of first 
instance which has already acquired jurisdiction over the 
case. 

*^Delegate Rafols. — But the accused has not yet been con- 
victed, and, in the justice of the peace court, he pleads 
guilty and pays the fine corresponding to the violation of the 
municipal ordinance. 

‘^Delegaie Laurel. — If that principle is accepted, that 
principle ought to continue in the court of first instance. 

** Delegate Rafols. — According to the penal precept, one 
cannot be convicted twice in the court of first instance. 

Delegate Laurel. — The case having become one of jeo- 
pardy, it cannot be permitted that he be prosecuted again 
for violating the municipal ordinance. 

**Delegaie Rafols. — The precept only prohibits that he be 
convicted twice either for a violation of a municipal ordi- 
nance or for a violation of a law. 

**Delegate Laurel — By jeopardy is ineanr placing one 
twice in danger of being punished. It does not refer to any 
condition. Your Honor knows that in the jurisprudence of the 
Supreme Court there are specified the conditions under which 
a person is placed in jeopardy — the filing of an information 
and the declaration by a witness. These are the provisions 
fixed by jurisprudence in order that one may be declared to 
be in jeopardy. Now, in the case set forth by your Honor, 
you affirmatively answer that it is under the conditions 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE CONSTITUTION 



191 



specified by the Supreme Court. It will not be permitted 
that he be prosecuted again.” 

"The Prcsidc 7 it . — The time of the speaker has expired.” 

An amendment was proposed by Delegate Barrion to 
modify the meaning of the word, jcopa^rdy, in such a way 
that, before the judgment of the lower court became final, 
an appeal to the higher court could be permitted. The pro- 
vision as amended by Delegate Barrion \\ould then isad as 
follows : 

"No person shall be twice put in jeopardy of punish- 
ment for an offense upon which a final judgment has been, 
rendered.'* 

In explaining his amendment. Delegate Barrion stated 
that he was reaffirming the doctrine of jeopardy , only thai. 
he was suggesting that the Convention should give its own 
meaning of the term, jeopardy, so that the government, like 
the accused, should be giyen an opportunity to appeal a 
case from the decision of the trial court before the sentence 
would become final. Delegate Barrion said: 

“I consider, gentlemen, that an appeal against an ac- 
quitting decision should not be considered jeopardy because 
the decision has not as yet become final. It can be con- 
sidered jeopardy only if that sentence has become final. 1 
mean to say if the sentence has been appealed to and con- 
firmed by the Supreme Court or if the period fixed by the 
law for the appeal has already expired. 

“We know, gentlemen, that we have sad cases in w’hiclt 
the offended party come almost weeping because the accused 
has been acquitted, and the fiscal and the offended party 
do not understand why he has been acquitted, leaving them 
no more recourse. The judge is human, has his prejudices; 
he may err. But if we givq to the offended party the same 
right that the accused has in order that the decision of the 
trial judge may be review'ed by a more competent authority, 
the Supreme Court, then we shall have given satisfaction to 
the offended party.” 

Without any speech against it, the proposed amend- 
ment was defeated when put to a vote. The Convention 
consequently brought to the Constitution the meanings which 
the jeopardy provision had under the Jones Law. 



192 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



During the debates on this part of the bill of rights, 
Delegate Francisco proposed to institute here the principle 
of declaratory judgments in the Supreme Court. He pro- 
posed an amendment to that effect, which was veiy heatedly 
debated too, the amendment reading as follows: 

“But an appeal shall be allowed the people of the Philip* 
pine Islands on questions of law; provided that a verdict in 
favor of the defendant shall not be set aside by reason 
thereof.” 

The idea of the amendment as explained by the pro- 
ponent was not to place the accused in double jeopardy; 
for once acquitted in the court of first instance, he could 
not be tried again. It was to have the question of law 
passed upon by the Supreme Coui*t, for a ruling of law for 
the guidance of the courts or of citizens in subsequent cases 
of a similar nature. In the course of the defense, after 
citing the case of a judge of the Court of Fix’st Instance of 
Manila who acquitted a person accused of the falsification 
of sweepstake tickets on the ground that the sweepstake 
law was illegal, he continued : 

“But with this amendment, the fiscal, the government, 
or the people of the Philippine Islands will be permitted to 
appeal only for the purpose of obtaining a ruling, a doctrine, 
because as I have already said, unless an appeal be permit- 
ted in order to obtain a new doctrine, as long as the judge 
remains in the province, all cases of the same nature will 
necessarily be decided in favor of the accused; so that the 
whole object of this amendment is to make possible an ap- 
peal in those cases in which the acquittal of the accused 
has been based on a question of law, only to secure a 
ruling from the Supreme Court over that question of law, 
which ruling will serve as a norm in the other cases, with- 
out violating the right of the accused not to be placed in 
jeopardy/^ 

The amendment was opposed by Delegate Sevilla, who 
contended that the case in the Supreme Court would be one- 
sided; by Delegate Rafols, who said that the judge would 
find himself busily defending his decisions in the Supreme 
Court rather than studying cases before him ; by Delegate 
Vicente Singson Encarnacion, who pointed out that in the 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE CONSTITUTION 



193 



event that the Supreme Court would decide against the 
judge, although the defendant had been acquitted, this de- 
cision of the Supreme Court would opei*ate as a moral pun- 
ishment for him for it would appear that he was acquitted 
only by technicality of the law or by the wrong interpre- 
tation of the court. The arguments against the amendment 
were summarized by Delegate Gullas in concluding the de- 
bates as follows : 




“In the first place, it would tend to the multiplicity of 
suits. It would increase the burden of the Supreme Court. 
Second, it would be e.xpensive if we meet the fiscals who 
have an exaggerated opinion of themselves, who have more 
ego than gray matter in their heads or amor propio. In 
the third place, as it has been pointed out by a certain gen- 
tleman, it would convert the Supreme Court into a sort of 
academy or consulting body. In the fourth place, as pointed 
out by Mr. Sevilla, the fight in the Supreme Court will be 
one-sided. In the fifth place, as it was already pointed out 
by Delegate Labrador, this matter should be a procedural 
rather than a constitutional precept. And lastly, as was 
pointed out by Delegate Singson Encarnacion, in case the 
Supreme Court will reverse the judgment of the lower court, 
the defendant would be suffering morally through the rest 
of his life. He would be walking around with a veil of 
humiliation, carrying with him a stigma. 

Put to a vote, the amendment was defeated. 

Free Access to the Courts. — The Philippine Constitu- 



tion reads: 

“Free access to the courts shall not be denied to any 
person by reason of poverty.” ^ 

This provision is one of the new provisions of the 
Constitution. As a precept, it originated from the sub- 
committee of seven, which included it in the first draft of 
the Constitution as a good guiding principle. It was ap- 
proved readily by the Convention. 

Provisions of the Bill of Rights of the Jones Law Not 
Included in the Philippine Constitution. — Of the provisions 
of the bill of rights of the Jones Law, the following were 



not included in the Constitution : 

1. ‘^Nor shall the law of primogeniture ever be in force 
in the Philippine Islands/' 



194 FRAMING OP THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

2. “Contracting of polygamous or plural marriages 
hereafter is prohibited. That no law shall be construed to 
permit polygamous or plural marriages.” 

Neither in the report of the committee on bill of rights 
nor in the first draft of the Constitution was there included 
a prohibition against the enforcement of the law of primo- 
geniture in the Philippines. During the debates on the bill 
of rights, an amendment was presented by Delegates Abox- 
do, Flores, and Canonoy prohibiting the enforcement of the 
law of primogeniture. The amendment was defeated, how- 
ever, because in the words of Delegate Laurel in opposing 
the amendment, “the right of primogeniture has never been 
in existence in the Philippines and there is no danger for 
the legislature in enacting such an antiquated and foreign 
legislation in the future.” 

Although the report of the committee on bill of rights 
contained a prohibition that “polygamy is prohibited and 
no law shall be construed to permit polygamous or plural 
marriages,” the first draft of the Constitution was silent 
about the matter altogether. The amendment proposed by 
Delegate Mumar and others during the debates to include 
in the Constitution the prohibition was postponed to be 
considered along with the article on legislative power. It 
was never taken up again. 

Proposed Provisions for the Bill of Rights Approved 
on Second Reading by the Convention but Stmck Out by 
the Special Committee on Style. — The following proposed 
provisions for the bill of rights were approved by the Con- 
vention on second reading: 

!• “No law shall be passed authorizing the deportation 
or exile of any Filipino citizen beyond the territorial limits 
of the Philippine Islands.” (This was a constitutional 
precept presented by Delegate Ventura.) 

^ 2. “No law shall impose a tax retroactively.” (This 

was a constitutional p^^ecept presented by Delegate Araneta,) 

But in the special committee on style, they were elimi- 
nated from the final draft of the Constitution; the first, 
because it was considered unnecessary in view of the gener- 



THE BILL OF RIGHTS OF THE CONSTITUTION 



195 



ally accepted principle of Philippine political law that no 
Filipino citizen could be deported from the Philippines; the 
second, because it was belieN’ed that there might be cases 
in the future when such a tax might be considered neces- 
saiy. The elimination of these provisions was approved 
during the debates on the report of the special committee 
on style. 

Some Other Precepts Proposed for the Bill of Rights 
but Disapproved by the Convention. — Among the amend- 
ments to the first draft of the Constitution were the fol- 
lowing : 

1. “No person shall be punished with the penalty of 
death.” 

2. "The military authorities and forces of the Nation 
shall always be subordinated to the civil authorities.” 

The first was proposed by Delegate Lim. It was dis- 
approved because the Convention deemed it better to leave 
the matter to legislation, for there might be cases where 
the death penalty would be really necessary. The second 
was proposed by Delegate Araneta. It was disappioved 
because of the fact that, in normal times, the military 
authorities and forces of the Nation would always be sub- 
ordinated to the civil authorities. 



CHAPTER XVII 



CITIZENSHIP UNDER THE PHILIPPINE 
CONSTITUTION 

Sources. — The provisions of the article on citizenship 
of the Constitution wnere evolved from the reports of the 
committee on citizenship and naturalization, the sub-com- 
mittee of seven, and the special committee on stjde, and 
from the different constitutional precepts introduced on 
the floor of the Convention. These were in turn influenced 
by the article on citizenship of the Jones Law, the Consti- 
tution of the Republic of Spain, and Philippine judicial and 
legislative precedents on the matter. 

The Draft of the Convention Committee on Citizen- 
ship and Naturalization. — The committee on citizenship and 
naturalization of which Delegate Gregorio Perfecto was 
chairman submitted on August 29, 1934 an elaborate re- 
poi't on citizenship and naturalization. It pi'ovided in de- 
tails for the manner of acquiring Philippine citizenship; 
for the requirements to be complied with by those who 
would like to become natux-alized citizens of the Philippines ; 
and for the methods of expatriation and i*epatriafion. 

The First Draft of the Sul>-Committee of Seven.— The 
sub-committee of seven recommended in the first draft of 
the Constitution the following article on citizenship: 

‘‘Section 1. The follo\ving* are citizens of the Philip- 
pines : 

“(a) All persons who are Philippine citizens at the time 
of the adoption of this constitution, or may hereto- 
fore have held an elective post under the govem- 
* ment of the Philippines, and their descendahts; 

“(b) All persons who are naturalized in accordance with 
law, and their descendants. 

; “Section 2. Philippine citizenship may be lost or reac- 

quired in the manner provided by law. 

“Section 3. It shall be the duty of citizens to aid in 
the support of the state, promote its growth, and defend 



198 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

its honor and interest. Suffrage is a public duty which 
should be exercised by all those who are qualified under 
the law.” 

The Second Revised Draft of the Sub-Committee of 
Seven. — In view of the many amendments introduced to 
these provisions of the first draft of the Constitution since 
the draft was reported to the Convention on October 26, 
1934, the sub-committee of seven, immediately before the 
debates on this article by the Convention, prepared a re- 
vised draft which embraced what were considered to be 
the five doctrines embodied in the different amendments. 
The revised draft read as follows: 

“The following are citizens of the Philippine Islands: 

“(1) All persons who are Filipino citizens at the time 
of the adoption of this Constitution. 

“(2) All persons born in the Philippines or in foreign 
territory of a father or mother who is a citizen of the 
Philippines. 

“(3) All persons born in the Philippines of foreign pa- 
rents provided they adopt Philippine citizenship within one 
year after attaining legal age. 

“(4) Persons who, prior to the adoption of the consti- 
tution, had held an elective office under the government of 
the Philippines. 

‘*(5) All persons who may be naturalized as provided by 
law.'' 

Debates on the Aiiicle on Citizenship.— The debates 
on the article on citizenship took place on November 26, 
1934, with the revised draft presented to the Convention 
by Delegate Cuademo and sponsored jointly by him and 
Delegate Roxas, the latter assuming largely the burden of 
defending the provisions of the same. The different pre- 
cepts on citizenship approved on November 26, 1934 were 
presented to the Convention as an article on December 3, 
1934, with that body approving them without very much 
difficulty. 

The Draft as Approved on November 26, 1934 and 
December 3, 1934. — As it was thus approved, the article 
on citizenship read: 



CITIZENSHIP UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 



199 



'"Section 1. The following are citizens of the Philippines; 
"(1) All persons who are citizens of the Philippines at 
the time of the adoption of this Constitution. 

"(2) All persons born in the Philippines or in foreign 
territory whose father is a citizen of the Philippines. 

"(3) All persons born in the Philippines or in foreign 
territory, whose mother is a citizen of the Philippines if on 
reaching the age of majority, they elect Philippine citizen- 
ship. 

“(4) All persons who are naturalized in accordance with 

’ law. 

"Section 2. Philippine citizenship may be lost or reac- 
quired in the manner provided by law.’* 

The Draft of the Special Committee on Style which was 
Finally Appi-oved by the Convention. — ^The special commit- 
tee on style, in the final draft which it presented to the 
Convention, adopted substantially all the foregoing provi- 
sions, only making some alterations in their phraseology. 
It added, ho\vever, another provision which read as follows : 

"Those born in the Philippine Islands of foreign pa- 
rents who, before the adoption of this Constitution, had been 
elected to public office in the Philippine Islands.” 

The draft of the article as revised by the special com- 
mittee on style and as finally approved by the Convention 
read as follows: 

"ARTICLE IV.— CITIZENSHIP 
"Section 1. The following are citizens of the Philip- 
pines : 

"(1) Those who are citizens of the Philippine Islands at 
the time of the adoption of this Constitution. 

"(2) Those born in the Philippine Islands of foreign 
parents who, before the adoption of this Constitution, had 
been elected to public office in the Philippine Islands. 

"(3) Those whose fathers are citizens of the Philippines. 
"(4) Those whose mothers are citizens of the Philip- 
pines and, upon reaching the age of majority, elect Phil- 
ippine citizenship. 

"(5) Those who are naturalized in accordance with law. 
"Sec. 2. Philippine citizenship may be lost or reacquired 
in the manner provided by law.” 



200 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

The second pi’ovision was opposed by Delegates Rafols 
and Araneta during the consideration of the report of the 
special committee on style on February 7, 1935 because of 
the fact that it was more or less in the nature of a personal 
legislation. However, the Convention voted to retain the 
provision. 

Citizens under the Constitution. — In the following par- 
agraphs, the author will attempt to show the spirit and 
the philosophy of the provisions of the article on citizenship 
in the light of the deliberations of the Conventon. 

1 

“All 'persons who are Filipino citizens at the time of 
the adoption of this Constitution” 

Under this provision were intended to be included 
those who v,rere considered citizens by the provisions of the 
Jones Law and those who had been natui'alized here thru 
the application of foiTnal naturalization papers and thru 
marriage. Under the Jones Law, all inhabitante of the 
Philippine Islands who were Spanish subjects on the 11th 
day of April 1899, and then resided in said Islands, and 
their children bom subsequent thereto, should be deemed 
and held to be citizens of the Philippine Islands, except 
those natives of Spain who elected to preserve their alle- 
giance to the crown of Spain by making before a court of 
record in the Philippines within eighteen months from 
April 11, 1899 a declaration of their decision to preserve 
their allegiance; and those who had since become citizens 
of some other country. 

Under the naturalization law of the Philippines, by 
marriage, a foreign woman ipso facto acquii^ed the citizen- 
ship of her Filipino husband if she herself belonged to any 
of the races that could apply for naturalization in the Phil- 
ippines. The following persons were the only ones who 
could apply for naturalization: 

1. Natives of the Philippine Islands who were not citizens 
thereof under the provisions of the Jones Law. 



CITIZENSHIP UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 



201 



2. Natives of tha Insular possessions of the United States. 

3. Citizens of the United States residing in the Philippine 

Islands; and 

4. Other persons residing in the Philippine Islands who 
could become citizens of the United States under the 
laws of the United States if residing therein. 

There was an attempt on the part of some delegates 
to add to this provision the phrase, and their descendants, 
to make it similar to a corresponding provision in the first 
draft of the Constitution ; but the proposed amendment was 
not considered favorably in view of the fact that it was not 
intended to make of the children of Filipino naturalized 
citizens ipso facto citizens of the Philippines. This point 
was taken up in the following portions of the debates: 

*^Delegate Vinzons, — Mr. President, is there any inconve- 
nience on the part of the sub-committee to place in the last 
part the words, and their descendants? 

** Delegate Roxas, — Yes, because we consider that that 
is a question which should be considered separately. 

*^Delegate But if they are to be considered as 

Filipino citizens at the time of the adoption of the Constitu- 
tion, then naturally their descendants must be considered 
as Filipino citizens. 

^^Delegate Rox^as, — No, because one who has been natu- 
ralized before the adoption of the Constitution may have des^ 
cendants in China, in Germany, or in England who are ot 
legal age and have not been naturalized, and they shou 
not be considered Filipino citizens.’* 

Under this provision, are children born in the Philip- 
pines of foreign parents before the adoption of the Consti- 
tution Filipino citizens? The Convention did not intend 
that these children should be considered ipso facto Filipino 
citizens, thereby refusing to incorporate unconditionally the 
doctrine of jiis soli. In fact, as it will be shown later on, 
the Convention disapproved by a great majority a propo- 
sition to the effect that children born in the Philippines of 
foreign parents should be considered Philippine citizens if 
they elected Philippine citizenship on- reaching the age of 
majority. 




■■5 

I 







f. 







. .1 ' ..Jp.iir--' ^ 






202 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



The opposition to making of childi’en born in the Phil- 
ippines of foreign parents Philippine citizens was very ap- 
parent and \ery vehement even before the formal submis- 
sion of the revised draft of the article on citizenship of the 
sub-committee of seven. 

In view of this strong sentiment against the incorpora- 
tion of the doctrine of jus soli in its pure form, when the 
first proposition was submitted for the consideration of the 
Convention, Delegate Aruego tried to explain that, as it was 
worded, the proposition embodied the doctrine of jus soli 
with respect to children born in the Philippines prior to 
Constitution. He pointed out that by 
1 ippine judicial decisions citizenship might also be ac- 
quire y virtue of the doctrine of jits soli and that ac- 
cor y those born in the Philippines of foreign parents 
e ore e adoption of the Constitution were considered Fi- 

by virtue of the proposition pending 
nsi era ion, if approved, they would be considered as Fi- 
lipino citizens under the Constitution. 

Because of the apparent insistence of the Convention to 
^ proposition, in the course of the debates, De- 
e ruego through a series of interpellations tried to 
^ ^ aiification of the intent behind the proposition 
^ children of foreigners born in the Philip- 
f-iip r. adoption of the Constitution. These were 

the pertinent portions of the debates: 

— Mr. President, may I just have one 
thpf ' I ask Mr. Roxas if, under this proposition 

th children bom in the Philippines before 

e me o the adoption of the Constitution are included? 

-Koaias. — No, sir; that is to say, if they are 
zens accordance with the present law, they will be citi- 

• Afruego , — But as I said they are citizens by 

judicial decisions. 

Delegate Roxas, — -If they are citizens now by judicial 
decisions, they will be citizens. 

^'Delegate Aruego — I should like to make it clear that 
we are voting on the proposition so that it will include all 



CITIZENSHIP UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 



203 



those born in the Philippines, regardless of their parentage, 
because I have heard some objections here to the incor- 
poration in toto of the doctrine of jus soli. There are many 
who do not want to include, as citizens, children of Chinese 
parents, but they are included in the proposition that we 
are voting upon 

“I should like to find out from the gentleman from 
Capiz if that proposition would make Filipino citizens o 
children of Chinese parents born last year or this year. 

“Delegate Roxas. — No, because by the laws of ^^e Phil- 
ippine Islands, they are not Filipino citizens now. 

With respect to the same point. Delegate Buslon made 



some interpellations : 

“Delegate Btislon.—Wc. President, I would like to know 
if it is the intention of the sub-committee, under that Prin- 
ciple, to make Filipino citizens out of Japanese cm ° 

Japanese father and mother, who have been born m the 

Philippines. 

“Delegate Roxas . — No sir.” 



The majority of the delegates to the Convention were 
apparently under the impression that children born in the 
Philippines of foreign parents befoi-e the adoption of the 
Constitution were not ipso facto considered Filipino citi- 
zens; and it was under this impression that they voted 
for the approval of the first proposition. 

Under this provision, what would be the status of 
children born in the Philippines before the adoption of 
the Constitution of a Filipina mother and a foreign father? 
In the light of the debates on the proposition making child- 
ren born in the Philippines of foreign parents Filipino 
citizens if they elected Philippine citizenship on reaching 
the age of majority, the Convention apparently intended 
that they would not become ipso facto Filipino citizens 
unless they were born out of wedlock in which case they 
would follow the nationality of their mother. 



2 

“Those born in the Philippine Islands of foreign pa- 
rents who, before the adoption of this Constitution, had 
been elected to public office in the Philippine Islands.’* 



W4. 



204 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



This provision of the Constitution was included for 
the accommodation of Delegate Caram. Delegate Caram 
was born in the Philippines of Syrian parents. Before his 
election to the Convention, he was elected as a member of 
the provincial board of Iloilo. He had never been natu- 
ralized as a citizen of the Philippines. 

This provision was substantially included in the first 
draft of the Constitution and in the second revised draft 
of the article on citizenship prepared by the sub-committee 
of seven. 

In the debates on the revised draft of the article on 
citizenship on November 26, 1934, the provision was de- 
feated principally because it applied only to a few cases 
and because the fact was little known that it had been 
intended primarily to accommodate Delegate Caram. How- 
ever, in the special committee on style of which Delegate 
Caram was a member, the provision was again inserted in, 
the Constitution through the influence of Delegate Roxas 
and over the objection of some members of the same. 

When the Convention considered the report of the spo 
cial committee on style, there was a strong opposition 
against the re-insertion of the provision, the most insistent 
opponent being Delegate Araneta, who contended that the 
Constitution should not be made an instrument for taking 
care of special cases. The fact was then oi>enly announced 
hat this provision was intended for Delegate Caram. De- 
legate Caram worked very hard among the delegates for 
the approval of this provision to remove all doubts about 
his citizenship, which, according to him, had been raised 
in the course of his political campaigns. 

The provision was finally approved by the Conven- 
tion, the most persuasive argument that swayed the body 
to a decision being that which asserted that, should this 
provision be not approved, there would be the anomalous 
situation that the Constitution would be signed by one who 
was not a citizen of the Philippines, although there were 
some delegates who were of the opinion that, under Philip- 



CITIZENSHIP UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 



205 



pine jurisprudence, Delegate Caram was already a Filipino 
citizen. 

3 

“Those whose fathers are citizens of the Philippitves.” 

Through this provision, the doctrine of jns sanguinis 
was adopted. Children bom in the Philippines or abroad 
of fathers who are citizens of the Philippines are Filipino 
citizens. 

The National Assembly, so the Convention intended, 
would not have the power to prescribe conditions for the 
acquisition of citizenship by these children although i 
might pass laws regarding the loss of citizenship. 

During the debates on this provision. Delegate Laurel 
presented an amendment empowering the National s- 
sembly to prescribe conditions for the acquisition of ci i- 
zenship by children born abroad of fathers who were citi- 
zens of the Philippines. He proposed to add to the pro- 
vision the phrase, subject to such limitations as may oe 
prescribed by 'the National Assembly. Reasoning out his 
amendment. Delegate Laurel, in part said: 

“Under the precept announced by Delegate Roxas 
(Those whose fathers are citizeTis of the Philippines are 
Filipino citizens )t a person born in Germany whose father 
is a Filipino citizen although of German blood would be a 
* Filipino citizen. Now I say, * subject to siich limitations as 

may be prescribed by the National Assembly* for this rea- 
son. That boy born in Germany may never come to the 
Philippine Islands at all. Upon reaching, let us say, the 
age of majority, of 21, he comes here and he is a Filipino 
citizen without having resided in the Philippine Islands and 
without knowing our institutions and our regulations, and 
may be appointed fiscal or may hold public office. Now, 
if we insert that provision, although it may be understood, 
our National Assembly may provide that that boy is sub- 
ject to certain requirements as to residence; that, before 
he can be a Filipino citizen, or before he can hold public 
office, before he shall be allowed to enjoy the privileges and 
immunities of citizenship, he must have resided, let us say, 
five, one or two years. 



206 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

insist upon my amendment in order that the Leg- 
islature may not be tied later on, so that in this case 
brought out by me, he is not nor could he be considered a 
Filipino citizen because he has not been here notwithstand- 
ing the fact that he was bom abroad of a Filipino father.** 

But the amendment was vigorously objected to and was 
finally disapproved because it was felt that there should be 
no distinction to be made between Filipinos by law and Fili- 
pinos by blood. It was insisted that either a person should 
be considered a Filipino citizen or he should not be. Once 
considered a Filipino citizen, he should be ipso facto a Fili- 
pino citizen, with all the attendant privileges of citizen- 
ship. To permit the National Assembly to prescribe condi- 
tions or regulate the acquisition of citizenship by those 
considered by law to be Filipino citizens would lead, it was 
^ pernicious consequences. The opposition was 
e by Delegates Araneta and Briones. Delegate Araneta 
said in part: 

"I believe that the amendment of the Delegate from 
Batangas, Mr. Laurel, has brought out a fundamental ques- 
tion worthy of a matured study on our part. I understand 
that one is a Filipino either by the mandate of the Consti- 
tution or by the mandate of the law. By the mandate of 
f e Constitution we have just defined that he is a Fili- 
pino who is one at the time of the approval of the Consti- 
ution. The second proposition which is submitted is to 
e effect that, by the mandate of the Constitution, the son 
^ Filipino. Now comes the amendment of 

e delegate from Batangas, Mr. Laurel, which states the 
^ the mandate of the Constitution, the son of 

^ 1 ipino is a Filipino, subject to the conditions prescribed 

y aw; that is to say, that while the Constitution gives him 
e right to be a Filipino, by the law he is denied or can 
be demed this right. 

The delegate from Batangas, Mr. Laurel, reasons out 
is amendment, saying that it might happen that Filipinos 
by law may not be so, however, because of their blood, for 
being children of foreigners, and for this reason it is nec- 
essary to provide that such children are not Filipinos. I 
believe that we ought not to place distinctions where the 
law does not. If one is already a Filipino, we should not 
ask whether or not he is of Filipino blood. After we have 



CITIZENSHIP UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 



207 



brought him into our nationality and if he fulfills all the 
conditions for being a Filipino and after we have accepted 
him as such, I believe that it would be pernicious if we 
begin to place definitions and distinctions where the law 
does not.” 



Delegate Briones, in objecting to the Laurel amend- 
ment, counselled: 

“I believe that in this matter of Filipino citizenship 
the attitude of our coimtry and accordingly of this Consti- 
tutional Assembly should be one which I should call cath- 
olic, not in the religious sense of the word, a welcoming 
attitude to those elements who would like to come to live 
with us and make of this country their home where to 
work out their happiness. I believe that the attitude^ of 
this Assembly and that of this country in tliese critical 
moments in its history should not be one of slavishness, 
should not be one of hostility; it should be one of protec- 
tion, of embrace, to the entire world. 

''With respect to this amendment, it has occurred to me 
to make the following observations. This proposition No. 2 
makes a definition of who are Filipino citizens under the 
said precept, stating the following: dll pevsons horn with^ 
in or outside the Philippines of Filipino fathers. This is 
a general declaration. Now, if we accept the amendment 
of the distinguished gentleman from Batangas, subjecting 
this to the limitations of the law, that would be equivalent 
to establishing two classes of citizens under this precept: 
citizens in its pure significance, those against whom the 
state does not have to place any brake nor limitation, and 
citizens on whom the state has to make observations and... 
careful inspection and investigation when they come to our 
country, as he has said in the case of children of Filipino 
fathers who have resided abroad constantly since their youth 
until they return to the country. I believe that such should 
not be the case. I do not believe that the National Assem- 
bly should establish two classes of citizenship under the 
precept: pure citizens and citizens per capita minutiae. 

Now, the case cited by Delegate Laurel is a case which 
really can happen in the practical life of a Filipino. It 
is the case of a Filipino who has lost his citizenship be- 
cause of certain circumstances. Everybody knows that ci- 
tizenship can be lost — either because one has resided for a 
long time outside of his country — and this case would be 
an exceptional one — or because he has resided abroad, occu- 
pying a civil or military i>osition, or because he has been 



208 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



naturalized in another country. This falls under section 2 
referring to the loss of citizenship.” 

4 

“Those whose mothers are citizens of the Philippines 
and, upon reaching the age of majority, elect Philippine ci- 
tizenship” 

The original provision in the revised draft submitted 
by the sub-committee of seven, after it had been subdi- 
vided by resolution of the Convention, read: All perso7is 

born in the Philippines or any foreign territory of a 
mother who is a citizen of the Philipphies (are Filipino 
citizens). 

This provision was intended to incorporate the doc- 
trine of jus sanguinis even if the mother was the only 
parent of Philippine citizenship. It 'w^as defended by the 
proponents as a proposition in keeping with the trend ol 
modem constitutions, like those of Spain, the Irish Free 
State, Poland, and Czechoslovakia, and even the Malolos 
Constitution; but it was objected to primarily because of 
the fear that such children, especially if brought up in 
the country of their foreign fathers under the influence 
of foreign institutions and environment, and even in the 
Philippines, if reared under the influence and control of 
their foreign fathers, might not turn out to be devoted 
and loyal Filipino citizens. The further objection was 
presented that it was not exactly very desirable to have 
citizens of hyphenated loyalty, which fact would generally 
be the case with citizens possessing dual citizenship. 

As a compromise proposition, an amendment to the 
provision was presented by Delegates Enriquez and Cano- 
noy, making children of mothers who were citizens of the 
Philippi^®® Filipino citizens, if on readying the age of ma- 
jority they would adopt Philippine citizenship. The En- 
riquez-Canonoy amendment was readily approved by the 
Convention after a brief explanation of its meaning had 
been made by Delegate Enriquez. Explaining his amend- 
ment, Delegate Enriquez said in part: 



CITIZENSHIP UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 



209 



“Under the precept announced by the sub-committee, the 
child born of a Filipina mother is a Filipino, while under 
the amendment presented by us, by Delegate Canonoy and 
him who now has the honor of speaking, the child bom of 
a Filipina mother married to a foreigner is not a Filipino. 
He will be a Filipino if he prefers to be so upon reaching 
the age of majority. So that the difference is essential. 
While under the precept pending debate the child born of 
a Filipina mother married to a foreigner is a Filipino be- 
cause of his mother, under the amendment proposed he is 
not yet a Filipino. He will be one if he prefers to be so 
upon reaching the age of majority.” 

This provision was intended to apply only to legiti- 
mate children of mothers who are citizens of the Philip- 
pines, had with foreign fathers. Consequently, the legiti- 
mate children of a mother who is a citizen of the Phil- 
ippines and a father tvho is a foreigner ai’e not considered 
as Filipino citizens from the time of birth; they are to be 
considered so only from the time they have elected Phil- 
ippine citizenship in the manner to be provided by law, 
upon reaching the age of majority. In the meantime, 
they would have only an inchoate right to citizenship. 

During the debates on this provision, Delegate Rafols 
presented an amendment to include as Filipino citizens the 
illegitimate children with a foreign father of a mother 
who was a citizen of the Philippines, and also found- 
lings; but this amendment was defeated primarily because 
the Convention believed that the cases, being too few to 
warrant the inclusion of a provision in the Constitution 
to apply to them, should be governed by statutory legis- 
lation. Moreover, it was believed that the rules of inter- 
national law were already clear to the effect that illegi- 
timate children followed the citizenship of the mother, and 
that foundlings followed the nationality of the place where 
they were found, thereby making unnecessaiy the inclu- 
sion in the Constitution of the proposed amendment. 

5 

“Those who are naturalized in accordance with law.” 

This provision of the article on citizenship was ap- 
proved readily without debate. Under this provision, the 



210 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



National Assembly is given the complete authority to de- 
termine the classes of people who may be naturalized and 
the conditions under which they may be naturalized. 

Children Born in the Philippines of Foreign Parents. 
— In view of the introduction of several precepts for the 
incorporation of the doctrine of jus soli with respect to 
children boni of foreign parents in the Philippines, one of 
the propositions submitted to the Convention by the sub- 
committee of seven read: 

"All persons born in the Philippines of forei^ parents 
provided they adopt Philippine citizenship within one year 
after attaining legal age (are Filipino citizens,)'* 

The proposition was very vigorously debated, with the 
proponents led by Delegates Montinola, Rafols, and Be- 
nitez; and the opponents, by Delegates Briones, Cloribel, 
Paredes, and Cuaderno. 

The main argument for the incorporation of this pro- 
vision was based on the necessity of having a sounds li- 
beral national policy with respect to population. In de- 
fense of the proposition, Delegate Benitez delivered the fol- 
lowing stirring speech on the matter : 

*‘Mr. President, this is one question where I feel I have 
to make myself clear and of record because this involves 
a national policy with regard to population. This involves 
a problem which will determine the future growth of our 
population. Hawaii has been referred to as an example 
that we should avoid. I think that Hawaii is the best ex- 
ample to prove that that liberal policy with regard to na- 
tural born of whatever race is a sound policy. The Japa- 
nese and the Chinese born in Hawaii have made good Ame- 
rican citizens. They have learned the American language; 
they are more identified with the United States than with 
their respective countries, and yet they belong to a differ- 
ent race. Now, the fear in the Philippines, I believe, is 
to be attributed to the complex, to the European complex 
that the Filipino has imbibed. The Filipino has been so 
influenced by European thought that he is afraid, he is sus- 
picious, of his own fellow Orientals. 

^‘Now, We are allowing foreign born citizens who have 
lived here for the space of five years, according to the 
Naturalization Law, to become Filipinos; and yet we have 



CITIZENSHIP UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 



211 



here natural born wno have lived here for twenty-one years 
and who desire, after reaching the age of majority, to join 
us in this country and become Filipino citizens. Gentlemen, 
we ought to extend to them the courtesy, if they want to 
adopt this nation as their country, to become Filipino citi- 
zens. Now, these citizens belong to great powers, and it 
it not very common that citizens of great powers would 
sacrifice membership in those nations for the sake of as- 
suming Philippine citizenship. So that when a natural born 
foreigner decides to. adopt Filipino citizenship, he really con- 
siders this land of his birth as his own and casts his lot 
to live and to die in this land. 

“Now, there may be some who would say that foreign- 
ers migrate here who decide to become Filipino citizens, 
and it is because of economic reasons. Why, what is wrong 
about migration for economic reasons? Gentlemen, if you 
analyze the history of migration all over the world from 
time immemorial, you will see that great nations have at- 
tained greatness because of migrations. For what purpose? 
For economic improvement. It is these very people whom 
we want to attract here because these people who migrate 
from their o^vn native countries and are willing to give 
up their old citizenships are the ones who are endowed with 
the valuable traits that we need in this country for our 



citizenry.'' 



The proposition was defeated, however, in view of the 
feeling of fear among many members of the Convention 
that the policy enunciated by this precept might prove pre- 
judicial to the economic interests of the country. The fear 
was best expressed in the arguments presented by Delegates 
Cloribel, Paredes and Cuaderno. In the course of his ar- 
guments, Delegate Cuadeimo stressed: 



\ 

\ 



“I am against this precept, Mr. President, for econo- 
mic reasons. The very preamble of our Constitution says 
that we are to maintain and conserve the national patri- 
mony. A child without a drop of Filipino blood could at 
the age of twenty-one make himself appear that he se- 
lects Filipino citizenship perhaps for economic reasons, per- 
haps, Mr. President, in order that he could take advantage 
of the limitations contained in this draft for the acqui- 
sition and enjoyment of our natural resources. Who knows 
that, behind that idea of adopting local citizenship, he is 



212 



framing of the PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



not mentally reserving the citizenship of his blood, the ci* 
tizenship of his parents?” 

The Loss and Reacquisitian of Citizenship. — The Phil- 
ippine Constitution provides: 

“Philippine citizenship may be lost or reacquired in 
the manner provided by law.” 

Under this provision, the Convention left for legisla- 
tive determination the conditions under which citizenship 
might be lost or reacquired after it had been lost, believing 
that the Constitution could not go into details with res- 
pect to this matter. It was for this reason that the Con- 
vention defeated the amendment presented by Delegates 
Bueno and Chioco, which read as follows : 

“Philippine citizenship may be lost by anybody who 
disclaims his citizenship in the Philippines or abroad, or by 
such provision as the National Assembly shall hereafter 
provide. Philippine citizenship may be reacquired in the 
manner provided by law.” 

Under this provision of the Constitution, may the 
National Assembly prescribe regulations for the acquisi- 
tion of citizenship by those who, under the Constitution, 
are considered Philippine citizens? During the debates on 
the Laurel amendment to the effect that the acquisition of 
citizenship by children bom abroad of fathers who were 
citizens of the Philippines should be subject to such 
regulations as might be prescribed by the National As- 
sembly, it was suggested by Delegate Roxas, in objecting 
to the amendment, that that part might be taken up during 
the consideration of this section of the article on citizen- 
ship when it would be scheduled for debate. Delegate 
Laurel contended, however, — and the majority of the dele- 
gates believed with him — that the power to regulate was 
not included under this section in view of the fact that this 
section treated only of the loss or reacquisition of citizen- 
ship, never of its acquisition. Delegate Gullas before the 
voting on the Laurel amendment tried to press for an an- 
swer from Delegate Roxas, who was speaking on behalf 
of the sub-committee of seven, if be would consent to the 



1 



CITIZENSHIP UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 213 

inclusion of the word regulate in this section in order to 
take care of the cases mentioned by Delegate Laurel. The 
most that he could get, howevei', was the suggestion that 
this point should be taken up in due time. Herewith is a 
part of the records on this matter: 

**Delcgatc President, according to Dele- 

gate Roxas, the point raised by Delegate Laurel is that in- 
cluded in Section 2, but there are those who are opposed to 
the view of Delegate Roxas because the word ‘‘regulate * is 
not included in Section 2. Now, may I ask, please. Delegate 
Roxas, whether the Committee would have any objection to 
the inclusion of the word “regulate’’ in section 2 so that 
we shall vote against the Laurel amendment? 

**The President . — The committee will submit the matter 
to the Convention at the proper time. 

**Delegate Gullas.— But, so that we can judge before 
we vote, because Delegate Laurel may propose the same 
amendment when we come to the second part of the propo- 
sition, then we shall be discussing the proposition over an 
over again. 

“T/ie President . — That is entirely a matter of style 
whether the word “regulate” is included in the power to 
deny citizenship once it has been acquired under the limita- 
tions imposed by the Legislature. 

**Delegate G? 4 ZZas.— According to section 2, the wording 
is “loss or reacquisition of citizenship.” It does not say 
anything about that. 

“The President . — I would suggest to Delegate Gullas 
to present that amendment when we come to section 2. 

“Delegate Gullas . — But in order that we can decide 
the way we shall vote on the Laurel amendment. 

“T/ie President . — The amendment of the delegate from 
Batangas, as amended by the delegate from Pampanga, will 
now be submitted to a vote”. 

During the consideration of this section, Delegate Ca- 
bili attempted to present again the Gullas amendment to in- 
sert the word, regulate, but the Convention did not act on 
it any more. 

In the light of all the debates and of the attitude of 
the Convention, it was clearly intended by the Convention 
that this section should be understood to refer not to the 



ft 



214 FRAMING OP THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

regulation of the acquisition of citizenship, but only to its 
loss or reacquisition. The Convention in defeating the 
Laurel amendment intended to deny to the National As- 
sembly any authority whatsoever to prescribe conditions 
for the acquisition of citizenship by those who, under the 
provisions of the Constitution, are considered automatically 
to be Philippine citizens. 



CHAPTER XVIII 



SUFFRAGE UNDER THE PHILIPPINE 
CONSTITUTION 

Sources. — The article on suffrage of the Constitution 
was based largely on the report of the committee on suf- 
frage, presided by Delegate Jose Altavas, which in turn 
was strongly influenced by the election laws then in force 
in the Philippines; and on the compromise amendment 
presented by Delegate Eusebio Lopez during the debates 
on suffrage, extending the right of suffrage to women if, 
in a plebiscite which should be held for the purpose, three 
hundred thousand women should vote affirmatively for 
such extension. 

Draft of the Convention. Committee on Suffrage. — 
The committee on suffrage, in its draft reported to the 
President of the Convention on September 24, 1934, re- 
commended : 

1. That the right of suffrage should be exercised only 
by male citizens of the Philippines. 

2. That it should be limited to those who could read 
and write. 

3. That the duty to vote should be made obligatory. 

Debates on Suffrage. — The debates on suffrage cen- 
tered primarily on two main points, namely, (1) Should 
suffrage be granted to Filipino women; and (2) Should 
voting be made compulsory? 

The Question of Woman Suffrage. — From the opening 
days of the Convention, with the creation of the commit- 
tee on suffrage, it became gradually apparent that there 
was a difference of opinion among the delegates with res- 
pect to woman suffrage. During the organization period 
of the Convention, in the exercise of the one-half hour 
privilege, some members of the Convention delivered 
speeches in favor of woman suffrage ; while others, against 
it. These speeches had their repercussions among the del- 



216 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



egates, who thereafter became more interested in the ques- 
tion of woman suffrage. 

Any observer could easily tell that one of the greatest 
fights in the Convention would be that on woman suffrage. 
The suffragettes of the country, perceiving that there was 
a camp in the Convention opposed to woman suffrage, did 
not lose time to prepare for the fight. 

The Fight for Woman Suffrage in the Convention 
Committee on Suffrage. — The first fight for woman suf- 
frage was staged in the public hearings of the committee 
on suffrage. Prominent women leaders identified with 
the woman suffrage movement of the country worked hard 
for the retention of the right of suffrage already granted 
to them by the legislature, to be effective on January 1, 
1935. Suffragettes, like Mrs. Jaime de Veyra, Mrs. Pilar 
Lim, Mrs. Potenciano Pecson, Mrs. Delfin Jaranilla, Dr. 
nes Villa, and Miss Avelina Lorenzana, mustered all the 
forces that were in their power to convince the members of 
the committee on suffrage to report for woman suffrage. 

But the committee voted to withhold from women the 
right of suffrage. In its report to the President of the 
Convention on September 24, 1934, the committee on suf- 
frage said : 

The Committee refrains from stating in this report the 
re^ons on which it bases its decision to withdraw the 
rig t of suffrage from the women and will merely say that 
e principal idea in the minds of the members not in favor 
o extending suffrage to the women was that the sweet wo- 
manlmess of the Philippine women should be projected from 
po itical strife and passion in order that sweet home may 
not lose any of its sweetness.” 

Defeated in the first stage of their fight, the suffra- 
gettes, not losing courage, continued to carry it on in the 
Convention. 

The Fight for Woman Suffrage in the Convention. — 
The question of woman suffrage was taken up in the ple- 
nary sessions of the Convention, following the debates and 
voting on the issue of bicameralism versus unicameralism. 



SUFFRAGE UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 



217 



By a resolution of the Convention on October 23, 1934, 
it was agreed to open for debate the following proposition: 

“Resolved, that the right of suffrage under the Con- 
stitution be granted to male citizens only.” 

On October 24, 1934, upon the recommendation of the 
committee on rules. Delegate Manuel Abella, a rabid wo- 
man suffragist, was designated by the Convention as the 
leader of the woman suffragists; while Delegate Jose Al- 
tavas, chairman of the committee on suffrage, as the leader 
of the opposition. 

The debates on suffrage commenced on October 24, 

1934, with both sides defended by a long array of speakers. 
Of those who spoke for woman suffrage were Delegates 
Abella, Bocar, Vinzons, Locsin, Osias, Palma, Saguin, Per- 
fecto, Sevilla, Moncado, Delgado, Buendia, Joven, and Cua- 
demo; while those against, wei*e Delegates Altavas, Guz- 
man, (J.), Gumban, Grafilo, Abordo, Albero, Arellano, 
Balili, Carin, Sotto, (V.), Francisco, Escareal, Caram, Co- 
nejero, and Inting. 

Throughout the debates, it was admitted by both camps 
that the Filipino woman was capable of exercising the right 
of suffrage. The opposition to woman suffrage was based 
principally upon the following considerations that there 
was no popular demand for suffrage by Filipino wo- 
men themselves; that woman suffrage would only tend 
to disrupt family unity; and that it would plunge wo- 
men into the quagmire of politics, dragging them from the 
pedestal of honor in which they had theretofore been placed. 
The proponents in reply argued that it would be unfair 
to deprive Filipino women of the right of suffrage already 
granted to them by the legislature, effective on January 1, 

1935, without having given them a chance to prove whethex 
they deserved it or not ; that the extension of suffrage to 
them would make them more interested in the manage- 
ment of the affairs of the government ; and that it was nec- 
essary as a matter of justice, to say the least, ta extend 
the frontiers of democracy to our women who had labored 



218 



FBAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



hard side by side with our men for the progress and de- 
velopment of the country. 

In the course of the debates, petitions were received 
by the Convention from women throughout the country, 
acting singly or collectively. Some pleaded for the reten- 
tion of woman suffrage; others, for its withdrawal, 

A petition signed by Pilar Hidalgo Lim, Concepcion F. 
de Rodriguez, Pura Villanueva de Kalaw, Asuncion A. Pe- 
rez, Sofia R. De Veyra, Concha Apacible, Geronima T. Pec- 
son, Ines Villa, Avelina M, Lorenzana, Maria Kalaw Katig- 
bak, Josefa J. Martinez, and Josef a L. Escoda was sent to 
the individual delegates of the Convention in an attempt to 
save the cause of woman suffrage. The petition read as 
follows : 

“We, the undersigned, duly elected representatives of 
women who believe in the justice and wisdom of the en- 
franchisement of the Filipino women, protest most solemnly 
against women being deprived of the vote in the Constitu- 
tion of the Commonwealth and against any change in the 
existent Law, No. 4112, passed by the Ninth Philippine Leg- 
islature on November ninth, 1933, and signed by Governor- 
General Frank Murphy on December seventh, 1934. 

“We call the attention of the Constitutional Assembly 
and the Legislature to the plea for liberty made before the 
Congress and President of the United States for thirty- 
seven years by the Filipinos; a plea based on the fact 
that we are a liberty-loving people equipped and capable of 
self-government. Such government cannot exist ‘half-slave 
and half-free.’ The women of this Christian land, serene 
in the knowledge that in peace or war they have never 
failed their men or their country, in this crucial hour of 
the realization of the sacrifice and devotion of the years, 
insist upon their political recognition and their share in the 
triumph of the cause of liberty. 

“It is not a matter of plebiscite nor specific numbers. 
It is a right earned, deserved and therefore claimed. It is 
not a matter of sex. In a democratic government all qual- 
ified citizens, men and women alike, can and should make 
their valuable contribution in deciding what their commu- 
nity shall undertake to do through its government, by what 
means, and through what officials. 



SUFFRAGE UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 



219 



“Under the law women suffer penalties, are summoned 
before the courts by law — laws they have had not voice 
in making — and pay taxes. ‘Taxation without repre- 
sentation is tyranny’ and more so in 1934 than in 1776. 

“So confident of the unalterable righteousness of this 
cause, to you, gentlemen of the Constitutional Assembly, we 
appeal for justice believing and knowing that our cause is a 
just one, and that our rights have been won thru years of 
sacrifice, devotion and service to our common cause ^the 
cause of men and women alike — the welfare and progress 
of our native land, — the Philippines.’’ 

The Defeat of Woman Suffrage.— The suffragists of 
the Convention were up against odds. There was, first of 
all, the Convention President, who had alwaj’s been against 
the enfranchisement of Filipino women. Then, there was 
President Manuel L. Quezon, whose influence was still felt 
in the ranks of the delegates affiliated with the majority 
party, in spite of his absence from the Philippines duiing 
the debates on the suffrage question. In his letter to 
President Recto from abroad. President Quezon wrote 
among others that he was in favor of extending suffrage 
to women only if a sufficient number of them would ap- 
prove of the idea in a referendum, with the understanding 
of course that they should also assume the civil obligations 
of men to the government. This letter, the contents of 
which were revealed by President Recto in a caucus of the 
majority party delegates during the early days of the Con- 
vention, was interpreted by many delegates to mean that 
President Quezon was against the extension of the right 
of suffrage to women. 

On November 5, 1934, the Convention considered the 
amendment to the resolution by Delegate Vinzons which 
read: 

“Resolved, that the right of suffrage under the Consti- 
tution be granted to all citizens unless disqualified by law.’’ 

The purpose of the amendment was in effect to leave 
the matter of suffrage to the complete discretion of the leg- 
islature; in other words, to leave it as it was before the 
drafting of the Philippine Constitution. The resolution 



220 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



squarely placed before the Convention the question of whe- 
ther or not the women of the country should retain the 
right of suffrage already granted to them by the legisla- 
ture, to be effective on January 1, 1935. 

The resolution was defeated by a close vote, the voting 
being 76 affirmative votes against 86 negative votes. A 
shifting of six more votes to the affiiTnative side would 
have meant victory for the cause of woman suffrage. 

The Compromise on Woman Suffrage. — The inunediate 
cause of the defeat of the Vinzons amendment was the set- 
tled decision of a great number of the delegates to favor 
the Lopez compromise amendment for the support of which 
they had already given written pledges. The Lopez com- 
promise amendment read : 

“Resolved, that the right of suffrage under the Con- 
stitution be granted to male citizens only; Provided, how- 
ever, that the National Legislature shall extend the right 
of suffrage to women if, in a plebiscite held for that pur- 
pose, no less than three hundred thousand women other- 
wise qualified should vote affirmatively.” 

The Lopez compromise amendment, influenced by the 
corresponding provision of the first draft of the Constitu- 
tion at the time in the course of preparation, was inspired 
by the desire to place squarely into the hands of the women 
of the country the decision whether or not to extend the 
right of suffrage to women, especially because of the alleged 
marked division of opinion among the women themselves 
on the question of suffrage. 

There were several proposed amendments to the Lopez 
amendment. One of them, presented by Delegate Abella, 
was to the effect “that the right of suffrage shall be grant- 
ed to women, if, in a plebiscite which shall be held for that 
purpose, a majority of women otherwise qualified shall vote 
affirmatively on the question.” Another, presented by Del- 
egate Enriquez, would reduce the required number to 200,- 
000. Still another, presented by Delegate Lim, would ex- 
tend suffrage to them “if not less than 300,000 women 
voters should vote, in the election to he held for the ratifir 



1 



I 

» 

SUFFRAGE UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 221 

cation of the Constitution.” But all of these amendments 
were defeated. 

With the Convention very evidently in favor of the . 

approval of the Lopez compromise amendment as a solu- 
tion of the woman suffrage question. Article 6 of the first 
draft of the Constitution, presented by Delegate Cuademo 
as an amendment to the Lopez amendment, was overwhelm- a. 

ingly approved. Said ai'ticle of tlie first draft read: 

“Section 1. Suffrage may be exercised by male citi- , 

zens of the Philippines not otherw-ise disqualified by law, 
who are twenty-one years of age or over, able to read and 
write, and who shall have been resident of the Philippines ]| 

for one year and of the municipality wherein they propose 
to vote for at least six months preceding the election: 

Provided, however. That the National Assembly shall i, 

tend the right of suffrage to women, if in a plebiscite which i 

shall be held for that purpose, no less than three hundred J 

thousand women otherwise qualified should vote affirmative- , 

ly on the question.” I 

On November 27, 1934, when the Convention came I 

‘ to the article on suffrage of the first draft of the Consti- I 

tution the advocates of woman suffrage, under the leader- r 

ship of Delegates Abella, Gullas, and Osias, tried to reopen : 

the question of woman suffrage; but the attempt failed 
owing to the objection of the delegates opposed to woman 
suffrage, who contended that the matter had already been 
sufficiently debated, with the Convention having categori- 
cally expressed its opinion in the voting on the woman suf- 
frage resolutions. 

The time for holding the plebiscite was determined by 
the Convention during the consideration of the article on 
suffrage of the first draft of the Constitution. There were 
two formulae submitted. According to the first, the pleb- 
iscite would be held simultaneously with the second gen- 
eral elections under the Constitution ; according to the sec- 
ond, within two years after the adoption of the Consti- 
tution. The champions of woman suffrage of the Conven- 
tion presented first the second formula, which was carried 
by 59 affirmative votes against 54 negative votes. 



L 



222 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



The Question of Compulsory Voting. — The question of 
compulsory voting was brought formally to the attention of 
the Convention for the first time in a very ably delivei'ed 
speech by Delegate Rivera on August 10, 1934, in the exer- 
cise of the thirty-minute privilege. The speech was fol- 
lowed by the introduction by several members of precepts 
for the adoption of compulsory voting in the Philippines. 

The Principle of Compulsory Voting Endorsed by the 
Convention Committee on Suffrage. — The principle of com- 
pulsory voting was recommended in the draft of the com- 
mittee on suffrage. In its report, the committee said with 
respect to compulsory voting: 

“It has adopted the principle of making the exercise 
of the right of suffrage obligatory, by such means as the 
Legislature may in its discretion adopt, the main object 
being that the Philippine citizen may never lose sight of the 
fact that suffrage is a function of popular sovereignty to 
make the government truly democratic, and it is the duty 
of the citizens desirous of the welfare and progress of his 
country to participate in the selection of its public servants 
when required, and not indifferent to the fate of his coun- 
try.” 

The Principle of Compulsory Voting in the First Draft 

of the Constitution. The principle of compulsory voting 

was included in the first draft of the Constitution in the 
following provision : 

“Suffrage is a public duty which should be exercised 
by all those who are qualified under the law. 

Debates on Compulsory Voting in the Convention. — 
Whether or not the principle of compulsory voting should 
be included in the Constitution was fully debated in the 
Convention on November 27, 1934, with Delegates Rivera 
and Kapunan taking up the defense; and Delegates Ro- 
mero, Escareal, Perez, (T.), and Conejero, the opposition. 

Delegate Rivera, father of the proposed idea of com- 
pulsory voting under the Constitution, summarized the ar- 
guments for the adoption of the principle in the following 
portions of his speech : 



SUFFRAGE UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 



223 



“Mr. President, putting suffrage in the category of a 
duty that should be exercised by all those who are qualified 
under the law is to give suffrage the import and signifi- 
cance that it rightly deserves in a democracy. In a dem- 
ocratic government there are certain duties which cannot 
claim superior significance over suffrage but which are 
made obligatory upon the citizens. Modern constitutions 
and this constitution that we are now considering provide 
for compulsory military service. Compulsory military ser- 
vice is essential for the protection of the State in time of 
war. But considering the fact that sometimes a nation is 
thrown into the horrors of war thru the indiscretions and 
temperament of the persons who are at the head of the 
government of that nation, there is no conceivable reason to 
advance why, if the citizens can be compelled to render mil- 
itary service in order to save the country from the cata- 
clysm into which it has been thrown by the misdecision of 
its officers, these same citizens should not be compelled to 
elect their owm officers who have the final power of declar- 
ing war and upon whose wisdom depends the peace or tur- 
moil of the community. Certainly, if the citizens can be 
compelled to bear the consequences of wurong decision, with 
more reasons they should be compelled to choose the per- 
sons who may avoid making such a misdecision. 

“Mr. President, that far is the philosophical concept 
of the principle of obligatory vote. I shall summarize the 
practical results of compulsory suffrage as follows: 

“(1) The inclusion in our Constitution of a precept 
providing for the compulsory exercise of the right of suf- 
frage is essential in order to bring about a ihore effective 
and enduring democracy. The effectiveness and endurance 
of a democratic government depends upon the number of 
qualified citizens who actually take part in the running of 
such government. 

‘‘(2) A constitutional precept on obligatory vote will 
help reduce the election expenses of candidates. While obli- 
gatory vote may not entirely eliminate election expenses, 
yet it is submitted that the pernicious vice of not a few 
of our electors of refusing to go to the polls to cast their 
votes unless given monetary consideration for doing the 
same, is minimized. 

‘'(3) Compulsory suffrage will help democratize our 
elections. Because election expenses are greatly reduced, 
poor but deserving candidates have equal chances of getting 
elected as the rich. It is the ability to serve the people 



224 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



and not the ability to spend for the people that will then de- 
termine the elevation of persons to public offices. 

*'(4) Obligatory vote will acquaint the greatest number 
of electors with the trait and qualifications of the rival 
candidates together with the respective principles of gov- 
ernment that each candidate espouses. Because they are 
compelled to vote, the electors are compelled to study and 
compare the different candidates with their respective plat- 
forms. Obligatory vote is, therefore, conducive to an intel- 
ligent voting.’’ 

The opponents of compulsory voting pointed out, how- 
ever, that it would be very hard to administer the law es- 
tablishing compulsory voting; that it would not eliminate 
the evils which it was intended to eliminate, like election 
expenses for candidates, bribery, etc; and that it would 
destroy the beautiful thought behind suffrage as a privi- 
lege rather than as a duty. 

Delegate Romero stressed the administrative difficul- 
ties in carrying out into practice the principle of compul- 
sory voting. The suppletory law to cari'y it out, he said, 
must necessarily provide for reasonable excuses. Such be- 
ing the case, there must have to be investigations and in- 
vestigations for ascertaining whether the excuses given 
were true or not. If the excuses given were not true, the 
prosecution of the offenders would take months and months 
to be finished. In brief, he contended, the pi'oposed con- 
stitutional precept would really be “a useless declaration of 
principle, or after it is maintained, (it) will be unenforce- 
able.” 

When put to a vote, the proposition to adopt the prin- 
ciple of compulsory voting was defeated by 74 negative 
votes against 46 affirmative votes. 

Other Requisites for the Exercise of the Right of Suf- 
frage . — Age Qiuilification . — All amendments to set the age, 
at 18 or at 20 were defeated in favor of the age limit of 21 
fixed in the Constitution. 

Educational Qiuilification . — From the opening days of 
the Convention, there had been a very prevalent sentiment 



SUFFRAGE UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 



225 



among the delegates for the elimination of illiterates from 
the class of persons who should be granted the right of 
suffrage. The idea was readily approved in the Conven.- 
tion without any dissenting vote. i ' 

Although the report of the committee on suffrage prO'- 
vided, as the educational qualification, the ability to read 
and write English, Spanish, or some local dialect, the sub- 
committee of seven recommended that it be only the ability 
to read and write. 

During the debates on the article on suffrage, some 
delegates led by Delegate Santos presented an amendment 
to revive the suffrage committee report, contending that a 
specification of the language or dialect was necessary iu 
order to prevent the disenfranchisement in the future of 
the people of the country who could speak only English,. 
Spanish, or a local dialect. The insertion was urged as- 
being specially necessary because of the plan set forth irt 
the first draft of the Constitution to develop a national 
language from among the dialects of the Philippines. 

The amendment was defeated, hov^ver, because the 
Convention felt that what was necessary was only the 
ability to read and write. Moreover, to approve the amend- 
ment would be, as alleged by Delegate Cabili in opposing 
the same, discriminatory against the Mohammedans. 

The Lanao delegate said in part: 

“It is discriminatoi'y against a respectable minority of 
the population of the Philippines. It would serve to dis- 
criminate against the Mohammedan population of the Phil- 
ippines for which I am one of the humble representatives. 
It is the opinion of this Convention, I think, to emancipate, 
to enfranchise our backward elements, especially the Moham- 
medan population. And you would like to curtail that right 
and that privilege by inserting a provision that only those 
who can read and write either English, Spanish, or any 
of the local dialects shall be allowed to vote. This amend- 
ment would preclude the Mohammedans because their Ara- 
bic writing is not included under the local dialects. Be- 
cause when you say, local dialects, you refer to the dialect 
and not to the system of writing. The system of writing 
is either Arabic or Roman. In view of this fact, Mr. Pres- 



226 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



ident, I hope that you will be liberal and tolerant enough 
to reject this proposed amendment because it is unneces- 
sary and because it is discriminatory.'* 

Residence Qualification . — There was no question in the 
Convention with respect to the proposed residence requix'e- 
ment in the Philippines for one year. But relative to the 
proposed requirement of residence in the municipality 
wherein the electors would propose to vote for at least six 
months preceding the election, Delegate Jesus Pei'ez pro- 
posed that the residence should be of the province instead 
of the municipality to prevent the deprivation from voting 
of those who, for one reason or another, might find them- 
selves compelled to change their residence from one town 
to another within six months preceding the election. The 
proposed amendment was defeated, however, primarily be- 
cause of the fact that the term, residence, meant legal not 
actual residence. 

Statutory disqualification.— i:^Q Convention preferred 
to leave to the National Assembly the determination of legal 
disqualifications other than those touching on the qualifica- 
tions. It was primarily because of this fact that the Con- 
vention defeated the amendment presented by Delegate 
Castor Cruz to disqualify from suffrage the members of 
the armed and naval forces. 

Suffrage and the Electors of Municipal Districts.— 
The article was intended to include the enfranchisement of 
the electors of municipal districts for insular elections. Be- 
fore the adoption of the Philippine Constitution, there were 
municipal districts whose electors could vote for municipal 
and provincial officials but not for insular officials. The 
delegates from Ilocos Sur, Abaya and Joven, worked very 
hard not only in the proper committees but also in the ple- 
nary sessions of the Convention for the modification. 

During the debates on the article on suffrage of the 
first draft of the Constitution, Delegate Abaya, by a process 
of interpellations, obtained the following clarifications of 

the scope of the suffrage article: 

“Delegate Abaya. — Mr. President, I should like to know 
from the Committee, with respect to Article 4, if this provi- 



SUFFRAGE UNDER THE CONSTITUTION 



227 



sion of the Constitution includes the electors of the muni- 
cipal districts. I;mean to say, if the electors in the municipal 
districts will have the same rights as those of the regular 
municipalities because actually, according to the law, the 
electors of the municipal districts cannot elect insular offi- 
cials but only provincial and local officials. 

**The President. — What does the Committee say? 

**Delegate Singson EncaTnacion. — There is no prohibi- 
tion here in the Constitution. 

** Delegate Abaya. — Here it says: ‘Not otherwise dis- 

qualified by law.' According to the present law, these mu- 
nicipal electors in the municipal districts cannot elect in- 
sular officials. 

** Delegate Singson. Encamacicm. — We shall leave that to 
the Legislature. 

** Delegate Abaya. — If that is the case, I should like to 
insert a provision here. 

*^Delegate Roxas. — In the article referring to the Legis- 
lature, it is expressly stated that all the members of the 
National Assembly shall be elected by the qualified elector^ 
in their respective provinces. 

** Delegate Abaya. — But these electors in the municipal 
districts cannot elect insular officials. 

^'Delegate Roxas. — Why not? This provision of the 
Constitution gives them the right to vote for members of 
the Assembly. There is no exception. 

^^Delegate Abaya. — And these words, *not otherwise dis- 
qualified by latv/ to what do they refer? 

**Delegate Roxas. — They refer to the disqualification, for 
having been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, 
and other disqualifications. 

Delegate Abaya. — Should I be made to understand that 
this provision here amends the provisions of the existing 
law? 

*^Delegate Roxas. — Yes sir.’* 

Draft of the Article on Suffrage as Approved by the 
Convention on November 28, 1934. — As it was approved by 
the Convention on November 28, 1934, the article on suf- 
frage read: 

^‘Section !• Suffrage may be exercised by male citi- 
zens of the Philippines not otherwise disqualified by law, 
who are twenty-one years of age or over, able to read and 
write, and who shall have been resident of the Philippines 



228 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



for one year and of the municipality wherein they propose 
to vote for at least six months preceding the election: Pro- 
vided, however, That the National Assembly shall extend 
the right of suffrage to women, if in a plebiscite which shall 
be held for that purpose within two years after the adop- 
tion of this Constitution, no less than three hundred thou- 
sand women otherwise qualified should vote affirmatively on 
the question.” 

Draft of the Article on Suffrage as Revised by the 
Special Committee on Style and Finally Approved by the 
Convention. — As it was revised by the special committee 
on style and finally approved by the Convention, the article 
on suffrage read: 

“ARTICLE V. — SUFFRAGE 
“SECTION 1. Suffrage may be exercised by male citi- 
zens of the Philippines not otherwise disqualified by law, 
who are twenty-one years of age or over and are able to 
read and write, and who shall have resided in the Philip- 
pines for one year and in the municipality wherein they 
propose to vote for at least six months preceding the elec- 
tion. The National Assembly shall extend the right of suf- 
frage to women, if in a plebiscite which shall be held for 
that purpose within two years after the adoption of this 
Constitution, not less than three hundred thousand women 
possessing the necessary qualifications shall vote affirmative- 
ly on the question.’’ 

Effectivity of the Article. — By Sec. 6 of Article XV — 
Transitory Provisions — of the Philippine Constitution, this 
Article on Suffrage became effective before the inaugura- 
tion of the Commonwealth of the Philippines. In the elec- 
tions for the first members of the National Assembly and 
the first President and Vice-President of the Common- 
wealth, only those electors possessing the qualifications set 
forth in this Article were permitted to vote. 



CHAPTER XIX 

THE LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 

Sources. — The article on the legislative department of 
the Philippine Constitution was reproduced largely from 
the report of the committee on legislative po\\'er, presided 
by Delegate Manuel C. Briones. In view of the decision by 
the Convention on October 22, 1934, after several weeks of 
debate, to adopt a unicameral system, the sub-committee 
of seven made corresponding changes in the report of the 
committee on legislative power, which report provided for 
a bicameral system with the members of the Senate to be 
elected at large throughout the Philippines on the basis 
of proportional representation. 

The provisions of this article of the Constitution weie 
inspired by the Jones Law, by several American state con- 
stitutions, by the Malolos Constitution, by the Constitution 
of the Republic of Spain, and by observations on the work- 
ings of the English and American governments. 

Debates. — The debates on the legislative department 
commenced with the question of the organization of the 
lawmaking body — whether it should be unicameral or bi- 
cameral. That was at a time while the sponsorship com- 
mittee was still working on the provisions for the first 
draft of the Constitution. 

After the completion by the sub-committee of seven 
of the first draft of the Constitution, the Convention pro- 
ceeded to consider the draft, article by article, taking up 
successively the preamble and the articles on the national 
territory, the bill of rights, citizenship, and suffrage. 

With the consideration of these articles finished, the 
Convention resumed its debates on the legislative depart- 
ment of the government on November 28, 1934, completing 
the debates on the provisions of the draft on legislative 
power on December 14, 1934, with the exception of the 
compensation, the manner of choosing, and the distribution 



230 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



of the members of the National Assembly, which were 
taken up on January 31,1935. On Februaiy 7 and 8, 1935, 
the Convention once more debated on the article, this time 
on the changes made by the special committee on style 
on the Constitution as approved by the Convention on sec- 
ond reading. 

Among the great debates on the legislative depart- 
ment were those on the organization of the lawmaking 
body — whether it should be unicameral or bicameral; on 
the composition of the National Assembly — the manner of 
choosing the assemblymen from the non-Christian prov- 
inces ; on the electoral commission ; on the permanent com- 
mission; on the budgetary relations between the executive 
and the legislative branches — the prohibition upon the 
National Assembly to increase appropriations recom- 
mended in the budget for the executive department; on 
the prohibition upon members of the National Assembly 
to hold any other office or employment iu the government 
without forfeiting their seats ; on the proposed committee 
on accounts; and on the power of the President to veto 
separate items in a revenue or tariff bill. 

Position of the Lawmaking Body in the Government. — 
The Philippine Constitution was drafted on the philosophy 
of the presidential system with its concomitant doctrines 
of check and balance and the separation of powers. In 
the course of his defense of the article on legislative power 
of the first draft of the Constitution, Delegate Briones, 
chairman of the committee on legislative power, aptly ex- 
pressed this philosophy when he said i 

My theory is not likBwise to mako ons power stronger 
than another power. I wish to adhere to the same essence 
of the presidential system, namely, the theory of the sep- 
aration of powers that the powers should be separate, that 

none of them is superior to the others. They should work 
harmoniously and coordinately. And from the conjunction 
of coordination, let there come harmonious operation.” 

In the consideration of that provision of the Consti- 
tution under which Mcyrnher of the NcUbiOTUil Assembly 
may hold any other office or employment in the Govern'- 



THE LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 



231 



ment without forfetmg his scat,” the Convention found 
itself at the crossroads where it had to decide categorically 
whether to adhere to the presidential system through the 
approval of this provision of the first draft of the Con- 
stitution, or to make possible the establislmient in the 
country of a parliamentaiy system of government by ap- 
proving the Lim-Vinzons amendment to suppress this pro- 
vision. The Convention was made to understand that the 
draft was based on the philosophy of the presidential sys- 
tem, so that by voting to suppress this provision of the 
Constitution it would be in effect voting to permit the es- 
tablishment of a parliamentaiy system with the consequent 
union of legislative and executive functions. The Conven- 
tion decided to adhei*e to the presidential system, with its 
concomitant principles, by voting in favor of the retention 
of the provision of the draft. 

It is true that there are provisions of the Constitution 
tending to impair farther the fact of the separation of 
powers as understood before the adoption of the Constitu- 
tion, like that permitting department secretaries to appear 
on their own initiative before the National Assembly and 
that making some members of the Supreme Court sit 
in the Electoral Commission. These provisions were not 
intended, however, to destroy the doctrine of the separa- 
tion of powers as a legal fundamental philosophy of the 
Constitution. 

The Convention intended consequently that the law- 
making body should be supreme within its own sphere; 
that it should not surrender to another branch of the gov- 
ernment its leadership in legislation; and that it should 
be equal to and coordinate with tlie other branches of the 
government. 



CHAPTER XX 

BICAMERAUSM VERSUS UNICAMERALISM 



Introduction. — From tJie opening days of the Convew- 
tion, even before, it was commonly lield that the greatest 
battle in that body would be fought on the question of 
whether or not there should be established under the Con- 
stitution a unicameral legislature. The leading newspapers 
of the country, particularly the Tribimc and the Philippmcs 
Herald, lined up for the cause of a unicameral legisla- 
ture, arguing for its adoption in strong editorials' 
written even before the inaugural sessions of the Conven- 
tion. 

The opening gun for a unicameral legislatm-e was fired 
in the Convention by Delegate Bocar on August 16, 1936 ; 
and for a bicameral legislature, by Delegate Escareal on 
August 20, 1934, in speeches delivered in the exei'cise of 
the one-half hour privilege. 

Recommendation of the Convention Committee on Leg- 
islative Power. — After several days of deliberation, tlie 
committee on legislative power decided to recommend a 
bicameral legislature. But it was not to be a bicameral 
legislature constituted on exactly the same basis as that 
under the Jones Law^ For while the members of the pi'O- 
posed lower house were to bo elected from the geographical 



1 In defense of a unicameral legislature, the Tribune iDublished 
editorials with the following titles: 

1. The Drift toward Unicameralism (July 20, 1934). 

2. Unicameralism in the Convention (July 21, 1934). 

3. Inevitably toward Unicameralism (July 25, 1934). 

4. Simplification (July 26, 1934). 

5. More Defects (July 28, 1934). 

6. Unified Legislative Leadership (July 31, 1934). 

7. Philippine Precedents (August 1, 1934). 

For the same purpose, the Philippines Herald published an edi- 
torial with the following title: 

Our Form of Government (March 31, 1934). 



234 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



districts provided under the Jones Law, those of the pro- 
posed Senate were to be elected throughout the Philippines 
on the basis of proportional representation. 

The proposed innovation was a compromise in the 
committee. Many of the members could not see any justi- 
fication for the existence of the Senate as it was consti- 
tuted under the Jones Law, with the senators chosen from 
districts embracing one or more provinces. To them the 
Senate was only a duplication of the lower house. But 
with all the defects of the system under the Jones Law, 
they were opposed to a unicameral legislative system. Fi- 
nally, it was decided to retain the bicameral system; pro- 
vided that the upper house should be constituted on a more 
rational basis. 

According to the report of the committee, the Senate 
was to be constituted on the basis of proportional repre- 
sentation in the following manner until the legislature 
Would otherwise provide : 

“The political parties that elected the largest and the 
second largest number of members to the House of Rep- 
resentatives at the last preceding election, and any other 
party or group that elected no less than ten members to 
said House of Representatives at such election or which 
shall present a petition signed by at least five per centum of 
the voters who cast their votes at said election, may, in 
convention, nominate a panel or list of candidates not to ex- 
ceed the number of Senators to be elected. Upon such no- 
mination the names of the parties or groups thus entitled 
to present nominations shall be printed on the ballot. Each, 
elector shall indicate the party or group for whose candi- 
dates he desires to cast his vote. After all returns are re- 
ceived the sum total of all the votes for Senators cast and 
counted shall be divided by the number of seats to be filled 
and the quotient shall be taken as the unit or quota of 
representation. The sum total of all the votes polled by 
each party or group shall then be divided by the unit or 
quota of representation, and the quotients thus obtained will 
indicate the number of seats to which each party or group is 
entitled; but if the sum of said quotients be less than the 
number of seats to be filled, the party or group having the 
largest remainder after excluding the votes counted to form 



BICAMERALISM VERSUS UNICAMERALISM 



235 



the quotas of elected candidates as above specified, shall 
be entitled to the first vacancy and so on until the total 
number of seats are filled. The seate corresponding to each 
party or group shall be filled by the candidates nominated 
by each, respectively, in the order of preference in which 
the names of such candidates appear in tlie panel or list 
of nominees filed by said party or group.” 

Taking advantage of the one-half hour privilege, De- 
legate Briones on September 24, 1934 made a partial re- 
port to the Convention of the recommendations of his com- 
mittee, stressing specially that for constituting the Senate. 

The idea of a nation-at-large election for members of 
the Senate on the basis of pi'oportiozial repi*esentation, with 
the details set foi-th in the report, was not very favorablj’^ 
received by the delegates of the Convention. After sever- 
al interpellations directed to Delegate Briones, it was very 
apparent that the Convention was not ready to endorse 
the principle recommended by the committee. The plan to 
retain the bicameral system in the Philippines was there- 
after associated by many delegates w'ith that of having the 
Senate constituted on the basis of the recommendation of 
the committee on legislative power. And although there 
were other forms, the system of proportional representation 
was conceived by many delegates to be only as it was 
worked out in the committee report. This mistaken con- 
ception added to the force of the opposition to the bicame- 
ral plan. 

Debates. — In view of the fact that the Convention did 
not yet have a complete draft to sei*ve as a basis for dis- 
cussions in its plenary sessions, it was decided by the lead- 
ers of the Convention to thi'ow open for debate the very 
controversial question of whether or not there should be 
provided in the Constitution a bicameral legislative system. 

On October 8, 1934, the Convention decided that be- 
ginning on the following day it should debate on the fol- 
lowing resolution: 

“Resolved that it is the sense of the Convention that 
the Constitution to be drafted should provide for a bicame- 
ral legislature.” 



236 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

On the same day, upon the recommendation of the com- 
mittee on rules, President Recto designated Delegate Jose 
M. Aruego as the leader of the bicameralists; and Jose E. 
Romero, of the unicameralists. 

The debates on the resolution, commencing on Octo- 
ber 9, 1934, lasted for several days, with the- voting on 
the same taking place on October 22, 1934. 

Both sides were defended by a long ari*ay of speakers. 
Speaking in defense of bicameralism were Delegates 
Aruego, luting, Paredes, Abordo, Santos, Kintanar, Guz- 
man, (Alejandro), Bueno, Enriquez, Sandiko, Lopez, (E), 
Cinco, Mansueto, Baltao, Binag, Car in, Perez, (J), Mon- 
cado, and Barrion. Those who spoke in favor of a uni- 
cameral system were Delegates Grafilo, Guzman, (J), Clo- 
ribel, Abella, Buslon, Grageda, Salumbides, Cea, Bocar. 
Sotto, (V), Galang, Canonoy, Pelayo, Jumawan, Villarama, 
Ortega, Osias, Alkuino, and Marabut. 

It was contended by the bicameralists that a second 
chamber was necessary to serve as a check against hasty 
and ill-considered legislation; that it would draw to the 
legislature more matured, experienced, and able men; that 
a bicameral legislatui*e would be less susceptible to bribery 
and the control of big “interests” ; that a bicameral legisla- 
ture would provide a means for securing national views on 
public questions contrasted to the generally parochial views 
of men elected from small geographical districts; that a 
bicameral system was in vogue in practically all the coun- 
tries and states of the world ; that the time was not propi- 
tious for the Filipinos to venture in experiments, as in the 
adoption of the unicameral system. 

In defense of unicameralism, the unicameralists ar- 
gued that it was necessary to simplify the legislative ma- 
chinery in order to increase its efficiency, to allocate re- 
sponsibility more easily, and to effect economy in the 
government especially during the period of stress and 
probation — the period of the Commonwealth. Moreover, 
the unicameralists contended, a bicameral legislature would 



BICAMERALISM VERSUS UNICAMERALISM 



237 



be a vestige of ai'istocracy, with the members of the Senate 
feeling that they were greater and more important than 
those of the lower house ; whereas, under a unicamei'al sj’S- 
tem, all the legislators would be of equal rank, 

Di\ision among the Bicameralists. — There were more 
bicameralists than unicameralists in the Convention; but 
they were divided owing to the lack of a common plan for 
organizing the upper house of the bicameral legislature. 
The bicameralists belonged to three gitjups. To the first 
group belonged the delegates — including practically all the 
members of the committee on legislative pow^i* — who were 
in favor of supporting the report of the committee, namely, 
the election of the members of the Senate throughout the 
nation on the basis of proportional representation. The 
second group included those who were in favor of having 
a senator for every province. The third group was com- 
posed of those who, -not being in favor of either of the 
foregoing plans, would rather adhere to the system under 
the Jones Law of electing the senators from the then ex- 
isting senatorial districts. The first and second groups 
were vei'y frank about the fact that, should their plan fail, 
they would vote for a unicameral system. 

In this division among the bicameralists was found the 
fatal weakness of bicameralism in the Convention. It was 
a division that could not be avoided owing to the lack 
of a basis for constituting the Senate, supported by all or 
by a big majority of them. 

The Defeat of Bicameralism in the Convention. — Al- 
though by a resolution of the Convention on October 8, 
1934 it was agreed to have the debates on the issue of 
bicameralism versus unicameralism last for only four days, 
with the voting to take place on October 12, 1934, the 
voting was postponed several times. One of the x*easons 
for the postponement was the desire of President Recto 
to express his personal views on the question at a caucus 
of the majority scheduled for October 20, 1934. President 
Recto, it must be remembered, was in favor of a unicameral 



238 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



legislature unless the Senate would be constituted on the 
basis of nation-at-large representation. For this he had 
always worked while still a member of the House of Rep- 
resentatives. In his letter to President Recto from abi’cad, 
President jQuezon said that he was in favor of constituting 
the Senate on the basis of nation-at-large representation, 
the same plan for which Recto had been wox'king while 
still a representative. 

At the caucus of the majority party delegates on Oc- 
tober 20, 1934, President Recto formally revealed to the 
delegates that President Quezon, then abroad, in a letter 
to him expressed his opposition to the idea of having one 
senator for every province and also his desire to have the 
Senate constituted on the basis of nation-at-large repic- 
sentation. There was a very vehement opposition in the 
caucus to the nation-at-large plan of electing the members 
of the Senate although it had not been presented for a 
formal vote. 

The caucus of the majority party delegates, after some 
opposition, approved the motion presented vei-y informally 
by President Recto to the effect that, should the Conven- 
tion decide in favor of ^ bicameral legislature, the idea of 
one senator for every province should be dropped so that 
6 Selection would be between the system under the Jones 

aw and the recommendation of the committee on legisla- 
tive power. 

The approval of this motion w^as the first blow to the 
cause of bicameralism in the Convention. The bicamera- 
nsts from the small provinces expressed frankly their in- 
ention to join the ranks of the unicameralists in the final 
VO ing on the main resolution. 

After this caucus and before the voting on the main 
resolution on October 22, 1934, some members of the Phil- 
ippine Senate secretly resolved among themselves to help 
secure enough support for the retention of the bicameral 
system; but before they had been given enough chance to 
work effectively among the delegates of their respective 



BICAMERALISM VERSUS UNICAMERALISM 



239 



districts, the Convention with many of the delegates feeling 
slighted by the alleged interference of the senators in their 
proceedings pressed for a vote on October 22, 1934, in spite 
of President Recto’s pi'omise to the senatoi’s to delay the 
vote on the question until October 23, 1934. 

On October 22, 1934, after the Convention had decided 
to vote on the original resolution. Delegate Roxas presented 
a motion for the consideration without debate of the pro- 
position that, in the event of the establislmient of a bicame- 
ral system, the Senate should be elected throughout the 
Philippines. He added that he was one of those in favor 
of a bicameral system provided that the Senate would be 
elected throughout the Philippines; otherwise, he planned 
to vote with the unicameralists. 

Although there was some objection to the pi*ocedure of 
submitting the proposition before the voting on the main 
question, the Convention by 71 votes against 60 votes ap- 
proved the Roxas motion. 

Delegate Briones then presented a resolution amend- 
ing the original one so that the members of the Senate 
should be elected nation-at-large. Put to a vote, the 
Briones proposition was defeated by 117 votes against 47 
votes. This was the second blow to the cause of bicamera- 
lism in the Convention. Many of the delegates who had 
been supporting the bicameral principle in the hope that 
the Senate would be composed of men elected throughout 
the Philippines decided then to favor a unicameral system 
which they preferred to the bicameral system under the 
Jones Law. 

When put to a vote, the original resolution for a bica- 
meral legislature was defeated by 94 votes against 71 af- 
firmative votes. Thus was established by the Convention 
a unicameral system in the Philippines. 

Press Comments. — The establishment of a unicameral 
system by the Convention was the object of widespread 
comments. The press which had been very active in the 



240 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

movement for a unicameral system lauded the act of the 
Convention, some of the newspapers once more pointing out 
the advantages of the new system. 

In its issue for October 23, 1934, the La Vangiuirdia, 
published the following editorial on the adoption of the uni- 
cameral system: 

“UNICAMERAL 

“The first positive act of the Convention refers to the 
establishment under the government of the Commonwealth, 
for the first time in the political history of the Philippines 
since the establishment of the Philippine Assembly, of the 
unicameral system. With such a reform, the old and al- 
ready worn out system of two separate legislative chambers 
disappears completely. 

“There are various advantages of unicameralism. The 
first is that the organization becomes simpler and conse- 
quently more efficient and economical. The second is that 
responsibility becomes concentrated and not divided, and the 
people can focus their attention upon only one body. The 
third is the concentration of efforts instead of dispersion 
and waste of time and of words. The fourth is that there 
is avoided the game of hoodman’s blind, the “passing of the 
buck”, which conceals moral cowardice. The fifth is the 
elimination of the common belief that the Senate is by its 
nature a conservative body, when from our own experience 
we know that, when it suits itself or wishes to be liberal or 
advanced, it is sometimes more radical than the lower house. 
The sixth is that under such a system those who are ma- 
tured in judgment and those who are not, on being brought 
together in a single chamber, become more closely related: 
and the reciprocal influence is advantageous. The seventh 
IS that the prejudice, more than anything else the product 
pt an inherited psychological atmosphere, that the Senate 
IS a semi-aristocratic body, the defender of privileged in- 
terests of all classes, is eliminated ^vit,h this reform. 

“We could point out other advantages, but there is 
enough with those already indicated.” 

About the same matter, the Philippines Herald, in its 
issue for -the same day, published the following editorial : 

“THE UNICAMERAL SYSTEM 
“In proposing the adoption of the unicameral system 
for the law-making machinery of the Philippine Common- 



BICAMERALISM VERSUS UNICAMERALISM 



241 



wealth, the Constitutional Convention has chosen the short 
cut to economy and convenience. As early as March 31 last^ 
or exactly four months before the Convention met^ the 
Herald proposed that a unicameral legislature be adopted. 
We reproduce the follo\\ing excerpt from an editorial we 
wrote on that day: 

*As to the form of legislature we should have we 
believe that there can be no dispute about the ^visdom 
of having only one chamber of popular representation. 
We are too sinall a nation to be able to afford the 
luxury of a house and a senate at the same time. After 
all, this relic of republican Rome is out of place now 
when the representation is essentially and primarily 
popular, rather than a representation of classes and 
special interests. One popular assembly, to all intents 
and purposes, will be sufficient to speak the will of the 
people.'' 

“It is interesting to recall that the Roman Senate was 
a creature of the aristocratic convictions of the time. It 
was the age of embitterment between patricians and ple- 
beians, and the patricians, who were men of property, had 
naturally the upper hand. Only they, therefore, were en- 
titled to hold seats in the Senate, by the Consuls' appoint- 
ment, and all the plebeians were allowed to do was to vote 
for the Consuls, who had to be patricians. Thus the Senate 
was but the instrument of the aristocracy's grip on the great 
mass of the Roman people. 

“The idea of bicameralism was the fashion during the 
eighteenth century and the United States adopted it mainly 
under the natural influence of the prevailing British system. 
The original parliament of England was composed exclu- 
sively of Lords. Then the House of Commons was bom, 
as the spokesman for the average man. The House of Lords 
was retained as the representative of the so-called substan- 
tial man. 

“The whole arrangement pointed strongly to the distrust 
in which the men of property of the time held the great 
mass of the people. It was feared that the commonalty 
would not be able to control itself, that the House of Com- 
mons was apt to be too impetuous in its ways. The signs 
were not lacking that this was so in a way, as the record 
of the Rump Parliament, which sent Charles I to the scaf- 
fold, would show. 

“A truly democratic system as we understand it to be 
in the Philippines can hardly be expected to prosper upon 



242 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

a social division of the people. The idea of a “select” up- 
per chamber is odious to our popular mind. We want our 
le^slature to be universally representative of the people 
of this realm, we want no chamber that would legislate for 
one class of ourjpopulation, and another chamber that would 
look after another clas.= in particular. 

“That is the social implication of it which we cannot 
help but reject. On the other hand, there is the rather crude 
political concept that underlies the idea of checking on the 
acts of the commonalty. If we feel that we cannot give our 
common people their full political rights without their being 
watched by a group of “superior” and “select” senators, let 
us give up the idea of democracy in favor of autocracy. 

Attempts to Reconsider the Question.— There were 
several attempts to reconsider the issue of bicameralism 
versus unicameralism in the weeks that followed, especially 
in the days immediately following the arrival of President 
Quezon from abroad. It was said that President Quezon 
expressed the desire to have the matter reconsideied with 
a view to finding out if 'the Convention could possibly adopt 
a bicameral plan with the members of the Senate elected 
throughout the Philippines on the basis of proportional 
representation. But the Convention refused to reconsider 
the mattei* because of the conviction that a unicameial sys- 
tem was really better than a bicameral system and because 
of the fact that a reconsideration might cause an unneces- 
sary delay in the proceedings of the Convention. 



CHAPTER XXI 



THE ORGANIZATION OF THE NATIONAL 
ASSEMBLY. 

The Name of the Lawmaking Body. — With the Conven- 
tion having decided to organize a unicameral lawmaking 
body, one of the first questions brought to the attention 
of the delegates was that with i*espect to the name of the 
lawmaking body and, the title that would go with the mem- 
bers thereof. Some delegates proposed the name, Con- 
gress; while others would like to call it Legislature. The 
sub-committee of seven proposed in the first draft of the 
Constitution the name. National Assembly. With respect 
to the title of members tliereof, some proposed the title, 
legislators; othei’s preferred to retain the old title, repre- 
sentatives, under the Jones Law. The sub-committee of 
seven used in the first draft of the Constitution the term, 
Members of the National Assembly. 

The consideration of the question about the name of 
the lawTuaking body and the title of its members was, after 
a brief discussion, referred to the special committee on 
style for its determination. 

The revised draft of the Constitution coming from the 
special committee on style retained the name. National As- 
sembly, for the lawmaking body; and the term. Members 
of the National Assembly, for members thereof. It was a 
common understanding in the committee that members of 
the National Assembly should be called more briefly As- 
semblymen. The following interpellations by Delegate Sa- 
lumbides to President Recto took place on February 8, 1935, 
during the consideration of the amendments on the Con- 
stitution by the special committee on style. 

“Delegate Salumbides . — I remember that there were 
many amendments presented to change the name. National 
Assembly, to Congress or Legislature. Did the committee 
consider those amendments? 



244 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

“President Recto. — Yes; we preferred to maintain the 
words, ‘National Assembly.' 

“Delegate Salumbides. — Did the committee take into ac- 
count that the word, ‘Legislature,’ is better? 

“President Recto. — The word, ‘Legislature,’ is commonly 
used in the States by the State Legislature. When you say 
National Assembly, it is the Legislature or Congress of the 
people. 

“Delegate Salutnbidea. — How will you call the members 
of the Assembly? 

“President Recto. — We call the members of the Nation.al 
Assembly ‘Assemblymen,’ or we call ‘diputados’ in Spanish. 

“Delegate Salumbides. — Does not the gentleman think 
that it would be better if the members are called ‘legisla- 
tors’ and the body ‘Legislature’? It is more specific. 

“President Recto. — I think the words, ‘National Assem- 
bly,’ will be better and express better our idea.” 

The Size of the National Assembly.— Following the 
principle laid down in the report of the committee on leg- 
islative power, the sub-committee of seven in the first 
draft of the Constitution placed a maximum limit on the 
number of members of the National Assembly. The maxi- 
mum number was fixed at one hundred and twenty, the 
same number recommended by the committee on legisla- 
tive power for the lower house of the proposed bicameral 

legislature. 

The principle of placing in the Constitution a max- 
imum limit on the number of members of the National As- 
sembly was readily approved in the Convention, although 
^ere were divisions of opinion on the maximum number. 
Delegates Lim, Conol, and Buslon proposed that the num- 
ber should be one hundred; and Delegate Santos, that it 
should be one hundred and thirty. But the Convention 
rejected both propositions in favor of the provision of the 
draft which fixed it at one hundred and twenty. 

The constitutional limitation on the maximum number 
of members of the National Assembly was inspired by the 
desire of the Convention to prevent the unnecessary en- 
largement in the future of the membership of the National 
Assembly. The Convention intended this to be another 



ORGANIZATION OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 



245 



step in the direction of an economical government, without 
impairing the efficiencj" of the lawmaking body nor affect- 
ing the A\isdom of its decisions; for it believed that the 
number agreed upon was big enough for a deliberative 
body, but not too big to make of the National Assembly 
unwieldy for legislative purposes. 

The Composition of the National Assembly. — ^The Con- 
vention left to the National Assembly the determination of 
the number of its members, subject to the limitation that it 
should not exceed one hundred and twenty. To the Na- 
tional Assembly was likewise left the authority to deter- 
mine the distribution of legislative seats to the different 
provinces, provided that each province should have at least 
one member. 

There was a very strong movement in the Convention 
led by Delegate Cuenco to detennine in the Constitution 
the layout of the different districts. For sometime it was 
thought that the plan would prosper. The movement was 
rapidly gaining headway until President Quezon, in infor- 
mal conferences with the majority party delegates, ex- 
pressed his opposition to the idea, which was not entirely 
free from the accompanying evil of gerrjTnandering. It 
was for this reason that the Convention finally decided to 
leave to the National Assembly the full power to lay out 
the different legislative districts. 

The Constitution contemplates periodic census-taking 
and an apportionment of the legislative seats within three 
years after the return of every enumeration; for it is pro- 
vided in the same that the members of the National As- 
sembly shall be apportioned among the several provinces 
as nearly as may be according to the number of their 
respective inhabitants. 

During the consideration of the article on the legis- 
lative department, there was a very insistent demand for 
the reapportionment of members of the National Assembly 
from the regularly organized provinces on the basis of re- 
cently estimated population and no longer that upon which 



246 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

was based the appox’tionment in the Jones Law. The de- 
mand was sponsored primai’ily by delegates from Nueva 
Ecija, the Mindanao provinces, Cebu, Ilocos Sur, and sev- 
eral others; but the majority of the delegates thought it 
better to leave the matter of reappoi-tionment to the Na- 
tional Assembly. 

The Constitution reads: 

“Until such apportionment, the National Assembly shall 
consist of ninety-eight members, of whom eighty-seven shall 
be elected by the representative districts as now provided 
by law; and three by the Mountain Province, and one by 
each of the other eight existing special provinces. 

Before the adoption ^of the Constitution, Mindanao and 
Sulu were represented by only five representatives, although 
there were seven special provinces ; the Mountain Province, 
by three representatives ; and Nueva Vizcaya, by one rep- 
re^sentative. 

In the first draft of the Constitution, it was provided 
that until a ^new apportionment should have been made, the 
National Assembly should consist of ninety-six members, of 
whom eighty-seven should be elected by the districts then 
provided by law, and nine elected, respectively, by the nine 
special provinces. Under this provision of the draft, each 
of the seven special provinces of Mindanao and Sulu was to 
be given a representative, making the number of represen- 
tatives altogether seven instead of five. But the number 
of representatives from the Mountain province was reduced 
from three under the Jones Law to only one. 

Naturally, the delegates from the Mountain Province 
objected to the proposed reduction; and their objec- 
tion was sustained by the members of the sub-commit- 
tee of seven. Through Delegate Cuaderno, the sub-com- 
mittee of seven proposed an amendment to the provision 
of the first draft, making the number of representatives 
ninety-eight instead of ninety-six, and the number of rep- 
resentatives from the Mountain Province three instead of 
only one. The amendment was approved by the Conven- 



ORGANIZATION OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 



247 



tion. The Cuaderno amendment upon which the provision 
of the Constitution in its pi'esent form was based read : 

“Until such apportionment shall have been made, the 
National Assembly shall consist of 98 members, of whom 
87 shall be elected by the districts now provided by law, 3 
elected by the Mountain Province, 1 elected respectively by 
each of the 7 provinces in Mindanao and Sulu, and 1 by the 
province of Nueva Vizcaya.” 

Delegate Jumawan from Negros Oriental, lieutenant- 
governor of the sub-province of Siquijor, worked very hard 
for his proposition of giving in the Constitution at least a 
representative for that sub-province. He presented to the 
Convention and to the individual members thei’eof cax’efully 
prepared memorials showing that by the number of its 
population and by its geographical location, being an island, 
Siquijor was entitled to at least one representative and 
should not be joined to Negros Oriental to fonm only one 
representative district. But he failed in liis efforts to 
make Siquijor a representative district owing to the fact 
that there was involved, in giving to Siquijor a representa- 
tive, the principle of reapportionment for the regularly 
organized provinces, against which the Convention had 
already decided by leaving the matter of reapportionment 
to the law-making body. 

The Selection of Members of the National Assembly. — 
Under the Constitution, all the members of the National 
Assembly are elected by the qualified voters in their res- 
pective districts, with the exception of those from the prov- 
inces of Sulu, Lanao, and Cotabato, who are chosen in n 
manner determined by law. 

The committee on legislative power reported in favor 
of making all the members of the National Assembly 
elected directly by the qualified voters, thereby proposing 
a change to the system under the Jones Law according to 
which the legislators from the non-Christian provinces 
were appointed by the Chief Executive. 

On January 31, 1936, the Convention approved over- 
whelmingly the Suner amendment providing for the elec- 



248 FRAMING OP THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

tion of all the members of the National Assembly by the 
qualified electors of their respective districts. 

In the special committee on style, however, an amend- 
ment was made excepting the provinces of Sulu, Lanao, 
Cotabato, and the Mountain Province. The amendment of 
the committee read as follows: 

“The Members of the National Assembly in the prov- 
inces, of Sulu, Lanao, Mountain Province, and Cotabato shall 
be chosen as may be determined by law; in all other prov- 
inces they shall be elected by. the qualified voters therein. 

This change in the special committee on style was ef- 
fected upon the suggestion of President Quezon, who was 
then in attendance at the session of the committee. Pres- 
ident Quezon informed the special committee that he had 
been approached by leading Moro representatives and de- 
legates who told him that they were opposed to the system 
of direct election for assemblymen from the Moro regions 
because of the conviction that the Moros were not yet fully 
prepared for direct popular election. Moreover, President 
Quezon added, it was not wise that at the time the assem- 
blymen from the non-Christian provinces should be elected 
directly by the people in view of the fact that the majority 
of the qualified electors were Christian Filipinos who were 
concentrated in the developed towns of the region. A sys- 
tem of direct election at the time would mean the sure 
election of Christian rather than of Mohammedan Fi- 
lipinos. It was therefore decided to leave to the National 
Assembly the manner of choosing the assemblymen from 
the regions excepted in order to insure the election of Mo- 
hammedan Filipinos rather than Christian Filipinos. The 
National Assembly was given the power to determine when 
the assemblymen from the Moro regions of Sulu, Lanao, 
and Cotabato would be elected directly by the people. The 
inclusion of the Mountain Province among the provinces 
excepted was likewise inspired by the desire to see to it 
that the natives would be given a fair chance to be elected 
as assemblymen. 



ORGANIZATION OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 



249 



The change proposed by the special committee on style 
caused no little excitement among the delegates from the 
Mountain Province and Lanao. 

The delegates from the Mountain Province were unan- 
imously against the plan of having the assemblj^men from 
the Mountain Province chosen in any manner other than 
by direct popular election. Under the leadership of De- 
legate Elpidio Quii'ino, who although not a delegate from 
the Mountain Province took a special interest in the matter, 
the delegates from the Mountain Province worked very 
hard for the rejection of the amendment of the special 
committee on style in so far as it referred to the Mountain 
Province. 

In addition to Delegate Quirino, Delegates Velasco and 
Gumangan fi'om the Mountain Province spoke vigorously 
against the amendment. In part, Delegate Velasco said: 

“President Quezon, our beloved leader, in the course of 
his speech before us the other day, stated that we are going 
back to our respective homes and face those people who sent 
us and tell them that we have done our duty not only as 
patriots but also as statesmen, that we have served the 
highest ideals of patriotism and have peered into the dim 
and distant future so that we may serve not only the needs 
of today but also the demands of tomorrow. On the con- 
trary, we delegates from the Mountain Province are going 
back to our respective districts and we shall be branded not 
as heroes but as traitors, because we are not granted the 
right to elect our representatives by popular vote. .... 

‘'In asking you to give the right of popular suffrage, I 
am prompted by no selfish ambition but by a desire to have 
justice done to the people of the Mountain Province. As we 
are assembled here to draft the Constitution of the Com- 
monwealth government and probably of the future Philippine 
Republic Government, let us not consider only the details of 
operation and administration of the prospective government. 
But let us carefully provide for a Magna Charta which in- 
sures complete political equality among Christian and non- 
Christian Filipinos in the discharge of their political rights 
and in the enjoyment of the essence of democracy.” 

Delegate Gumangan, in the course of his speech, said: 

'‘What we are requesting from you, gentlemen of this 
Convention, is the practice of democracy, justice, and liberty 



250 framing of the Philippine constitution 

as was emphasized by our greatest leader, President Que- 
zon, in this hall the day before. We wish to enjoy the 
blessings of those ideals which you, my Christian brothers 
are enjoying. After all, we are all Filipinos, wet by the 
same blood, covered by the same color, and we possess all 
the feelings that you possess 

“You will note, gentlemen of this Convention, that there 
is not one of the delegates from the Mountain Province who 
is opposed to our desire of having suffrage in the Moun- 
tain Province. And so there is no reason why we shall not 
be granted such enfranchisement.” 

Because of the unanimous support of the delegates 
from the Mountain Province, the Convention by 83 affii-m- 
ative votes against 11 negative votes decided to give the 
people of that region the right to vote directly for their 
assemblymen. 

With respect to Lanao, there was a division between 
the two delegates from that province. Delegate Cabili 
fought hard for the direct election of, the assemblyman from 
Lanao, but he was opposed by Sultan-Delegate Alonto. Be- 
cause of this division, the Convention voted to sustain the 
amendment by 72 affirmative votes against 43 negative 
votes. 

The two delegates from Sulu had always been against 
the popular election of legislators from the island. The 
delegates from Cotabato were indifferent on the matter. 
Consequently, no opposition came from their quarters to 
the proposition from the special committee on style. 

The Qualifications of Members of the National Assem- 
report of the committee on legislative power 
recommending the adoption of a bicameral legislatui’e, the 
age qualification for membership in the lower house'was 
fixed at 25 years; and that for the Senate, at 30 years. 

These age qualifications were likewise adopted in the 
preliminary report of the sub-committee of seven before 
the decision on the debates on the question of whether or 
not the legislature should be bicameral. However, with 
the adoption by the Convention of a unicameral system, the 



ORGANIZATION OP THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 



251 



sub-committee of seven fixed the age qualification for mem- 
bership in the National Assembly at 30 yearn, in order to 
insure the presence in that body of men of experience and 
maturity of judgment for legislative work. 

During the debates on the provision of the first diaft 
of the Constitution referring to^ qualifications for mem- 
bership in the National Assembly, there were amendments 
presented by Delegates Gullas, Vinzons, Cea, and Ricohei- 
moso setting the age qualification at 25 yeare, and by De- 
legate Cruz setting it at 35 years; but these amendments 
v/ere defeated, the Convention deciding to retain the age 
qualification of 30 years fixed in the first draft of the 
Constitution. 

With respect to the citizenship requirement for mem- 
bership in the National Assembly, the first draft of the 
Constitution, as it was in the report of the committee on 
legislative power, provided for citizenship in the Philippines 
for at least five years, thereby opening seats in the National 
Assembly not only to natural-born citizens of the Philip- 
pines but also to naturalized citizens who had become such 
for a period of five years. 

Delegate Mumar px'oposed an amendment to restrict 
membership in the National Assembly to natural-bom citi- 
zens of the Philippines in keeping, he said, with the na- 
tionalistic ideas of the other provisions of the draft. 
Arguing for his amendment to that effect, he said: 

“If the duties and powers of our Chief Executive are 
only given to a natural-bom citizen of the Philippines, and 
if the duties and powers of the Supreme Court and the 
Court of Appeals are given only to natural-bom citizens of 
the Philippines, I do not see any reason, Mr. President, in 
my humble way of thinking why the duties and powers of 
the Legislative Department should not be given only to na- 
tural-born citizens of the Philippines. It is my humble 
opinion that the powers and duties of the Legislative De- 
partment are more important than the powers and duties 
of the Chief Executive and the Judicial Department, because 
the Chief Executive only sees to it that the laws passed by 
the Legislature are complied with by the people, and the 



252 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

Judicial Department only sees to it that the laws passed by 
the Legislature are correctly interpreted when they are 
brought before them. But in the case of the Legislature 
it is that body that makes the laws for the entire nation — 
the laws that may be passed by it affect our national honor 
and dignity — affect our economic, sociaF, and political inte- 
rests. In other words, the laws passed by the Philippine 
Legislature affect everything in the Philippines. For this 
reason, Mr. President, I humbly believe that the powers and 
duties of the Legislative Department should only be given 
to natural-born citizens of the Philippines, because these 
people, having Filipino sentiments, traditions, characteristics, 
and interests, would undoubtedly protect anything and every- 
thing that is Philippine.’^ 

The amendment was defeated, however, after a de- 
fense of the draft by Delegate Briones, who contended that 
there was no reason for depriving naturalized citizens of 
the Philippines of such a political right. After all, he con- 
tended, the election of members of the National Assembly 
epended upon the body politic. If the body politic would 
elect a naturalized citizen, that fact meant that it reposed 
confidence in him. 

With respect to the residence requirement, there were 
several camps of thought in the Convention. A group of 
e egates led by Delegate Ricardo Nepomuceno favored the 
eimination altogether of the local residence requirement, 
0 owing the example of England and Spain. In arguing 

or an amendment to this effect. Delegate Nepomuceno said 
in part: 

‘‘If this amendment is approved by this Convention, the 
effect would be that every Filipino who possesses all the 
other qualifications required by the Constitution to be a 
member of the National Assembly may present his can- 
didacy in any district of the Philippines although he has 
not resided therein I humbly maintain that every Fi- 

lipino should be given an opportunity to serve his country 
without the necessity of residing in the particular district in 
which he may choose to run. It seems to me that it is to 
the interest of the district and to the interest of the Filipino 
people as a whole for them to be able to choose from as 
many good Filipinos las may be possible. If we accord to na- 



ORGANIZATION OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 



253 



turalized citizens merely by the fact of naturalization the 
right to become members of the National Assembly, I think 
there is much more reason to permit a Filipino, because he 
is a Filipino and not because he has been naturalized only, 
to be a member of the National Assembly.” 

However, the Convention voted to defeat the amend- 
ment, preferring to require of the members of the National 
Assembly some local residence. 

With the Convention bent on requiring of assembly- 
men local i-esidence, the next question was: Should the re- 
quired residence be in the legislative district as it was un- 
der the Jones Law, or should it be in a greater geographical 
area — the province? 

The sub-committee of seven recommended in the first 
draft of the Constitution the adoption of a provincuiV rather 
than a district residence requirement. Delegate Briones 
of the sub-committee explained that the provision of the 
draft was a compromise between the district system of the 
Jones Law and the English and Spanish systems of not 
requiring any residence at all. 

The provision of the draft met with tremendous op- 
position on the part of many delegates of the Convention. 
A group of delegates under the leadership of Delegates 
Ventura, Orense, Vinzons, and Baltao mobilized themselves 
to work for the retention of the district residence require- 
ment of the Jones Law. 

They pointed out in the debates the fact that the re- 
sidence requirement in constitutions was predicated upon 
the philosophy that a legislator should be acquainted tho- 
rougly with the needs of his constituency. Consequently, 
to provide that it would be sufficient for the legislator to 
reside in the province, not necessarily in ,the district, would 
be to defeat the purpose of the residence requirement. 

It was argued, however, in defense of the provision of 
the draft that it widened the field from which to select 
the best men to represent the respective districts. After 
all, the electorate had the complete conti'ol of elections. 
Under the draft, should it decide to be represented by 



254 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



a native son, a district could do so ; but it should not be 
prevented by a constitutional district residence require- 
ment, should it wish, from selecting one from the province, 
although not a district son, who it believed could represent 
it worthily. 

The Convention voted finally to defeat the distHct res- 
idence amendment by 71 votes against 66 affirmative votes 
thereby adopting the provincial residence requirement of 
the first draft of the Constitution. 



Should this provincial residence requirement be actual 
or legal residence? The first draft of the Constitutmn tol- 
lowing the phraseology of the Jones Law, provided for 
acM residence. But the word, actml, was sti-uck out, 
in accordance with an amendment to that effect by Dele- 
gate Alejandro de Gusman, carried by 71 affirmative vot« 
against 88 negative votes. In reasoning out his amend- 
ment, Delegate de Guzman said : 

.... 1 r^ntlemen of the Convention: I 

“Mr. President and (aenLien*^ r ..u 

have desired to disturb the attention of the Conven- 
tion about the consideration of this amendment, because 
the words, actual residence, interpreted as such, mean 
that the candidate should have his actual residence m 
the district. And if he does not have actual residence be- 
cause he is a lawyer, for example, although he was born m 
his province and is in Manila only because of a certain 
employment or business, according to this phrase of the 
Constitution, he would be deprived or at least the returns in 
the event that he is elected representative of his district 
would be very protestable. Kesidence, according to Amer- 
ican authorities may be actual or constructive. Actual, 
when the candidate lives actually and is found physically 
living, having his house, in the district; and constructive, 
when he is absent but his heart and his feelings are for the 
province wherein he was born and wherein he wishes to be 
a candidate for representative. Mr. President, in the case 
of other gentlemen who are lawyers who come to Manila to 
exercise the profession of law because they do not like to 
exercise it in their provinces but who have never forgotten 
the feelings of their native provinces and of their districts, 

and the popular longings why should we deprive them 

and other citizens of the right to represent merely because 






ORGANIZATION OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 255 



of the lack of actual residence as the law says, as our pro- 
posed constitution says ^actual residence'? Why can^t we 
give the same opportunity to those individuals who like 
and love so much their province and their district, very 
much more than those who live or reside actually in the 
. province? It would be an injustice, Mr. President, that 
those individuals be deprived of the right to represent the 
province wherein they first saw the light of day.** 

Vacancies in the National Assembly. — Following sub- 
stantially the provision of the Jones Law, the Philippine 
Constitution provides that: 

“In the case of vacancy in the National Assembly a spe- 
cial election may be called in the corresponding district, in 
the manner prescribed by law, but the Member thus elected 
shall serve only for the unexpired term.” 

Officers of the National Assembly. — Following sub- 
stantially the provision of the Jones Law, the Philippin'® 
Constitution provides : 

“The National Assembly shall choose its Speaker, a 
secretary, a sergeant-at-arms, and such other officers as 
may be required.” 

The Convention used the word, Secretai'y, instead of 
the word, clerk, in the Jones Law in order to raise the 
category of that officer of the Assembly. It struck out the 
words, and assistants, of the Jones Law for being already 
included in the phrase, such other officers. 

There were no discussions in the Convention on tke 
powers and duties of these officers, the delegates leaving 
them to be determined by the National Assembly itself. It 
was of course the understanding that, as at the time of 
the drafting of the Constitution, the National Assembly was 
to be presided by the Speaker, who should be considered , the 
head of the legislative department of the government, com- 
bining in his person the personality of the President of 
the defunct Senate and the Speaker of the old House of 
Representatives. The category that should be accorded to 
the Speaker of the National /Assembly w:as defined by Pres- 
ident Recto himself in defending, the increase by the sp'ecial 



256 ORGANIZATION OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 



commiftee on srtyle of the salary of the Speaker from fif- 
teen thousand pesos to sixteen thousand pesos. President 
Recto said: 

“I submit the amendment to the salary of the Speaker 
of the National Assembly. The Convention voted for the 
sum of fifteen thousand pesos, and the committee on style 
recommends that it be sixteen thousand pesos. And the 
reason is very simple. The salary which the Constitution 
fixes for the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, as supreme 
head of the judicial power or department, is sixteen thou- 
sand pesos. We believe that the head of the legislative 
power, which precisely represents the people, should re« 
ceive, until the legislature should provide otherwise, the 
same amount of sixteen thousand pesos. We should take 
into account that the National Assembly is made up of only 
one house, so that the Speaker of the Assembly will be the 
sole head of the legislative department of the government, 
combining in his person the personality of the President of 
the Senate which we had and that of the Speaker of the 
House of Representatives. We believe that the chairman 
of the national legislative body ought to receive the same 
salary as the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.’* 



CHAPTER XXII 



THE COMMISSIONS IN THE NATIONAL 
ASSEMBLY 

The Electoral Commission 

Introduction. — One of the new political institutions set 
up in the Philippine Constitution is the Electoral Com- 
mission, composed of three Justices of the Supreme Court 
designated by the Chief Justice and of six Members chosen 
by the National Assembly, three of whom shall be nomi- 
nated by the party having the largest number of votes, 
and three by the party having the second largest number 
of votes therein. The Electoral Commission is the sole 
judge of all contests relating to the election, returns, and 
qualifications of the Members of the National Assembly. 

The creation of the Electoral Commission was one o£ 
the happy results of the generally non-partisan delibera- 
tions of the Convention. 

Before the framing of the Constitution, under the dif- 
ferent organic acts for the Philippines, the lawmaking body 
was the judge of the elections, returns, and qualifications 
of its members. The Philippine Bill of 1902, wdiich set 
up the Philippine Assembly, pi'ovided: 

“The Assembly shall be the judge of the elections, re- 
turns, and qualifications of its members.” 

The Philippine Autonomy Act of 1916 {Jones Law), which 
created a bicameral legislature, provided: 

‘‘That the senate and house of representatives, respec- 
tively, shall be the sole judges of the elections, returns, and 
qualifications of their elective members.’’ 

The experience of the Filipino people under the pro- 
visions of the organic laws which left to the law’^making 
body the determination of the elections, returns, and qual- 
ifications of its. members was not altogether sa tisfactor y. 
There were many complaints against the lack of political 



258 framing of the PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

justice in this determination ; for in a great number of 
cases, party interests controlled and dictated the decisions. 
The undue delay in the dispatch of election contests for leg- 
islative seats, the irregularities that characterized the pro- 
ceedings in some of them, and the very apparent injec- 
tion of partisanship in the detennination of a great num- 
ber of the cases were decried by a great number of the 
people as well as by the organs of public opinion. 

The faith of the people in the uprightness of the law- 
making body in the performance of this function assigned 
to it in the organic laws was by no means gi'eat. In fact 
so blatant was the lack of political justice in the decisions 
of the lawmaking body in many of the election contests 
that there was gradually built up a camp of thought in 
the Philippines inclined to leave to the courts the determi- 
nation of election contests, follov/iog the practice in some 
countries, like England and Canada- 

Such were the conditions of things at the time of the 
meeting of the Convention. 

Recommendations on the Electoral Commission. — Two 
of the committees of the Convention — the committee on 
con.stitutional guarantees, presided by Delegate Lim, and 
the committee on legislative power — reported in favor of 
a departure from the traditional pr’actice of leaving to the 
lawmaking body the determination of the election, re- 
turns, and qualifications of the rnornbers. 

The committee on constitutional guarantees in its re- 
port dated September 15, 1934 recommended that election 
protests against members of the L-gislature should be de- 
cided by a Tribunal of Constitutional Security, composed of 
three justices of the Supreme Court, to be designated by its 
members ; two senators, to be designated one each from the 
two major parties in the Senate; two representatives or 
congressmen, to be designated one each from the two major 
parties in the House of Representatives; and two repre- 
sentatives of the executive power, to be designated by the 
President or the one acting in his place. The Tribunal 
should be presided by the senior justice of the Supreme 



THE COMMISSIONS IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 259 



Court, unless the president thei*eof was a member, in which 
case the latter should preside. 

In its report dated September 24, 1934 the commit- 
tee on legislative power recommended that: 

“The elections, returns and qualifications of the mem- 
bers of cither House and all cases contesting the election of 
any of their members shall be judged by an Electoral Com- 
mission, constituted, as to each House, by three members 
elected by the members of the party having the largest num- 
ber of votes therein, tliree elected by the members of the 
party having the second largest number of votes, and as 
its Chairman, one Justice of the Supreme Court desigpiated 
by the Chief Justice.” 

In recommending an independent tribunal to deter- 
mine contests for legislative seats, the committees were in- 
fluenced not only by their dissatisfaction against the old 
system but also by the existence of similar institutions in 
other countries, with the constitutions of which a great 
number of the delegates were acquainted. The other de- 
legates were equally influenced by the same in the final ap- 
proval of the plan for an independent tribunal. 

The delegates to the Convention were acquainted with 
the Constitution of the Republic of Spain of 1931, which 
inspired the idea of the committee on constitutional gua- 
rantee for the creation of a Tidbunal of Constitutional Se- 
curity. Lilcewise were they acquainted with the fact that 
contests for legislative seats were decided by the courts 
in England, in the Dominion of Canada, in Australia, and 
in Poland; and by an electoral commission or court in 
Czechoslovakia, in the German Reich, and in Prussia. 
During the Convention days, they had with them for re- 
ference copies of the constitutions of these countries and 
political science books on the same. 

The proposition to create a body composed not exclu- 
sively of members of the lawmaking body for the determi- 
nation of election contests for legislative seats — a depar- 
ture from the traditional system — was therefore favorably 
received by a great number of the delegates and also by the 



260 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

press. The Tribune, in its issue for September 26, 1934, 
published the following editorial praising the i*eport of the 
committee on legislative power: 

“A COMPROMISE PLAN 

*‘The proposal that under the commonwealth govern- 
ment, election protests against members of the legislature 
be heard by a commission composed of members of the leg- 
islature, with a justice of the supreme court as chairman, 
is a compromise measure. 

‘‘Under the present law either house of the legislature 
is the sole judge of the elections, returns and qualifications 
of its members. There have been departures from this in 
other countries where this power is vested in the judiciary. 
The compromise consists thus in the inclusion of the mem- 
ber of the supreme court as chairman of an election com- 
mission. 

“Had the proposal been more radical and had it asked 
for the transfer outright of the power to the courts, there 
would be no dearth of reasons for it. Writers on consti- 
tutional government point out that the legislature is not 
so well qualified as the courts to determine questions of 
facts in an election contest; that partisan politics often 
determines the results of election contests decided by a leg- 
islative body; that the time of the legislature should be 
expended in the enactment of laws and not in hearing an 
election contest. 

“But the Briones committee in the constitutional con- 
vention is conservative, and has decided to reconunend the 
compromise plan.” 

The Electoral Commission in the First Draft of the 
Constitution. — The sub-committee of seven, following the 
recommendations of the two foregoing committees, in- 
cluded in the first draft of the Constitution the institu- 
tion of an independent tribunal. In the draft submitted 
to the sponsorship committee on October 20, 1934, the sub- 
committee recommended that: 

“The elections, returns and qualifications of the mem- 
bers of either House and all cases contesting the election 
of any of their members shall be judged by an Electoral 
Commission, constituted, as to each House, by three mem- 
bers elected by the members of the party having the largest 
number of votes therein, three elected by the members of 



rHE COMMISSIONS IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 261 



the party having the second largest number of votes, and 
three justices of the Supreme Court designated by the Chief 
Justice, the Commission to be presided over by one of said 
justices/' 

In view, however, of the decision by the Convention 
on October 22 , 1934 to adopt a bicameral system, the sub- 
committee, making’ cori*esponding changes in the first 
draft, recommended the following provision for the elec- 
toral commission: 

“The elections, returns and qualifications of the Mem- 
bers of the National Assembly and all cases contesting the 
election of any of its Members shall be judged by an Elec- 
toral Commission, composed of three members elected by 
the party having the largest number of votes in the Na- 
tional Assembly, three elected by the members of the party 
having the second largest number of votes, and tliree jus- 
tices of the Supreme Court designated by the Chief Justice, 
the Commission to be presided over by one of said justices.” 

Debates on the Electoral Commission.— The proposed 
creation of the Electoral Commission met with opposition 
on the part of a great number of delegates who saw in 
the radical change an impairment of the doctrine of the 
separation of powers, with the consequent weakening of 
the legislative branch of the government, and a danger to 
the independence and integrity of the judiciary. 

The opponents to the Electoral Commission, led by 
Delegate Labrador, were for the retention in the Consti- 
tution of the privilege of the lawmaking body to be the 
judge of the elections, returns, and qualifications of its 
members, following the practice in the United States and 
in the Philippines under the Jones Law. 

The debates on the Electoral Commission took place 
on December 4, 1934, with the proponents led by Delegates 
Francisco, Orense, and Cuaderno; and the opponents, by 
Delegates Labrador, Villarama, and Kapunan. 

The defense of the Electoral Commission was based 
primarily upon the hope and belief that the abolition of 
party lines because of the equal representation in this body 
of the majority and the minority parties of the National 



262 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



Assembly and the intervention of some members of the 
Supreme Court who, under the proposed constitutional pro- 
vision, would also be members of the same, would insure 
greater political justice in the determination of election 
contests for seats in the National Assembly than there 
would be if the power had been lodged in the lawmaking 
body itself. Delegate Francisco summarized the arguments 
for the creation of the Electoral Commission in the follow- 
ing words: 

understanci that from the time that this question 
is placed in the hands of members not only of the majority 
party but also of the minority party, there is already a con- 
. dition, a factor which would make protests decided in a 
^non-partisan manner. We know from experience that many 
times in the many protests tried in the House or in the 
Senate, it was impossible to prevent the factor of party 
from getting in. From the moment that it is required that 
not only the majority but also the minority should inter- 
vene in these questions, we have already enough guarantee 
that there would be no tyranny on the part of the major-' 
ity. 

“But there is' another more detail which is the one 
which satisfies me most, and that is the intervention of 
three jus^ces. So that with this intervention of three jus- 
tices, if there would be any question as to the justice ap- 
plied by the majority or the minority, if there would be 
any fundamental disagreement, or if there would be nothing 
but questions purely of party in which the members of the 
majority as well as those of the minority should wish to 
take lightly a protest because the protestant belongs to 
one of said parties, we have in this case, as a check upon 
the two parties, the actuations of the three justices. In 
the last analysis, what is really applied in the determina- 
tion of electoral cases brought before the tribunals of jus- 
tice or before the House of Representatives or the Senate? 
Well, it is nothing more than the law and the doctrines of 
the Supreme Court. If that is the case, there will be greater 
skill in the application of the laws and in the application 
of doctrines to electoral matters, having as we shall have 
three justices who will act impartially in those electoral 
questions. 

“I wish to call the attention of my distinguished col- 
leagues to the fact that in electoral protests it is impossible 



THE COMMISSIONS IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 263 



to set aside party interests. Hence, the best ^arantee, I 
repeat, for the administration of justice to the parties, for 
the fact that the laws will not be applied improperly or in- 
correctly as well as for the fact that the doctrines of the Su- 
preme Court will be applied rightfully, the best guarantee 
which we shall have, I repeat, is the inter\^ention of the three 
. justices. And with the formation of the Electoral Commission, 

I say again, the protestants as well as thejprotestees could 
remain tranquil in the certainty that^thfey will receive the 
justice that they really deser\’'e. If we eliminate from this 
precept the intervention of the party of the minority and 
that of the three justices, then we shall be placing protests 
exclusively in the hands of the party in^po^r. j 

understand, gentlemen, that in practice that has not given 
good results. Many have criticized, many have complained 
against, the tyranny of the majority in electoral cases... 

I repeat that the best guarantee lies in the fact that these 
questions will be judged not only by^ three members of the 
majority but also by three members of the minority^ with 
the additional guarantee of the impartial judgment of three 
justices of the Supreme Court/' 

The opposition to the creation of the Electoi'al Com- 
mission, with all the powers recommended for it in the 
first draft of the Constitution, was very ably supported 
by Delegate Labrador in his scholarly speech on the mean- 
ing and implications of the provision creating it. He 
pointed out that as the provision creating the Electoral 
Commission was in the draft, the powers lodged in that 
body included (1) the right to pass on the returns or cre- 
dentials of the members of the National Assembly; (2) 
the right to investigate and determine the legal eligibility 
of said members; (3) the right to investigate the corrupt 
or illegal practices in the election of said members; and 
(4) the right to try and decide election contests against 
said members. 

Delegate Labrador emphasized the fact that the crea- 
tion of the Electoral Commission, ^vith all the powers pro- 
vided for it in the draft, would impair the independence 
of the legislative branch. In the course of his speech, he 
said : 



264 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



President, the power to determine the qualifica- 
tions, returns, and elections of the members of a legislative 
chamber has always been lodged in said legislative cham- 
ber as a necessary corollary to the doctrine or principle of 
separation of powers, because, as a matter of principle and 
in consonance with sound parliamentary practice, no leg- 
islative body would really become independent of the other 
branches of the Government unless it had the power to 
determine the eligibility and election of the members com- 
posing it. To authorize one branch of the government to 
decide who should form part of the other would make the 
latter entirely subordinate or subservient to the former 
branch. It is in the maintenance of the independence of 
the legislative body from the other coordinate and coequal 
branches of the government, in order that it may give a 
free and untrammelled expression to the popular will, that 
we find the justification for the theory and the doctrine that 
the assembly or the legislature shall be the sole judge of 
the qualifications, returns and elections of its members. For 
in the same manner that it is of utmost importance and 
of supreme consequence to the independence of the judi- 
ciary that the appointment or transfer of judges should 
not be at the will and pleasure of the executive or of the 
legislative branch, or of both jointly, so it is indispensable 
for the maintenance of the independence of the assembly 
that it be free to decide and determine questions affect- 
ing the eligibility, credentials, and elections of its member- 
ship. The maintenance of this independence outweighs all 
other considerations. 

‘'It is indeed difficult to understand the reason why, 
in this draft of the Constitution, there should be a deliberate 
and concerted effort or attempt to deprive the National 
Assembly, the only direct mouthpiece of the people, of the 
rights and prerogatives that should be its due by reason 
of its supreme function of legislation . . . And I ask the 
gentlemen of the Convention, have we so little faith in the 
honor, the integrity, the capacity of the future members 
of the Assembly, in their sense and spirit of justice, that 
we should deny to them even the right to determine their 
own eligibility to the Assembly to which they are elected 
by popular will?'’ 

He added that in effect the creation of the Electoral 
Commission would reduce the National Assembly to a con- 



THE COMMISSIONS IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 265 



dition of subsei’viency and sendlity to the Supreme Court. 
He continued: 



*^Lct me ask your indulgence to allow me to demonstrate 
how this impotency, this subserviency, this servility of the 
National Assembly shall be produced in part by the Elec- 
toral Commission. I will have to refer you to an occasion 
in which feelings run high, an occasion of great political 
commotion, to prove to you how harmful in its effects on 
the Assembly this proposed Electoral Commission will be. 

In normal times, things run smoothly, and the machinery 
of government is not subjected to a rigid test; hence the ex- 
cellence of the Electoral Commission cannot be judged except 
when put to test in extraordinary times, in times of great 
political excitement or commotion, as I have stated. Let 
us suppose that a closely contested general election has 
just been finished, and a party succeeds in electing a ma- 
jority or plurality of four or five seats over the next larg- 
est party in the Assembly. By reason of the closeness of 
the election results, charges of fraud in the elections will 
be launched by one party against another, and no less than 
say nine or ten protests will be filed against members of the 
Assembly. At this juncture the function of the Electoral 
Commission will immediately assume supreme importance, 
as upon its decision will entirely depend which of the poli- 
tical parties will rule or control the Assembly. Unscrupu- 
lous as are political parties in the methods of obtaining 
political supremacy, movements shall be set afoot by the 
rival ones, first to secure from the Chief Justice the ap- 
pointment of justices sympathetic to their o\vn respective 
causes, and later to win the justices appointed to their re- 
spective sides. And so while the Electoral Commission is 
in the statute books, political parties will always compete 
with one another in giving favors, political or otherwise, to 
the Supreme Court as a body, or to the justices individually. 
In hotly contested and close election, this race for favor 
shall reach no limits, for then woe be to the party that has 
not merited the favor or the sympathy of the Supreme 
Court; it shall always lose its contested seats in the Na- 
tional Assembly. So shall political parties become sub- 
servient, servile, impotent, and in turn the National Assem- 
bly controlled and managed by them.” 



Moreover, it was stated, the participation of the Su- 
preme Court in the determination of contests for legisla- 
tive seats would place an unnecessary burden upon the 



266 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

time, energy, and care of the three justices in the Elec- 
toral Commission, who in all probability would have to 
abandon their work in connection with the administration 
of justice in the courts. 

And not only that. It was pointed out by Delegate 
Labrador and likewise by Delegate Kapunan that the in- 
tervention of the Supreme Court in the Electoral Commis- 
sion would drag it into partisan politics, and, in all pro- 
bability, impair its independence which should be preserved 
at all costs^ thereby reducing the prestige that it should 
always enjoy. In the words of Delegate Labrador: 

. .the evil effects of the Commission are greater upon 
the Supreme Court than upon the Assembly itself. In the 
scramble of political parties to have the justices on their re- 
spective sides, the Supreme Court and its members shall 
necessarily be dragged, whether they like it or not, into 
the dirty mud of politics and political intrigues. Even if 
they perform their functions in the Commission wth all 
impartiality and integrity, they will still be subject to the 
virulent attacks of the losing party, which of course vnW 
mince no words to show that it has been defeated of its 
rightful seats by collusion between the winning party and 
the Supreme Court.'* 

Delegate Kapunan stressed the importance of preserv- 
ing the independence of the judiciary and keeping it aloof 
from the mire of partisan politics. To quote him : 

“Let us suppose that the Electoral Commission is al- 
ready functioning. It will happen that since the Supreme 
Court is not composed of angels, probably the members will 
commit errors, as we know that in all the supreme courts 
of the whole world, there have been committed errors too 
unfortunate and deplorable. And even in our country, 1 
have heard so many complaints, reasonable or unreasonable, 
against our Supreme Court. And in practice, those men, 
if they are adherents to the party in power, will do what 
the party wants them to do. If they are enemies of the 
party in power, they will make the minority rise, and that 
puts in danger the national policy; that may endanger the 
fate of the entire country. 

“Moreover, all of us know that in the countries where 
there exists a separation of powers, the Supreme Court is 
the last bulwark where we should seek refuge in the event 



THE COMMISSIONS IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 267 

of the tyranny of the majority. If we are going to permit 
the Supreme Court to intervene in electoral or politi- 
cal questions, as this intervention necessarily means liti- 
gation, and as you know that where there is a suit there 
is always a losing party and a party who will complain 
against the decision, the inter\-ention of the Supreme Court 
will increase the number of protests, and with this increase, 
the number of complainants also increases. And naturally 
we shall finish with stripping the Supreme Court of its 
prestige. And then w’here shall we go? We shall go to 
arms. 

“So that if we are going to have a presidential system 
of government, it is best for us to keep away the members 
of the Supreme Court from the things in w'hich they should 
not butt in. If in the end and after all the members are 
not angels, I should prefer that those errors be committed 
by members of the National Assembly and not by another 
body which should be free from all blemish." 

The Compromise on the Electoitil Commission. — It be- 
came gradually apparent in the course of the debates tliat 
the Convention was evenly divided on the proposition of 
creating the Electoral Commission with the membership 
and powers set forth in the draft. It was growing evi- 
dent, too, that the opposition to the Electoral Commission 
was due to the rather inclusive power of that body to be 
the judge not only of cases contesting the election of the 
members of the National Assembly, but also of their elec- 
tions, returns, and qualifications. 

Many of the delegates wanted to be definitely infonn- 
ed of the scope of the powers of the Electoi’al Commission 
as defined in the first draft before determining their final 
decision ; for if the draft meant to confer upon the Electoral 
Commission the inclusive power to pass upon the elections, 
returns, and qualifications — contested or not — of the mem- 
bers of the National Assembly, they were more inclined 
to vote against the Electoral Commission. In an attempt 
to seek this clarification, the following interpellations took 
place : 

“Delegate Ventura. — Mr. President, we have a doubt 
here as to the scope of the meaning of the first four lines, 
paragraph 6, page 11 of the draft reading: ‘The elections. 



268 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



returns and qualifications of the Members of the National 
Assembly and all cases contesting: the election of any of 
its members shall be judged by an Electoral Commission...* 
I should like to ask from the gentleman from Capiz whether 
the election and qualification of the member whose election 
is not contested shall also be judged by the Electoral Com- 
mission. 

‘^Delegate Roxaa . — If there is no question about the 
election of the members, there is nothing to be judged; that 
is why the word ‘judge* is used to indicate a controversy. 
If there is no question about thd election of a member, there 
is nothing to be submitted to the Electoral Commission and 
there is nothing to be determined. 

» **Delegate Ventura . — But does that carry the idea also 
1 that the Electoral Commission shall confirm also the elec- 
' tion of those whose election is not contested? ^ 

**Delegate Roxas . — There is no need of confirmation. As 
the gentleman knows, the action of the House of Repre- 
sentatives in confirming the election of its members is just 
a matter of the rules of the assembly. It is not constitu- 
tional. It is not necessary. After a man files his creden- 
tials that he has been elected, that is sufficient, unless the 

election is contested. ** 

"^Delegate Ventura . — But I do not believe that that is 
sufficient, as we have observed that for purposes of the 
auditor, in the matter of election of a member to a legis- 
lative body, because he will not authorize his pay. 

Relegate Roxas — Well, what is the case with regards 
to the municipal president who is elected? What happens 
^th regards to the councilors of a municipality? Does any- 
body confirm their election? The municipal council does 
IS. it makes a canvass and proclaims — in this case the 
municipal council proclaims who has been elected, and it 
an s there, unless there is a contest. It is the same case; 

ere is no need on the part of the Electoral Commission 
unless there is a contest. The first clause refers to the 
case referred to by the gentleman from Cavite, where one 
person tries to be elected in place of another who was de- > 
For example, in a case when the residence ' 
of the man who has been elected is in question, or in case 
the citizenship of the man wh*© lias been elected is in ques- / 
tion. 



‘However, if the assembly desires to annul the power 
of the Commission, it may do so by certain maneuvers upon i 
its first meeting when the returns are submitted to the as- ! 



THE COMMISSIONS IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 269 



sembly. The purpose is to give to the Electoral Commis- 
sion all the powers exercised by the assembly referring to 
the elections, returns and qualifications of the members. 
When there is no contest, there is nothing to be judged. 

**Delegatc Ventura. — Then it should be eliminated. I 

^'Delegate Roxas- — But that is a different matter, I| 
think, Mr. Delegate. 

** Deleg ate Chico. — Mr. President, I have a similar ques- 
tion as that propounded by the gentleman from Ilocos Norte 
when I arose a while ago. However, I want to ask more 
questions from the delegate from Capiz. This paragraph 
6 on page 11 of the draft cites cases contesting tlie elec- 
tion as separated from the first part of The section which 
refers to elections, returns and qualifications. 

**Delegate Roxas. — That is merely for the sake of cla- 
rity. In fact the cases of contested elections are already 
included in the phrase 'the elections, returns and qualifica- 
tions.' This phrase 'and contested elections’ was inserted 
merely for the sake of clarity. 

** Delegate Cinco. — Under this paragraph, may not the 
Electoral Commission, at its own instance, refuse to con- 
firm the election of the members? 

'^Delegate Roxas. — I do not think so unless there is a 
protest. 

**Delegate Labrador. — Mr. President, will the gentleman 
yield? 

*^The President. — The gentleman may yield, if he so 
desires. 

^'Delegate Roxas. — Willingly. 

^‘Delegate Labrador. — Does not the gentleman from Ca- 
piz believe that unless this power is granted to the assem- 
bly, the assembly on its own motion does not have the right 
to contest the election and qualification of its members? 

*^Delegate Roxas. — I have no doubt that the gentleman 
is right. If this draft is retained, as it is, even if two- 
thirds of the assembly believe that a member has not the 
qualifications '^provided by law, they cannot remove him for 
that reason. 

**Delegate Labrador. — So that the right to remove shall 
only be retained by the Electoral Commission. 

**Delegate Roxas. — By the assembly for misconduct. 

^‘Delegate Labrador. — I mean with respect to the quali- 
fications of the Members. 



270 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

**Delegate Roxaa. — Yes, by the Electoral Commission. 

**Delegate Labrador . — So that under this draft, no mem- 
ber of the assembly has the right to question the eligibility 
of its members? 

**Delegate Rozas . — Before a member can question 
the eligibility, he must go to the Electoral Commission and 
make the question heard before the Electoral Coinmission. 

**Delegate Labrador . — So that the Electoral Commission 
shall decide whether the election is contested or not con- 
tested. 

'^Delegate Rozas. — Yes, sir; that is the purpose. 

**Delegatet Pelayo. — Mr, President, I would Rke to be 
informed if the Electoral Commission has power and author- 
ity to pass upon the qualifications of the members of the 
National Assembly even though that question Kas not been 
raised. 

^'Delegate Rozas . — I have just said that they have no 
power, because they can only judge.*' 

The leadership of the Convention was visibly bent, 
however, on pushing through the plan to create a non- 
partisan electoral commission. 

In the course of the heated debates, with the growing 
restlessness on the pai't of the Convention, President Recto 
suspended the session in order to find out if it was possi- 
ble to arrive at a compromise plan to meet the objection. 

When the session was resumed, a compromise plan was 
submitted in the form of an amendment presented by De- 
legates Francisco, Ventura, Lim, Vinzons, Rafok, Mumar, 
and others, limiting the power of the Electoral Commission 
to the judging of vtU cases contesting the elections, returns, 
and qualifications of the members of the National Assem- 
bly. Explaining the difference between the amendment 
thus proposed and the provision of the draft. Delegate 
Roxas, upon the request of President Recto, said: 

“The difference, Mr. President, consists only in obviat- 
ing the objection pointed out by various delegates to the 
effect that the first clause of the draft which states ‘The 
election, returns, and qualifications of the members of the 
National Assembly’ seems to give to the Electoral Commis- 
sion the power to determine also the election of the mem- 



THE COMMISSIONS IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 



271 



bers who have not been protested. And in order to ob- 
viate that difficulty, we believe that the amendment is right 
in that sense... that is, if we amend the draft so that 
it should read as follows: ‘All cases contesting the election, 

etc.,’ so that the judges of the Electoral Commission will . 
limit themselves only to cases in which there has been a \ 
protest against the returns.” 

The Approval of the Electoral Commission by the Con- 
vention. — The limitation to the powers of the Electoral 
Commission proposed in the compromise amendment did 
much to win in favor of the Electoial Commission many 
of its opponents; so that when the amendment presented 
by Delegate Labrador and others to retain in the Consti- 
tution the power of the lawmaking body to be the sole judge 
of the elections, returns, and qualifications of its members 
was put to a nominal vote, it was defeated by 98 negative 
votes against 56 affirmative votes. 

With the defeat of the Labrador amendment, the pro- 
vision of the draft creating the Electoral Conmiission, as 
modified by the compromise amendment, was consequently 
approved. As amended, the provision of the draft then 

read : 

“All cases contesting the elections, returns and quali- 
fications of the members of the National Assembly shall 
be judged by an electoral commission, composed of three 
members elected by the pai*ty having the largest number 
of votes in the National Assembly, three elected by the 
members of the party having the second largest number 
of I votes, and three justices of the Supreme Court designated 
by the Chief Justice, the Commission to be presided over 
by one of said justices.” 

The Revised Draft of the Special Committee on 
Styl^.—In the special committee on style, the provision was 
amended so that the Chairman of the Commission should 
be the Senior justice in the Commission, and so that the 
Commission was to he the sole judge of the election, re- 
turns, and qxwMfications of the members of the National 
Assembly. As it was then amended, the provision read: 

“There shall be an Electoral Commission composed of 
three Justices of the Supreme Court designated by the Chief 



272 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

Justice, and of six Members chosen by the National Ass^- 
bly, three of whom shall be nominated by the party having 
the largest number of votes, and three by the party ha\ing 
the second largest number of votes therein. The senior Jus- 
tice in the Commission shall be its Chairman. The Electoral 
Commission shall be the sole judge of the election, returns, 
and qualifications of the Members of the Natioyial Assembly. 

The Draft on the Electoral Commission as Finally Ap- 
proved by the Convention. — The report of the special com- 
mittee on style on the power of the Commission was op- 
posed on the floor of the Convention by Delegate Confesor, 
who insisted that the Electoral Commission should limit 
itself to judging only of all contests relating to the elec- 
tions, returns, and qualifications of the members of the 
National Assembly. The draft was amended accoidingly 
by the Convention. 

As it was finally adopted by the Convention, the pro- 
vision read: 

"There shall be an Electoral Commission composed of 
three Justices of the Supreme Court designated by the 
Chief Justice, and of six members chosen by the National 
Assembly, three of whom shall be nominated by the party 
having the largest number of votes, and three by the party 
having the second largest number of votes therein. The 
senior Justice in the Commission shall be its Chairman. 
The Electoral Commission shall be the sole judge of all 
contests relating to the election, returns, and qualifications 
of the Members of the National Assembly.” 

In determining the party which received the greatest 
number of votes or which received the second greatest 
number of votes, the members whose elections are protest- 
ed were intended to be included. This fact was brought 
out in the following portion of the debates : 

“Delegate Joven. Supposing that there are three mem- 

bers protested or whose elections are protested. Will these 
three members be considered in determining the number 
which party received the greatest number of votes or who 
has the greatest number of members in the Assembly? 

I “Delegate Roxas. While their seats have not been 

/ vacated, they are considered prima facie members of the 
I Assembly and their votes will be counted.” 



THE COMMISSIONS IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 273 



It was the intention of the Convention that the non- 
partisan composition of the Electoral Commission as set 
forth in the Constitution should be followed whether or 
not the protestees and the protestants belonged to the same 
political party. 

The Convention failed to give definitely a decision with 
respect to the determination of the political parties having 
the greatest number of members and the second gi*eatest 
number of members in the event that the number of as- 
semblymen belonging to no political party is gi-eater than 
the members belonging to any political party therein. 

The Electoral Commission in the Governmental Sys- 
tem. — Although composed of members from the National 
Assembly and the Supreme Court, the Electoral Commis- 
sion was not intended to be a dependency of one or the 
other. The delegates intended to make it an independent 
body, supreme within the sphere assigned to it in the Con- 
sUHtTon— the determination of all contests relating to the 
election, returns, and qualifications of the membei'S of the 
National Assembly. For the proper exercise of its exclu- 
sive function as such judge of election contests for legis- 
lative seats, the Electoral commission would natui'ally hav3 
the incidental power to promulgate such rules and regu- 
lations as it would deem necessary. In the exercise of this 
function, its decisions are final, not requiring the confir- 
mation of either the Supreme Court or the National As- 
sembly. 

The Permanent Commission 
Introduction. — With the adoption by the Convention of 
a unicameral system, the sub-committee of seven conceived 
of the idea of an inner checking body in the unicameral 
legislature. To this body it gave the name. Permanent 
Commission. 

The Permanent Commission was intended primarily to 
provide a check against the Chief Executive in the matter 
of appointments and to serve as a prosecuting body in im- 
peachment cases. Delegate Briones of the sub-committee 



274 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



of seven, in sponsoring the article on legislative depart- 
ment of the first draft of the Constitution on November 28, 
1934, said in referring to the Commission : 

“After that {the adoption of a unicameral legislature), 
Mr. President, the only essential new thing inserted in 
draft is the creation of the Permanent Commission, which 
body has been considered necessary in view of the establish- 
ment of the unicameral system. The Permanent Commis- 
sion is, in my opinion, a compromise between bicameralism 
and unicameralism on the basis of our political traditions 
over the matter. 

‘“Mr. President, our tradition in the Philippines is a 
presidential tradition in the sense that there is placed a 
check or counterbalance to the Executive in the matter of 
appointments. With the bicameral system gone, we remain 
without an agency that would serve as a check to the 
Executive. On this question, we have before us this cross- 
road; either we place entirely this power in the hands of 
the Executive without any condition, wthout any check; or 
we place this counterbalance in the National Assembly. 

“If it be the first, that is, to make the power to appoint 
essentially an executive function, the sub-committee believed 
that that would encounter a very serious opposition in our 
Assembly and even in our country, which has been used 
to seeing an Executive checked... by a power fully popu- 
lar, namely, the Senate. If it be the second, that is, to 
place this check in the entire National Assembly, we believed 
that this body, being too complex and too numerous, it would 
be difficult to bring about an agreement between both pow- 
ers— the executive power and the legislative power— in mat- 
ter of appointments. There would be continuous piques, 
continuous conflicts possibly; and that wouFd be prejudicial 
to the state. That is why we have believed it better to 
adopt a formula of compromise, a compromise between both 
systems—— the system of giving this power solely to the Exe- 
cutive or that of giving it to him, but counterbalanced by 
the National Assembly. 

“And we have created this smaller body which is not 
a superchamber... but a ‘standing committee,’ a commis- 
sion, a committee of the National Assembly itself, creature 
and dependent of the National Assembly. The members of 
this Commission in reality do not have more powers than 
the other members, except this power to confirm appoint- 
ments. It is true that we are giving to this Commission the 



THE COMMISSIONS IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 275 

power or right to propose, to initiate, measures to the As- 
sembly; but this is a right that the other members have; 
it is an individual right of the other members of the As- 
sembly. Consequently, this right will not make the Com- 
mission higher than the other members of the Assembly. 
Moreover, we have believed the creation of this ^ Commis- 
sion necessary to provide an agency for prosecuting cases 
of impeachment.” 

As a matter of fact, before the commencement of the 
debates on the Permanent Commission, when Delegate Ox- 
tiz presented a motion to the effect that all pi'ovisions iix 
the draft affecting the Permanent Commission be accepted 
or approved by the Convention, provided that the Penna- 
nent Commission be divested of its confinning power over 
appointments. President Recto answered: 

“The chair wishes to call the attention of the Delegate 
from Surigao to the fact that the principal reason for the 
establishment of the Permanent Commission is the power to 
confirm, so that if it be deprived of that power, it will have 
practically no important role under the Constitution. 

The Permanent Commission in the First Draft of the 
Constitution. — As it was pi-oposed in the fii'st di'aft of the 
Constitution, the Permanent Commission was to be consti- 
tuted within five days after the National Assembly should 
have organized itself, the composition to be of twenty-five 
members elected by the National Assembly fi’om among 
its members on the basis of pi-oportional i*epresentation of 
the political parties thei*ein. The Speaker of the Assem- 
bly was to be a member, acting as chairman of the Com- 
mission. Membership in the Commission was to continue 
until a National Assembly should have been elected. Va- 
cancies .in the Permanent Commission were to be filled 
by the National Assembly upon the nomination of the cor- 
responding political party. The Pex'manent Commission 
was to meet at the call of the chainnan or a majority of 
its members to dischai’ge the powei’s and functions con- 
ferred upon it. 

The proposed Permanent Commission was to exercise 
the following functions: — (1)' to present and recommend 



276 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

to the National Assembly such legislative proposals as it 
might deem proper; (2) to prosecute impeachment cases; 
and (3) to consider and confirm appointments made by 
the President. 

Debates on the Permanent Commission. — The pro- 
posed creation of the Permanent Commission, with all the 
powers conferred upon it, met with a vigorous opposition on 
the part of the members of the convention from the time 
of the release of the first draft of the Constitution. Long 
before the time for the consideration of the provision of 
the draft on the Permanent Commission, there had been 
filed numerous amendments for its suppression. 

On December 6, 1934, the Convention resolved to de- 
bate on the resolution for the suppression of the Perma- 
nent Commission. Delegates Caram, Aruego, Francisco, 
Lim, Quirino, (E), Rivera, Banaga, and Labi*ador spoke 
for the suppression of the institution; while Delegates 
Alejandro de Guzman, Singson Encarnacion, Laurel, Kin- 
tanar, Salumbides Orense. and Briones spoke in its de- 
fense. 

The Permanent Commission was defended on the 
ground that it was necessary to create an agency that could 
serve as an effective check against the powerful executive 
set up in the Constitution, and that it was necessary to 
create a body representing the leadership, the wisdom, and 
the experience of the National Assembly. 

With respect to the checking function of the proposed 
Permanent Commission, Delegate Laurel in part said: 

‘'Because of the influence that he (the President) must 
have, the prestige that he must enjoy and the powers that 

I we are confemng upon him, prudence, indeed, dictates that 
some sort of a political contrivance should be devised by 
which he could be made to realize that although his powers 
are transcendent, they are not unlimited. The permanent 
commission is organized not for the purpose of harrassing 
or antagonizing him but for the purpose of cooperat- 
ing with him in the execution of broad national policies, 
but, withal, it is to be an alert continuing body invested 
with the power of initiating impeachment proceedings, con- 



THE COMMISSIONS IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 277 



firming appointments and recommending the adoption of 
: legislative measures to the National Assembly so that if 

the Assembly is unwieldy and cumbersome to move and to 
act and notwithstanding its periodical dissolution, there 
shall be a permanent, live and composite constitutional or- 
gan representing varied and live interests of the nation 
whose influence and powders may not, it is true, overawe 
the President, but w^hich will certainly serve aS a light 
brake on his propensity tow^ards extralimitations of powers, 
propensity perchance invited and occasioned by the vast 
grant of authority and likewise attributable to the inherent 
weakness of human nature/' 

He proceeded to explain further that there was no es- 
sential difference between the Permanent Commission and 
the ordinary legislative committees, except for tlie fact that 
the Permanent Commission would be composed probably 
of better men and outstanding figures of the Assembly. He 
added : 

**In my humble opinion, the permanent commission is 
but a mere scientific expansion of the committee organiza- 
tion of our legislature, to provide for the continuing per- 
sonality of the legislature; and I say more scientific en- 
largement of the present system, because in the same way 
that a legislative committee is appointed to undertake some 
work after adjournment of the legislature and is a creation 
of the legislature, so is the permanent commission created. 
There is, however, this difference that, whereas the crea- 
tion of legislative committees after each periodical dissolu- 
tion of the legislature may be said to be an inherent power 
of the legislative body, the existence of the permanent com- 
mission as a continuing organization is a ‘‘constitutional" 
creation. I am comparing a legislative committee to the 
permanent commission not for the purpose of demonstrating 
any analogy between the two organizations but to show that 
there is really no radical departure from the present prac- 
tice in so far as the work of studying and recommending 
measures for adoption by the legislature is concerned. But 
even in this respect the permanent commission has a de- 
cided advantage over the committee organization; first, no 
» single committee can be composite enough to represent all 

the political parties and much less have as their members 
the leaders of the different political parties. And secondly, 
a legislative committee could hardly serve as a check upon 



278 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



the Executive because the importance which the President 
will attach to a legislative committee is practically nil as 
compared to the importance which he will have to accord 
to the permanent commission.” 

Delegates Kintanar and Briones, in defense of the Per- 
manent Commission, emphasized the need for creating 
a leadership in the National Assembly. Delegate Kinta- 
nar said : 

“We need a Permanent Commission with real and ef- 
fective powers as a directing fovce to give shape, form, 
and direction to the fresh and intense energies of the young- 
er members of this Assembly which will likely dominate 
in point of number ... 

“In every parliament, I know, gentlemen of the House, 
there is always a group of select men who rise far above 
the ordinary kind of men, men who could command the con- 
fidence of the public, men who wield the symbol of authority, 
not for the mere fact that they were elected to the body, 
but on account of their intrinsic ability, of their proven 
■ knowledge, and on account of their experience and estab- 

lished capacity for service. It is this select gi'oup of men 
that I wish to be appointed in the Permanent Commission. 
It is this group 'of select men that I wish to clothe with 
privilege, that I wish to place in privileged positions be- 
cause if we do not put them in privileged positions, their 
voice of wisdom is likely to be drowned in the confusion 
of mediocre babbling, in selfish intrigues and in useless 
bickerings that are so useless in legislative halls.” 

In part Delegate Briones said : 

“We like to organize a leadership in the National As- 
sembly. It seems that there is an abhorrence against lead- 
ership; but I say to the Assembly that democracies cannot 
live inarticulately. They have to live by leadership. Thera 
can be no democracy without an organization of a leader- 
ship to guide the deliberations of the Assembly. Other- 
wise there would be debility; there would be anarchy. And 
I do not believe that that is what the members of the As- 
sembly desire, especially during the Commonwealth, which 
is going to be the critical period of the country when we 
find the stability of our institutions very necessary in order 
that we can face successfully the various problems which 
will present themselves to the country at that critical pe- 
riod of history.” 



THE COMMISSIONS IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 279; 

The proposed creation of the Permanent Commission 
was opposed mainly because it was feared that it might 
develop into a privileged body in violation of the spirit of 
democratic government; that rather than seiwe as a check 
against the Executive it might turn out to be an agency 
to serve as his own instrument ; and that it would be better 
to lodge the confirming power in the National Assembly 
than in a close group, like the Permanent Commission. 

It was pointed out especially by Delegates Carani and 
Francisco that, with all the powers conferx’ed in the draft 
upon it, the Permanent Commission would easily become a 
powerful body, more powei'ful than the National Assembly 
itself. 

Delegates Lim, Labrador, and Elpidio Qumno stressed 
the fact that as it was proposed to be ci*eated, the Peima- 
nent Commission — not accountable nor responsible to the 
National Assembly and holding office for the entire legis- 
lative term fixed in the draft — would easily develop to be 
a body nioi*e easily conti'olled by the Executive than the Se- 
nate abolished by the Convention; and that through his 
power of patronage, the President could easily control the 
Commission. Consequently, it would serve only as an in- 
strument of the Executive. For these reasons, they pro- 
posed that the confinning poA\^r should be vested in the 
National Assembly itself. 

In the course of the debates on the Permanent Com- 
mission, two members of the sub-committee of seven — De- 
legates Singson Encarnacion and Briones — in an attempt 
to save the Permanent Commission said that they were wil- 
ling to divest it of its power to initiate legislation ; to make 
it meet only during the sessions of the National Assembly 
and not to be a continuing body ; and to make the tenn of 
membership in the body subject to the control of the Na- 
tional Assembly. They said that they were willing to retain 
it only as an agency to serve principally as a body to con- 
confirm appointments. 



280 



FRAMING OP THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



But the momentum of the opposition to the Permanent 
Commission since the release of the first draft of the Con- 
stitution had grown so strong that in spite of the conces- 
sions granted by its proponents the opposition to it re- 
mained firm. 

The Proposed Permanent Commission Disapproved by 
the Convention. — Submitted to a nominal vote at the close 
of the debates on the same day, the motion to suppress 
the Permanent Commission was carried by 100 affirmative 
votes against 58 negative votes. 

The Commission on Impeachment and the 
Commission on Appointments 

Reconsideration of the Permanent Commission. — ^Not- 
withstanding the defeat of the proposed Pei'manent Com- 
mission by the Convention, President Recto and Delegate 
Roxas did not give up the plan of creating within the Na- 
tional Assembly some kind of an institution to be vested 
with the power of confirming appointments and prosecut- 
ing cases of impeachments. 

In two weeks time, they succeeded in securing enough 
support for the virtual reconsideration of the defeated Per- 
manent Commission through a resolution creating two agen- 
cies known as the Commission on Impeachment and the 
Conunission on Appointments, with powers substantially 
the same as those proposed for the Permanent Commission. 
They were able to enlist for these two bodies the support 
of even some of the leading opponents of the Permanent 

Commission. 

On December 20, 1934, the Convention considered the 
amendment by Delegates Lim, Abella, and Nepomuceno, 
presented at the instance of President Recto, which read: 
“The National Assembly shall within the first five days 
of every regular session, elect from among its members a 
Commission on Appointments and a Commission on Impeach- 
ments, composed of twenty-one (21) members each on the 
basis of proportional representation of the national political 
parties represented . in the National Aisembly. These Com- 
inissions shall meet at the call of their respective chairmen 



THE COMMISSIONS IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 281 

to perform the powers and to discharge the duties assigned 

, to the same by this Constitution.” 

^''Debates on the Conunission on Appointments — Once 
more the Convention engaged in other sensational debates, 
with the proposition opposed by Delegates Bocar, Rafols. 
and Conejero; and defended by Delegates Jose S. Reyes, 
Alejandi'o de Guzman, Lim, and Roxas. 

While there was no opposition to the creation of the 
Commission on Impeachment, there was a vigorous oppo- 
sition to the proposed Commission on Appointments, based 
upon the same grounds upon which was based the opposi- 
tion to the proposed creation of the Permanent Commis- 
sion. 

The ultimate fate of the proposed Commission on Ap- 
pointments was very uncertain until the two leaders of 
the Convention, Delegate Roxas and President Recto, made 
an open use of their power and their influence to secure 
enough support for it. 

Speaking in favor of the Commission on Appointments, 
Delegate Roxas, with all the force of his eloquence, ex- 
plained to the Convention the necessity of vesting the ap- 
pointing power in a circle of select men representing the 
leadership of the National Assembly rather than in the en- 
tire body, with members generally localistic in their views 
and inspired and moved by the interest of their respective 
^ constituencies, in order not to weaken unnecessarily the 
Chief Executive, who should be given the right to select men 
to carry out the policies of his administration. In the coui'se 
of his speech, Delegate Roxas pleaded: 

‘‘Let us be realists; let us not theorize on the question 
of government. This is very important. Why should we 
create this small body? This small body will be composed 
of the leaders of the different parties. 

“ . . . Mr. President, when you create a small body, or 
this Committee, you will have men who will have had ex- 
perience in the Legislature, who can visualize the integral 
problems of the Philippines, and they are not going to act 
in the Assembly merely as the representatives of their local 
or particular interests. 



282 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



‘‘Once we have established the Government, Mr. Pres- 
ident, I can say that the President of the Commonwealth 
will be weakened, unless you create this Committee, because 
he will have to talk to every member of this Assembly; he 
will have to promise appointments; he will have to promise 
him public works; he will have to do many things for him 
v/hich he would not do otherwise in the interest of public 
welfare, and that is wrong. '' 

In order to help save the Commission on Appointments, 
President Recto for the second time left the presidential 
rostrum to speak on the floor, at this time limiting himself 
to directing interpellations to Delegate Roxas. With the 
participation of President Recto in this manner clearly 
showing that he was very much in favor of the Commission 
on Appointments, preceded by an open canvassing among 
the delegates during the period of the debates, the hopes 
of saving the Commission became greater. 

The Commission on Impeachment and the Commission 
on Appointments Approved by the Convention.— When it 
was submitted to a nominal vote, the Lim-Abella-Nepo- 
muceno amendment for the creation of the Commission on 
Appointments and the Commission on Impeachment was 
carried by a slight margin with 67 affirmative votes against 
51 negative votes. 

The Draft of the Special Committee on Style on the 
Commission on Impeachment and the Commission on Ap- 
pointments which was Finally Approved by the Conven- 
tion. — As it was revised in the special committee on style 
and as it was finally approved by the Convention, the con- 
stitutional provision creating the Commission on Appoint- 
ments and the Commission on Impeachment read : 

“The National Assembly shall elect from among its 
Members, on^the basis of proportional representation of the 
n^oli^al parties therein, a Commission on Appointments and 
a Commission on Impeachment, each to consist of twenty- 
one members. These Commissions shall be constituted with- 
in thirty days after the National Assembly shall have been 
organized with the election of its Speaker, and shall meet 
only while the National Assembly is in session, at the call 
of their respective Chairmen or a majority of their mem- 



THE COMMISSIONS IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 283 

bers, to discharge such powers and functions as are herein 
conferred upon them." (Article VI, Sec. 7). 

The Meetings of the Commission on Impeachment and 
those of the Commission on Appointments. — Under the pro- 
vision creating them, the two Commissions shall meet only 
while the National Assembly is in session, at the call of 
their respective Chairmen or a majority of their members, 
to discharge such powei's and functions as are conferred 
upon them in the Constitution. 

The Lim-Abella-Nepomuceno amendment for the crea- 
tion of the two commissions did not provide that they 
should meet only \vhile the National Assembly would be in 
session. But the amendment was appx'oved with the gen- 
eral understanding that unlike the Permanent Commission 
which had been rejected by the Convention, they should not 
be continuing bodies with the pow'er to meet even when the 
National Assembly would not be in session. 

It was for this reason that the special committee on 
style inserted in the draft of the Constitution as approved 
by the Convention on second reading a provision providing 
that they should meet only^ during the session of the Na- 
tional Assembly. 

During the consideration of the amendments by the 
special committee on style on Februai-y 8, 1935, Delegate 
Jesus Perez inquired for the reason of the prohibition. The 
following were the pertinent -portions of the i*ecords: 

^^Delegate Perez, (J). — Will the gentleman explain the 
reason for prohibiting the Commission on Impeachment in 
meeting when the National Assembly is not in session? 

'^President Recto. — The prohibition is for both the Com- 
mission on Appointments and the Commission on Impeach- 
ment. 

^'Delegate Perez, (J). — I want to know the reason. 

President Recto. — We follow the precedent in the United 
States. The Commission on Impeachment does not hold ses- 
sion but only during the legislative period of the session of 
Congress. 

*^Delegate Perez. — This would, therefore, preclude the 
Commission on Impeachment from formulating charges of 
impeachment while the National Assembly is not in session. 



284 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

President Recto. — That is the effect. They can prepare 
the materials; meanwhile the trial may not be held imtil 
the National Assembly is in session, because both the trial 
and impeachment are held by the National Assembly. 

“Delegate Perez, (J). — Don’t you think this delay in the 
formation of charges amounts to injustice at certain times? 

“President Recto.— I do not think so. 

* . * * * • * 

“President Recto.— I suggest, Mr. President, that the 
amendm^t to Article 8 submitted by the committee be ap- 
proved. The amendment which is recommended consists in 
not permitting these commissions on impeachment and ap- 
except during the time of the session 
of the National Assembly. Really, what the Committee has 
done IS to liberalize more this precept, taking into considera- 
tion the predominating opinion of the members of this Con- 
vention. 

on Impeachment and the Commission 
session of the Na- 

tho V ssem y. In the event that at the tennination of 
the regu ar session of the National Assembly the Commis- 

1 q?r TL 'question was taken up on February 8. 

1935. The pertinent portions of the records were as fol- 



lows: 



from^BltT^® Gm^jo.-Mr. President, will the gentleman 
^ a question? 

President Recto— Gladly, Mr. President. 

Sion According to this draft the Commis- 

hundred Xr regularly during the one 

liecto. Yes, while it is in session. 

TYioTif if Grafilo, Suppose the Commission on Impeach- 
the session and has not finished tjie 
w en the Assembly has closed its session? 

President Recto.— There is nothing in the Constitution 
f ^ think the President will call a special session 
of the Assembly. He is not precluded to do that. 

Delegate Araneta. — For an explanation. In relation 
to the last answer of your honor that there is nothing in the 
Constitution which prohibits the President to call a special 
session for the trial of impeachment... 



THE COMMISSIONS IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 285 

‘^President Recto. — Not precisely for that single object 
but for other matters including the termination of impeach- 
ment charges. 

**Delcgate Araneta. — In section 3, page 8, it is said; 
‘The National Assembly may be called in special session at 
any time by the President to consider general legislation or 
only such subjects as he may designate.’ 

^‘President Recto. — What is the question of your honor? 

**Delegate Araneta. — It seems that that means that the 
special sessions of the Legislature ought to be only in rela- 
tion to legislation. 

** President Recto. — Or only such subjects as he may de- 
signate.” 

Duration of the Term of Members of the Commission 
on Impeachment and the Commission on Appointments. — 
It was the intention of the Convention that the members 
of the Commission on Impeachment and the Commission on 
Appointments should seiwe as such at the pleasure of the 
National Assembly. 

It has been shown in the preceding pages that one of 
the objections against the proposed Permanent Commission 
was the fact that its members were to serve until a new 
National Assembly should have been elected. 

When the Lim-Abella-Nepomuceno amendment creat- 
ing the two commissions was pending debate, there was 
an understanding although that was not put in written form 
that membership in the commissions should be only for one 
year. The special committee on style did not insert a pro- 
vision to that effect. As the Constitution had been re- 
vised by the special committee on style, there was no such 
limitation. 

On February 8, 1935, during the consideration of the 
amendments by the special committee on style, upon queries 
by Delegates Carin and Inting, President Recto said : 

“It is better to place at the disposal of tlie Assembly at 
\ all times the members of this Commission. H at the follow- 
) ing day the Assembly demres_tp_change the members they 
I can do it. These positions are position^ of confidence and 
j iinKe'“Assembly desires' to withdraw the confidence from 



286 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



all the members or from some of its members they may do 
so. It is better to give that liberty and privilege to the 
Assembly." 

Powers of the Commission on Impeachment and the 
Commission on Appointments. — With respect to the powers 
of the Commission on Impeachment, the Philippine Consti- 
tution provides: 

"The Commission on Impeachment of the National As- 
sembly, by a vote of two-thirds of its Members, shall have 
the sole power of impeachment." (Article IX, Sec. 2.) 

The Constitution further provides : 

"The President, the Vice-President, the Justices of the 
Supreme Court, and the Auditor-General, shall be removed 
from office on impeachment for, and conviction of, culpable 
violation of the Constitution, treason, bribery, or other high 
crimes.” (Article IX, Sec. 1.) 

* ♦ ♦ ♦ * « 

"The National Assembly shall have the sole power to try 
all impeachments. When sitting for that purpose the Mem- 
bers shall be on oath or affirmation. When the President 
of the Philippines is on trial, the Chief Justice of the Su- 
preme Court shall preside. No person shall be convicted 
without the concurrence of three-fourths of all the Members 
v/ho do not belong to the Conr\mission on Impeachment.” 
(Article IX, Sec. 3.) 

^ \\ith respect to the powers of the Commission on Ap- 
pointments, the Philippine Constitution provides : 

President shall nominate and with the consent of 
e ommission on Appointments of the National Assembly, 
s a appoint the heads of the executive depratments and 
ure^s, officers of the Army from the rank of colonel, of 
e avy and air forces from the rank of captain or corn- 
man er, and all other officers of the Government whose ap- 
pmntments are not herein otherwise provided for, and those 
w om e may be authorized by law to appoint; but the Na- 

vest the appointment of infe- 
rior 0 ficers, in the President alone, in the courts, or in the 
heads of departments.” (Article VII, Sec. 11, Sub-sec. 3). 

The President shall have the power to make appoint- 
ments during the recess of the National Assembly, but such 
appointments shall be effective only until disapproval by 
tne Commission on Appointments or until the next adjourn- 



THE COMMISSIONS IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 287 



ment of the National Assembly.” (Article VII, Sec. 11, Sub- 
sec. 4). 

“The President sh*all have the power, with the concur- 
rence of a majority of all the Members of the National 
Assembly, to make treaties, and with the consent of the 
Commission on Appointments, he shall appoint ambassadors, 
other public ministers, and consuls.*' (Article VII, Sec. Ilf 
Sub-sec. 7). 

“The members of the Supreme Court and all judges of 
inferior courts shall be appointed by the President with the 
consent of the Commission on Appointments of the National 
Assembly." (Article VIII, Sec. 5). 

“There shall be a General Auditing Office under the di- 
rection and control of an Auditor General, who shall hold 
office for a term of ten years and may not be reappointed. 
The Auditor General shall be appointed by the President 
with the consent of the Conmussion on Appointments, and 
shall receive an annual compensation to be fixed by law 
which shall not be diminished during his continuance in of- 
fice." (Article X, Sec. 1). 

The Proposed Committee on Accounts 
The Proposal to Create a Committee on Accounts. — 
Following the suggestion of Hon. Miguel Unson, ex-Secre- 
tary of Finance, in a memorandum to him, dated July 12, 
1934, Delegate Araneta worked hard for the creation of a 
committee on accounts similar to that in the English House 
of Commons, with a majority of its members belonging to 
the party of the opposition. The function of the proposed 
committee was 'To examine and investigate the account of 
every branch of the government.'^ 

The proposal to create a committee on accounts was 
favorably endorsed by a number of delegates and com- 
mented favorably by a certain sector of the press. The 
Tribune in its issue for September 4, 1934, commenting on 
the Araneta proposal, said : 

“The proposal of Attorney Salvador Araneta, delegate 
from Manila to the constitutional convention, that the mi- 
nority be provided with the means with which to carry out 
properly its duty of fiscalization of the acts of the majority, 
deserves the considered attention of all serious students of 
government. 




288 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

“The proposal covers the realization of duties rather 
than the redefinition of the duties of the minority in the 
premises. The minority would be placed where it can dis- 
charge these duties without obstacles. It will have the 
means at its command, such as the subordinate personnel 
and the official standing of its move to delve into govern- 
mental matters. What today is assumed that the minority 
may do, is declared to be a duty which it can easily per- 
form and on which, because of the Araneta proposal, it 
will not want to be delinquent. 

“The opposition party in these islands has never been 
a robust organization. Its history has been generally one 
of timidity, one of postponement of action on its opportu- 
nities to fiscalize the acts, which are overacts, of the ma- 
jority. There are exceptions to this of course. But they 
have been so few as to leave no doubt in the mind of the 
public that the opposition is ineffective. 

“It is not claiming too much for the Araneta proposal 
that it may serve to give the minority an opportunity to 
assert itself more effectively in its role of inquirer into 
the acts of the party in power. Especially should the plan 
work out well in respect to the disbursement of the public 
revenues. Under the plan the minority can easily find out 
what are legitimate disbursements, and what are authorized 
expenditures largely sanctioned for patronage and political 
expediency.'' 

Debates on the Proposed Committee on Accounts. — On 
December 13,1934, the Convention considered the proposi- 
tion to create the committee on accounts, in the following 
amendment to the first draft of the Constitution: 

'^The National Assembly shall create a coinmittee on 
accounts, presided by the floor leader of the party of the 
opposition, the majority of the members of which shall be 
of said party, which shall have the power to examine the 
receipts, disbursements, and accounts of all the departments 
of the government." 

The debates on the proposition were some of the most 
sensational in the Convention. President Recto fpr the 
first time since the inaugural session left the presidential 
chair to participate in the debates. 

Delegates Araneta, Santos, Confesor, and Briones 
spoke in favor of the proposition, emphasizing primarily 



! 



THE COMMISSIONS IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 289 



the necessity for increasing the effectiveness of the woi'k 
of the minority party as a fiscalizing agency in the gov- 
ernment. 

Opposing the proposition were Delegates Paredes, Cua- 
derno, Dikit, Moncado, and President Recto, who empha- 
sized the fact that while the institution of a commit- 
tee on accounts succeeded in England, it failed in other 
countries like Canada and the United States. They 
pointed out that a committee on accounts as proposed would 
not work so well in a presidential system although it was 
admitted that it might work in a parliamentary system. 
President Recto pointed out cogently that while in Eng- 
land where a committee on accounts had been found to 
be a successful institution the discovery of irregularities 
by it could precipitate new elections because of the parlia- 
mentary system of government, the same could not be done 
in the Philippines. The result would be, according to him, 
that there would be created a feeling of restlessness on the 
part of the masses who would think that the party in power 
was not governing well, with a consequent weakening of 
their faith in the government. And that spirit of restless- 
ness and decreasing faith in the government would con- 
tinue until the people could be given at the next periodical 
election the opportunity to change their rulers. In the 
meanwhile there was the fear that the restlessness of the 
people and their lack of faith in the goveniment would be 
a source of constant danger to the maintenance of order 
and peace in the country. 

The Proposed Committee on Accounts Disapproved by 
the Convention. — Before the debates, the approval by the 
Convention of the proposed committee on accounts was 
considered certain. In fact Delegate Araneta had secured 
the pledge of many delegates to support his proposition, 
including the members of the Lopez bloc, which formally 
endorsed it in one of its caucuses. Even during the de- 
bates, ft was believed that the committee on accounts would 
ultimately be created by the Convention. 



290 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

But when President Recto took the floor to speak 
against it, the opposition gradually became stronger. When 
submitted to a nominal vote on the same day, the proposi- 
tion to create the committee was finally defeated by 8G 
negative votes against 46 affirmative votes. 



CHAPTER XXIII 



PRIVILEGES AND DISQUALIFICATIONS OF 
MEMBERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

Introduction. — ^The Constitution provides for certain 
privileges of members of the National Assembly primarily 
to safeguard their independence and that of the Assembly 
itself. It provides (1) that they shall, in all cases except 
treason, felony, and breach of the peace, be privileged from 
arrest during their attendance at the session of the Na- 
tional Assembly, and in going to and returning from the 
same; (2) that for any speech or debate therein, they 
shall not be questioned in any other place; (3) that the 
National Assembly may determine the rules of its proceed- 
ings; (4) that the Members are entitled to receive compen- 
sation; and (5) that the Assembly has the power to dis- 
cipline its members. 

The Constitution likewise contains certain disqualifica- 
tions for Members of the National Assembly — disqualifica- 
tions dictated by a sense of decency and morality. These 
are found in the following provisions: 

1. “No Member of the National Assembly may hold any 
other office or employment in the Government wthout for 
feiting his seat, nor shall any such Member during the time 
for which he was elected, be appointed to any civil o cc 
which may have been created or the emoluments w 
shall have been increased while he was a Member o e 
National Assembly. 

2. ‘‘No Member of the National Assembly shall direct- 
ly or indirectly be financially interested in any contract 
with the Government or any subdivision or instrumentality 
thereof, or in any franchise or special privilege grante 
by the National Assembly during his term of office; 

3. “(N) or shall any such Member appear as counsel 
before the Electoral Commission or any court in any civil 
case wherein the Government or any subdivision or instru- 

‘ mentality thereof is the adverse party, or collect any fee 

for his appearance in any administrative proceedings or in 



292 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



any criminal case wherein an officer or employee of the 
Government is accused of an offense committed in relation 
to his office. No Member of the Commission on Appoint- 
ments of the National Assembly shall appear as counsel 
before any court inferior to the Supreme Court.” 

Privileges 

Privilege from Arrest. — The Philippine Constitution 
reads : 

‘The Members of the National Assembly shall in all 
cases except treason, felony, and breach of the peace, be 
privileged from arrest during their attendance at the ses- 
sions of the National Assembly, and in going to and re- 
turning from the same; and for any speech or debate there- 
in, they shall not be questioned in any other place.” 

Sources.— The Philippine Autonomy Act of 1916 
(Jones Law) contained the following provision on the 
matter : 

‘The Senators and Representatives shall, in all cases 
except treason, felony and breach of the peace, be privi- 
leged from arrest during their attendance at the session 
of their respective houses and in going to and returning 
from the same.” 

The Philippine Administrative Code of 1917, modify- 
ing to a certain extent the provision of the Jones Law, 
provided : 

“'Members of the Philippine Legislature, in all cases 
except treason, open disturbance of public order, or other 
offense punishable by death or imprisonment for not less 
than six years, shall be privileged from arrest during their 
attendance at the session of the Legislature, and in going 
to and in returning from the same.” 

The committee on legislative power recommended in 
its report the incorporation in the Constitution of the pro- 
vision of the Administrative Code. The recommendation of 
the committee on legislative power was embodied by the 
sub-committee of seven in the first draft of the Constitu- 
tion, the only change made being that required by the deci- 
sion of the Convention to adopt a unicameral legislature 
instead of a bicameral legislature which was contemplated 



PRIVILEGES AND DISQUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS 293 

in the report of the committee on legislative power. The 
provision in the first draft of the Constitution read: 

“The Members of the National Assembly shall in all 
cases except treason, open disturbance of public order, or 
other offense punishable by death or imprisonment of not 
less than six years, be privileged from arrest during their 
attendance at the sessions of the National Assembly, and in 
going to and returning from the same.” 

Debates. — When the Convention came to the conside- 
ration of this provision of the first draft on December 4, 
1934, Delegate Aldeguer presented an amendment for the 
substitution of the phrase, felony and breach of the yeace, 
for the phrase in the draft, open disturbance of public or- 
der, or other offense punishable by death or imprisonment 
of not less tha-n six years, so that the provision should then 
read : 

“The Members of the National Assembly shall in all 
cases except treason, felony, and breach of the peace, be 
privileged from arrest during their attendance at the ses- 
sions of the National Assembly, and in going to and re- 
turning from the same.” 

The amendment was in effect for the retention of the pro- 
vision of the Jones Law on this matter. 

In defending his amendment, Delegate Aldeguer ex-, 
plained that it was the same as the corresponding provi- 
sion of American constitutions and of the Jones Law. He 
stated that the history of parliamentaiy immunity showed 
that it was never intended to exempt members of the law- 
making body from criminal arrest. He said that the priv- 
ilege of members of the National Assembly as set forth 
in his amendment was sufficient to enable them to carry on 
their work well. 

The amendment having been accepted by the sub-com- 
mittee of seven through Delegate Roxas was readily ap- 
proved by acclamation by the Convention. 

The Provision in the Draft of the Constitution Finally 
Adopted by the Convention. — ^There was no further amend- 
ment to this provision, either in the special committee on 



294 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE (X)NSTITUTION 

style or in the Convention. As it was in the final draft of 
the Constitution adopted by the Convention, the provision 
read ; 

"The Members of the National Assembly shall in all 
cases except treason, felony, and breach of the peace, be 
privileged from arrest during their attendance at the ses- 
sions of the National Assembly, and in going to and re- 
turning from the same.” 

Freedom of Speech or Debate. — The Philippine Con- 
stitution reads: 

“(A)nd for any speech or debate therein, they shall 
not be questioned in any other place.” 

This provision was borrowed from the Jones Law. The 
provision of the Jones Law was in turn copied from Amer- 
ican constitutions. 

It was recommended in the report of the committee on 
legislative power and incorporated by the sub-committee of 
seven in the first draft of the Constitution. 

When the Convention came to the provision of the 
first draft on this matter. Delegate Cabili proposed to 
strike it out. He argued that time and again some mem- 
bers of the lawmaking body, shielding themselves behind 
the protection of this provision, took occasion to cast as- 
persions against outside persons or bodies in speeches 
which had nothing to do with the work of the legislature. 
He concluded: 

“My friends, if we cannot depend on what we say in 
the hall of our legislature, we have no reason to speak it 
out in the legislature. But if our speech is founded on 
facts and we have reason to stand behind every word we 
utter. We "should not be afraid that we would be questioned 
or prosecuted for our acts.” 

However, the Convention decided to retain the provi- 
sion as being necessary to wise and beneficial legislation. 
For it would enable legislators to discuss freely every pro- 
ject of legislation and to execute more fully their other 
functions. Because if they would work under the fear that 
they might be proceeded against at law by any person 



PRIVILEGES AND DISQUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS 295 

who might take offense at any act or remark made in the 
performance of their functions, they would speak and act 
under an undesirable sense of restraint. 

Determination of Rules of Proceedings. — The Philip- 
pine Constitution reads: 

“The National Assembly may determine the rules of 
its proceedings... It shall keep a Journal of its proceed- 
ings, and from time to time publish the same, excepting 
such parts as may in its judgmient require secrecy; and 
the yeas and nays on any question shall, at the request of 
one-fifth of its Members present, be entered in the Journal. 

The first part of the provision tvas borrowed from the 
Jones Law. The second part of the provision was bor- 
rowed from the American federal constitution and several 
state constitutions although substantially there w^as also a 
similar provision in the Jones Law. 

This provision was embodied substantially in the le- 
port of the committee on legislative power and incoipo- 
rated in the first draft of the Constitution. The provi- 
sion in the first draft of the Constitution was readily ap- 
proved by the Convention. The special committee on sty e 
substituted the word, request, for the word, desire, in the 
draft. The change being one of form only was not sub- 
mitted any more to the Convention. 

Under this provision, the National Assembly is author- 
ized to prescribe rules of procedure for the orderly and 
proper disposition of matters before it. It may determine 
what committees it should have and the subjects to be as- 
signed to their jurisdiction, what should be the daily order 
in which the business should be taken up, what should be 
the order in which certain motions should be received and 
acted upon, and all other kindred matters; provided that 
there should be no violation of constitutional provisions or 
fundamental rights. 

That part of the provision regarding the keeping of a 
journal was intended to insure publicity in the proceedings 
of the National Assembly and a corresponding responsibi- 
lity of its members to their respective constituencies. It 



296 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

was believed that it would at least help discourage, if not 
prevent, intrigues and plottings in the consideration of 
measures. 

Compensation. — The Philippine Constitution reads: 

‘The Members of the National Assembly shall, unless 
otherwise provided by law, receive an annual compensation 
of five thousand pesos each including^ per diems and other 
emoluments or allowances and exclusive only of travelling 
expenses to and from their respective districts when attend- 
ing sessions of the National Assembly. No increase in said 
compensation shall take effect until after the expiration of 
the full term of the Mem.bers of the National Assembly 
elected subsequent to the approval of such increase. The 
Speaker of the National Assembly shall receive an annual 
compensation of sixteen thousand pesos until otherwise pro- 
vided by law.*' 

Sources. — Under the Philippine Bill of 1902 and the 
Jones Law, members of the lawmaking body received a 
compensation which was left to be determined by law. 
There was no limitation as to the amount nor to the in- 
crease or decrease that might be made upon it. The law- 
making body was given full authority to deal with the 
compensation of its members. 

The committee on legislative power recommended, 
however, that the amount should be fixed in the Constitu- 
tion and should remain such until the lawmaking body 
should decide otherwise; and that while the lawmaking 
body might increase the amount, the increase should not 
take effect until after the expiration of the term of office 
of the legislature that approved the increase. The report 
of the committee read: 

“The Senators and Representatives shall receive for 
their services an annual compensation of four thousand pe- 
sos including per diems and other emoluments or allowances 
and exclusive of travelling expenses to and from their re- 
spective residences when attending sessions of the National 
Legislature, unless otherwise fixed by law: Providedj That 

no increase in this yearly compensation shall take effect 
until after the expiration of the terms of office of all the 
Members of the Legislature that approved such increase.** 



PRIVILEGES AND DISQUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS 297 

The sub-committee of seven followed the principle laid 
down in the report of the committee on legislative powder. 
It raised, however, the amount of compensation to five 
thousand pesos and made more rigid the restriction on in- 
creases by providing that the increase w'ould not be effec- 
tive until after the expiration of the term of the members 
of the National Assembly elected subsequent to the ap- 
proval of such increase. The first draft of the Constitu- 
tion read : 

“The Members of the National Assembly shall, unless 
otherwise fixed by law, receive an annual compensation 
of five thousand pesos each including per diems and other 
emoluments or allowances and exclusive only of travelling 
expenses to and from their respective districts when at- 
tending sessions of the National Assembly: Provided, That 
any increase in said compensation shall not take effect un- 
til after the expiration of the term of office of the Members 
of the National Assembly who may be elected subsequent 
to the approval of such increase.” 

Debates. — There was no difference of opinion in the 
Convention wth respect to the fact that members of the 
lawmaking body should receive compensation for their ser- 
vices. Neither was there any opposition to the part Oi. 
the provision regarding the time when an increase in com- 
pensation should be effective. Everybody recognized the 
moral righteousness of the prohibition. 

There was a difference of opinion, however, as to whe- 
ther or not the amount of compensation should be fixed a« 
all in the Constitution. 

From the early part of the Convention days, there was 
an insistent movement under the leadership of Delegate 
Ysip to fix in the Constitution the compensation not only 
of legislators but also of other officials of the government. 
The purpose of the movement was to bring about a general 
reduction in salaries and to set certain salary standards for 
future lawmaking bodies. It was felt that by its nature the 
Convention was than any other body else in a better posi- 
tion to bring about this reduction and to define these stan- 
dards. To accomplish these objectives, the Ysip group pre- 



298 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

pared a general scale of salaries, copies of which were cir- 
culated among the delegates. 

There were delegates, however, who were of the 
Opinion that the details about salaries should be left to 
statutory legislation. 

A third group of delegates was in favor of a plan 
representing a compromise between the plans of the first 
two groups — the plan later on embodied in the fii'st draft of 
the Constitution, according to which the salaries of certain 
officials, like the Members of the National Assembly, the 
President, the Chief Justice and the Associate Justices of 
the Supreme Court, and the Auditor General should be set 
down, in the Constitution, with the proviso, however, that 
those salaries should remain until othei^wise provided by 
law. 

Owing to these differences of opinion and to the desire 
of the Ysip group to have the matter of salaries taken up 
together at the same time because of the common princi- 
ples involved, when it came to the provision on salaries of 
the first draft of the Constitution on December 4, 1934, 
the Convention decided to postpone consideration of the 
matter to the last days of the Convention. 

In the meantime some leaders of the government, par- 
ticularly President Quezon, it was said, tried to prevail 
upon the Ysip group to abandon the idea of setting in the 
Constitution the details about salaries. The movement then 
began to weaken until at last the idea was abandoned. 

On January 31, 1935, the Convention took up the mat- 
ter of salaries on the basis of the provisions of the first 
draft of the Constitution. 

There were several propositions for the compensation of 
Members of the National Assembly. Delegate Cuenco pi-o- 
posed as annual compensation P5,000 ; Delegate Montinola, 
P3000; Delegate Rafols, P2,500; Delegate Mansueto, P7,200; 
Delegate Conol, P4000; and Delegate Navarro, P5000 as 
the maximum. The Convention approved the Cuenco pro- 



PRIVILEGES AND DISQUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS 299 



position, thereby sustaining the provision of the draft on 
this matter. 



It was also decided on that day to fix in the Consti- 
tution the salary of the Speaker of the National Assembly. 
Delegate Cuaderno suggested that it be P15,000; Delegate 
Lim, P16,000; and Delegate Abordo, P12,000. The Con- 
vention voted in favor of the Cuaderno proposition. 



The Draft as Revised by the Special Committee on 
Style and as Finally Approved by the Convention.— 
In the special committee on style, there was no change in 
the substance of the provision as approved by the Conven- 
tion with the approval of the article on legislative power 
on January 31, 1935, except in the salaiy of the Speakei, 
which was raised to P16,000. As it was revised by the spe- 
cial committee on style, the provision on compensation foi 
the National Assembly read: 



“The Members of the National Assembly shall, unless 
otherwise provided by law, receive an annual 
of five thousand pesos each including per diems an ® 
emoluments or allowances and exclusive only of rave i 
expenses to and from their respective districts w en a en 
ing sessions of the National Assembly. No increase in s 
con^pensation shall take effect until after 
of the full term of the Members of the Nationa sse 
elected subsequent to the approval of such , 

Speaker of the National Assembly shall 
compensation of sixteen thousand pesos until o erwi 
vided by law.*' 



Reporting the change to the Convention on February 
7, 1935, President Recto said: 



“I submit the amendment to the salary o e pea 
of the National Assembly. The Convention yoe or c 
sum of fifteen thousand pesos, and the commi ee ^ J 
recommends that it be sixteen thousand pesos. n 
reason is very simple. The salary which the Constitution 
fixes for the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, as sup^me 
head of the judicial power or department, is sixteen ou 
sand pesos. 



“We believe that the head of the legislative power, 
which precisely represents the people, should receive, un i 



300 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

the legislature should provide otherwise, the same amount 
of sixteen thousand pesos. We should take into account 
that the National Assembly is made up of only one house, 
so that the Speaker of the Assembly will be the sole head 
of the legislative department of the government, combining 
in his person the personality of the President of the Senate 
which we had and that of the Speaker of the House of Rep- 
resentatives. We believe that the chairman of the national 
legislative body ought to receive the same salary as the 
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.*' 

The Convention approved the recommendation of the 
special committee on style. 

The provision on compensation in the Constitution fi- 
nally adopted by the Convention was the same as that ap- 
proved and recommended by the special committee on style. 

The Power to Discipline Its Members.— The Philippine 
Constitution reads: 

“The National Assembly may... punish its Members 
for disorderly behavior, and, with the concurrence of two- 
thirds, expel a Member.” 

A majority of all the Members shall constitute a quo- 
rum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from 
day to day, and may compel the attendance of absent Mem- 
bers, in such manner and under such penalties as the Na- 
tional Assembly may provide.” 

\^^ile the first part was borrowed from the Jones 
aw, the second part was borrowed from American con- 
stitutions although there was also a somewhat similar pro- 
vision in the Jones Law. 

These provisions were recommended by the committee 
on l^islative power and incorporated in the first draft of 
the Constitution. The first draft read : 

“The National Assembly may... punish its Members 
for disorderly behavior, and, with the concurrence of two- 
thirds, expel a Member." 

A majority of all the Members shall constitute a quo- 
rum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from 
day to day, and may authorize to compel the attendance of 
absent Members, in such manner and under such penalties 
as the National Assembly may provide." 



PRIVILEGES AND DISQUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS 301 

When the convention came to this part of the first 
draft, Delegate Esliza proposed to make the concun*ence of 
three-fourths, not two-thirds, necessaiy to the expulsion 
of a Member. He said that the matter of expulsion was 
such an important one that the required number should be 
increased so as to check the possibility of abuse. The Con- 
vention, however, disapproved the amendment. 

No further amendment w'as introduced either in the 
Convention or in the special committee on style to the pro-^ 
vision in the first draft of the Constitution. 

What does the requirement of two-thirds mean? 

In the discussion of the Esliza amendment. Delegate 
Roxas said : 

“Referring to the amendment which is proposed, this 
is a matter which I believe could adjust itself with the 
judgment of the Convention. Two-thirds of ninety-six 
(number of members for the Assembly as previously agreed 
upon) is if I am not mistaken, sixty-four, and three-fourths 
of ninety-six is seventy-two. If the amendment is approved, 
seventy-two votes will be required before a member may 
be expelled for misconduct. If the draft is retained, sixty- 
four would be needed. The committee does not have any. 
preference as to whether two-thirds or three-fourths should 
be adopted. We think that this is a question which the 
Convention may decide and determine. We neither accept 
nor decide to accept the amendment.’’ 

After the disapproval of the amendment, the following 
interpellations took place: 

“Delegate Balili. — Mr. President, may 1 ask from the 
Chairman a question about this two-thirds vote? Does this 
mean two-thirds of all the members, or two-thirds of the 
members present? 

**Delegate Roxas. — Two-thirds of the Members voting.” 

In the session of February 8, 1935, when President 
Recto was sponsoring the changes made by the special com- 
mittee on style, the following interpellations took place : 

**Delegate Bueno. — I would like a clarification of sub- 
section 5, on page 9, Mr. President, about the expulsion 
of Members of the National Assembly. Is it going to be 
two-thirds of the membership of the National Assembly? 



802 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



"President Recto. — Two-thirds of those present.” 

The judicial precedents under corresponding provi- 
sions of American constitutions had laid down that the two- 
thirds meant two-thirds of the members present, provided 
there was a quorum. 

The second part was approved readily by the Conven- 
tion. 

The special committee on style struck out from the first 
draft the phrase, authorize to, in order to improve the lan- 
guage. The change being one of form was not submitted 
any more to the Convention. 

Whether the phrase, m majority of all the members, 
means a majority of the entire number or a majority only 
of those who remain as members — excluding those who 
died or those who resigned, leaving a vacancy — was not 
taken up in the Convention. 

Under this provision, the National Assembly may com- 
pel the attendance of absent Members, having the power to 
determine the procedure and the nature of the penalty to 
carry out this power. 

Disqualifications 

DisquaUfication to Hold Other Offices ^The Philippine 

Constitution reads: 

“No Member of the National Assembly may hold any 
other office or employment in the Government without for- 
feiting his seat, nor shall any such Member during the time 
forjy^h^ he was elected,, be appointed to any civil office 
which may have been created or the en^oluments whereof 
shall have been increased while he was a Member of the 
National Assembly.” ^ 

Sources. — ^The Jones Law contained the following pro- 
vision with respect to the disqualification of legislators for 
other offices: 

“No senator or representative shall, during the time 
for which he may have been elected, be eligible to any of- 
fice the election to which is vested in the legislature, nor 
shall be appointed to any office of trust or profit which 









PRIVILEGES AND DISQUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS 303 

shall have been created or the emoluments of which shall 
have been increased during such term.” 

The committee on legislative power in its report to the 
Convention recommended for incorporation into the Consti- 
tution the following provision regarding the disqualifica- 
tion of legislators for other offices: 

‘'No Senator or Representative shall, during the time 
for which he was elected, be appointed to any ci\dl office 
under the authority of the Government of the Philippine 
Islands which may have been created, or the emolument 
whereof shall have been increased during such time, and 
any member of either House who accepts any office or em- 
ployment in the Government shall be deemed to have for- 
feited his seat in said House.” 

The part of the committee report providing that a leg- ^ 
islator who accepted an office or employment in the gov- 
ernment should be deemed to have forfeited his seat in the 
house to which he belonged was inspired by many leading | 
American state constitutions ; while the romaining part was 
reproduced from the American federal constitution, state 
constitutions, and the Jones Law, 

Following the recommendation of the committee on 
legislative power, the sub-committee of seven incorporated 
in the first draft of the Constitution the following provi- 
sion: 

“No Member of the National Assembly may hold any 
other office or employment in the government without for- 
feiting his seat, nor shall any such Member during the time 
for which he was elected, be appointed to any civil office 
under the authority of the Government of the Philippines 
which may have been created, or the emolument whereof 
shall have been increased during such time.” 

The purpose of the first part of the provision — ^the pro- 
hibition against holding any other office or employment in 
the government while serving at the same time as a mem- 
ber of the National Assembly — ^was to prohibit the legis- 
lator to occupy an office which might be incompatible with 
his office as a member of the lawmaking body. American 
state constitutions generally provide that any person hold- 



304 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



mg any other office or employment in the government is 
not eligible to become a member of the lawmaking body. 
Our Constitution, on the other hand, provides that no Mem- 
ber of the National Assembly may hold any other office 
or emplojrment in the government without forfeiting his 
seat. While the two are differently worded, they are sub- 
stantially the same. The intendment behind the provision 
was to prohibit altogether the holding of any other office 
or employment in the government as long as the legislator 
remained a member of the National Assembly. If he had 
already been holding the office or employment at the time 
he was elected, he must give it up before he could become 
a member of the Assembly. If he would be appointed to it 
after he had become a member of the Assembly, if he 
wanted to accept the appointment, he must forfeit his seat 
in the Assembly. For he could not hold any other office or 
employment in the government and continue at the same 
time as a Member of the National Assembly. Inferentially, 
under this provision a Member of the National Assembly 
could be appointed to any other civil office or employment 
in the government should his appointment be considered 
necessary, in which case, however, he must forfeit his seat 
in the Assembly. Of course this is subject to the limitation 
in the remaining part of the provision. 

The pu^ose of the second part was to guard against 
trafficking in office. It was to prevent members of the 
lawmaking body from taking advantage of their official 
position to create offices — more lucrative or otherwise more 
attractive because of their permanence — or to increase the 
emoluments of offices already existing, to be filled by 
themselves. And in being thus prohibited to hold such 
offices, there was thus removed from them any induce- 
ment for causing a vacancy in the post to which the5'^ 
had been elected by the people. /It was the same moral 
and ethical reason for the corresponding provision of 
American constitutions, both federal and state. Ifnder the 
constitutions in the United States from which this pro- 
vision was borrowed, the ineligibility refers to ,the entire 



\ 



PRIVILEGES AND DISQUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS 305 

tenure of office, and not to the time the incumbent may 
choose to hold such office. Hence the legislator cannot 
render himself eligible during his tei*m by simply resign- 
ing his legislative membership. ’ 

Debates. — The first part of this provision met with 
strenuous opposition on tlie part of several leading mem- 
bers of the Convention under the leadership of Delegates 
Lim and Vinzons. 

Delegates Lim and Vinzons presented an amendment 
for the suppression from the draft of this part of the pio- 
vision. The purpose of the amendment, according to its 
authors, w'as to make the Constitution flexible in order to 
make possible the development or the adoption in the fu- 
ture of a parliamentary government, should the country de- 
cide, without the necessity of amending the Constitution; 
or at least to permit the continuance of the practice evolved 
under the Jones Law of appointing members of the law- 
making body to serve as heads of some of the executive de- 
partments. 

The debates on this part of the provision took place 
on December 5, 1934, with the debates centering on the 
Lim- Vinzons amendment. The amendment was defended by 
Delegates Lim, Vinzons, and Paredes; while the provision 
of the draft was defended by Delegates Roxas, Ventui'a, 
Briones, and Elpidio Quirino. 

In view of the apparent acquiescence by the propo- 
nents of the amendment to the adoption in the Constitution 
of a presidential form of government, the debates were fo- 
cussed squarely on the proposition of whether or not there 
should be continued the practice of appointing members 
of the lawmaking body to serve as heads of the executive 
departments of the government. 

Under the Jones Law, the heads of the executive depart- 
ments were appointed by the Governor-General with the 
advice and consent of the Philippine Senate. There was 
no prohibition against the appointment of members of the 
legislature to the executive departments. There develop- 



306 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



ed the practice of appointing legislators to serve as 
heads of some of the executive departments — a prac- 
tice intended to secure a greater harmony between the 
executive and the legislative departments and a greater 
degree of control by the legislature over the executive de- 
partments. 

It was pointed out by the defenders of the Lim-Vinzons 
amendment that it was necessary to eliminate the pro- 
vision objected to in order not to close forever the possi- 
bility of adopting a parliamentary system of government; 
and that its elimination would make possible the contin- 
uance of the practice under the Jones Law of pennitting 
legislators to serve as department secretaries — 3, system 
winch enabled the Executive to feel the pulse of public 
opinion on matters within his juidsdiction through his de- 
partment secretaries who were members of the lawmaking 
body, the representative body of the people. 

'^be defenders of the draft reasoned out, however, that 
the Constitution had been drafted on the philosophy of the 
presidential system of government with its concomitant 
doctrines of the separation of powers and of checks and 
balance. They pointed out that the Convention was at the 
crossroads where it had to decide whether to adopt a pres- 
idential system of government by adhering to the provi- 
sion of the draft, or to establish a parliamentaiy system 
01 government with its accompanying fusion of legislative 
and executive powers and with the legislature governing 
through the cabinet. They argued for the adoption of a 
presidential system of government ; for in the words of 
Delegate Briones “it is the system most familiar to the Fi- 
lipinos and most fitted to our character, to our political 
traditions, to our institutions, to our ideology.” 

It was explained further that the Lim-Vinzons amend- 
ment, which in effect would permit the appointment of 
members of the lawmaking body to the cabinet, would 
be a violation of the system of checks and balance which 
characterized a presidential system. Delegate Roxas, dis- 
coursing on this point, said: 



PRIVILEGES AND DISQUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS 307 



‘‘There is one other element in a presidential system, 
Mr. President, which is antagonistic to the amendment pro- 
posed. It is the system of checks and balance. The Pres- 
ident performs his functions not only as the agency which 
executes the law, but as a check to the Legislature in the 
formulation of the laws. He may approve or he may veto 
bills passed by the Legislature. When it is proposed to ap- 
point members of the Legislature in the Cabinet under the 
assumption that thereby the Legislature may be represented 
in the Executive, what happens? You destroy the existence 
of the check because under that theory members of the Leg- 
islature, the Cabinet officers who are already members of 
the Legislature, would discharge the functions of the Execu- 
tive to check the acts of the Legislature.” 

In the course of his speech, Delegate Roxas explained 
that the reason for the appointment under the Jones Law 
of legislators to the Cabinet was to democratize the Exe- 
cutive, who was appointed by the President of the United 
States and responsible only to him. He said: 

“Why have the Filipino leaders and the Filipino people 
and the Philippine Legislature accepted the practice of ap- 
pointing members of the Legislature in the Cabinet? Why? 
All those who have examined the discussion on this subject 
during the last 14 or 15 years know that the reason why 
the Filipino people have decided on the appointments of 
members of the Legislature to the Cabinet is merely in order 
to democratize the Executive. I would wish to make that 
point clear. The only reason, the only justification for the 
present practice of appointing members of the Legislature 
to the Cabinet is the desire of the Filipino people to de- 
mocratize the Executive. We have an Executive appointed by 
a foreign power, deriving his commission from the Pres- 
ident of the United States, legally responsible only to the 
President of the United States. We wanted to implant here 
an autonomous government under the terms of the Jones 
Law. It was very important, having democratized the Leg- 
islature, to determine what method could be employed in or- 
der to make the Executive responsive to the will of the peo- 
ple. This scheme was developed; we proposed that the Gov- 
ernor-General should appoint members of the Legislature to 
the Cabinet. Legally, the secretary^ of a department is respon- 
sible to the Governor-General; politically, he is responsible 
to the party in power or to the Legislature. We have always 
acted on the assumption that when that Cabinet officer who 



308 FRAMING OP THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

is a member of the Legislature no longer commands the 
confidence of the majority in the Legislature, he will leave 
his office in the Cabinet and return to the Legislature. That 
is to say, he goes to the Legislature in order to imbue that 
department with the viewpoints of the representatives of 
the people. This was the scheme implanted in order to 
solve the difficulty, the existing difficulty in our Govern- 
ment.” 

But, he added, in view of the fact that the Chief Ex- 
ecutive would already be elected by the people, there would 
be no more philosophy for the plan nor justification for it. 
There would be no longer the need for democratizing the 
Executive as there was under the Jones Law when the 
Chief Executive did not owe his office to the people, when 
he was not responsible to them. For, asked Delegate 
Roxas, 

“Why, Mr. President, would a member of the Legisla- 
ture go to the Executive in order to carry the views of the . 
Legislature in the exercise of the functions which the Con- 
stitution has placed exclusively on the President?” 

Delegate Quirino, one of the members of the legisla- 
ture who were then serving as department secretaries, also 
argued in favor of the provision of the draft and against 
the amendment, explaining that oftentimes a legislator- 
department secretary found himself in an embarrassing sit- 
uation because of the impossibility of sei’ving equally well 
two masters — the lawmaking body and the Chief Executive. 
The speech of Delegate Quirino added very much force 
to the opposition against the amendment because it was 
based upon actual experience under the system built up 
under the Jones Law. 

When it was put to a vote on December 5, 1934, the 
Lim-Vinzons amendment was defeated overwhelmingly, the 
voting being 11 affirmative votes against 96 negative votes. 

While the vote showed that the Convention was in 
favor of the maintenance of a presidential system of gov- 
ernment, it was more of a recoi'd of the opposition by the 
Convention to the continuance of the practice under the 



PRIVILEGES AND DISQUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS 309 

Jones Law of appointing members of the National Assem- 
bl^.to serve as heads of the executive departments. 

(( Under this provision 9f the draft, the term, office or 
enn/ployrncivt, was not intended to include such institutions 
as the University of the Philippines, the Cebu Portland 
Cement Company, and the Philippine National Bank. 
Herewith wei'e the pertinent portions of the lecoids. 

"Delegate Villararna, — Mr. President, I would like to 
have some information from the sponsorship committee. In 
the consideration of the office or employment, where shall 
you classify the University of the Philippines, the Cebu 
Portland Cement Company, and the Philippine National 
Bank? 

** Delegate Briones. — They are not included.’’ 

Delegate Ventura proposed an amendment adding the 
phrase, ivhich carries 2vith it a salary or compensation, so 
that the provision should read : 

“No member of the National Assembly may hold any 
other office or employment in the Government which carries 
with it a salary or compensation without forfeiting his seat;” 

but after the clarification from Delegate Roxas, he with- 
drew it. Plerewith were the portions of the records on this 

matter : 

** Delegate Ventura. — Referring to this part — any other 
office or employment— my amendment reads as follows: 
which carries with it a salary or compensation. So that the 
provision should then read: 

‘No member of the National Assembly may hold 

any other office or employment in the Goveniment which 

carries with it a salary or compensation.’ 

I have in mind in presenting this amendment, Mr. Pres- 
ident, the position in the board of regents of the University 
of the Philippines; the position in the Philippine National 

Bank. 

**Delegate Roxas. — I can answer that question now by 
saying. . . 

** Delegate Ventura. — And also in the Council of State, 
if in the future we may establish that institution under 
the Commonwealth, or in the Judicial Council which is pro- 
vided for in the Judicial Department. If a member of the 
National Assembly is appointed to the position in the Ju- 



310 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



dicial Council, will he have to resign then his position as 
member of the National Assembly? 

“Delegate Roxaa . — I do not think so. 

“Delegate Ventura ^ — But he is appointed as a member 
of the Council of State because he is the President of the 
National Assembly. He has to be a member of the Coun- 
cil of State. 



A 



f 



^'Delegate Roxas , — I do not think so, because as the 
courts have interpreted the meaning* of the word ‘‘office*^ 
or ‘‘employment^', it necessarily carries compensation. That 
is attached to it. In the definition of the word “office'^ 
the courts have always held that one of the elements is 
compensation and term of office, if it is an office; he must 
exercise a certain jurisdiction, must hold His office for a 
certain term, and must receive comper^ation, otherwise it 
is not an office or an employment^>^^^ 

"IJ^egafe Ventura— ^ would you call the position 

held by the members of the Board of Regents? 

**Delegate Roxas . — Membership in the Board. He is a 
member of the Board of Regents, and he does not receive 
compensation. t 

''Delegate Ventura - — It is called “office." 

"Delegate Roxas . — It is not exactly an office because, 
as I have said, legally it is not an office because it does 
not carry compensation. And then, Mr. President, these 
positions in the Board of Regents in the University or in 
the National Bank are not included in this precept because 
this precept only includes an office or employment in the 
government. The University of the Philippines is an inde- 
pendent corporation. The National Bank is an independent 
corporation. There is no appointment by the Government, 
but by the President or by the board of directors of the 
bank. 



"Delegate Ventura . — Referring to the Council of State 
that may be established? 

"Delegate Roxas. — Well, that is advisory. That is not 
an office because it does not carry compensation. But if 
you make it a permanent body with jurisdiction and compen- 
sation, then you are creating an office; but if it is the 
Council of State with advisory function, then it is not an 
office in the legal usage of the term. 

"Delegate Ventura . — Supposing he receives per diem? 

"Delegate Roxas . — If it is advisory, it is not an office. 



M 



PRIVILEGES AND DISQUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS 311 

“Delegate Ventura. — I mean the other offices or certain 
boards. 

“Delegate Roxas. — For example? 

“Delegate Ventura. — For example. 

“Delegate Roxas. — If he is a member of the Tariff Com- 
mission — suppose we create the Tariff Commission — and he 
is appointed to that office and he resigns himself as a mem- 
ber of the Legislature, he is entitled to compensation, be- 
cause the Tariff Commission e.xercises jurisdiction; 

“Delegate Ventura. — If that is the case, I withdraw 
the amendment. 

There were no debates on the second part of the pro- 
vision of the draft which read : 

“(N)or shall any such Member during the time for 
which he was elected, be appointed to any civil office under 
the authority of the Government of the Philippines whicli 
may have been created, or the emolument whereof shall 
have been increased during such time.” 

'^No amendment to this provision of the draft had been pro- 
posed. It was a provision not unfamiliar to the delegates, 
for it was substantially boi-rowed from the Jones Law, 
with the coi'responding provision of the lattei in^urn sub- 
stantially copied from American constitutions. ^The same 
moral and ethical consideration inspired all of them — to 
prevent members of the lawmaking body from taking ad- 
vantage of their official position to create more attractive 
Qffjggg Q 2 * increase the salary of offices alieady existing 
to be filled by themselves, and thereby remove from them 
an inducement to create a vacancy. ^.It was a pi*ovision 
they desired to retain under the Constitution. ^ 

Draft of the Provision as Approved by the Convention 
on January 31, 1935 with the Approval of the Article on 
Legislative Power. — As approved by the Convention on 
January 31, 1935 with the approval of the entire article on 
legislative power, the provision read: 

“No Member of the National Assembly may hold any 
other office or emplosmnent in the Government \vithout for- 
feiting his seat, nor shall any such Member during the time 
for which he was elected, be appointed to any civil office 
under the authority of the Government of the Philippines 



312 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

which may have been created, or the emolument whereof 
shall have been increased during such time/' 

Draft of the Provision as Revised by the Special Com- 
mittee on Style. — In the special committee on style, this 
provision underwent a change in phraseology. After the 
first correction by the committee, the provision read: 

“No Member of the National Assembly may hold any 
other office or employment in the Government without for- 
feiting his seat, nor shall any such Member during the time 
for which he was elected, be appointed to any civil office 
which may have been created, or the emolument whereof 
shall have been increased during such time while he was a 
Member.’’ 

As far as the author, who was a member of the 
special committee on style, remembers, the clause, xohilc 
he was a member, was in the hurried deliberations of the 
special committee added to make clearer the meaning of 
the phrase, during such time. 

Before the copy of the Constitution as revised by the 
special committee on style was sent to the bureau of print- 
ing, another change in the phraseology was made by some 
members of the special committee — this time no longer in 
the session of the committee — making the provision read: 

“No Member of the National Assembly may hold any 
other office or employment in the Government without for- 
feiting his seat, nor shall any such Member during the time 
for which he was elected, be appointed to any civil office 
which may have been created or the emoluments whereof 
shall have been increased while he was a McmhCT of the 
National Assembly.” 

The Convention did not deliberate any more on the 
change thus made, as it did on the changes in substance 
made by the special committee on style and reported to the 
Convention by President Recto. 

Draft of the Provision in the Constitution Adopted by 
the Convention — In the Constitution finally adopted by the 
Convention, the provision regarding the disqualification to 
hold another office read: 

"No Member of the National Assembly may hold any 
other office or employment in the Government without for- 



PRIVILEGES AND DISQUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS 313 

feiting* his scat, nor shall any such Member during the 
time for which he was elected, be appointed to any civil 
office which may have been created or the emoluments 
w’hercof shall have been increased while he was a Member 
of the National Assembly.” 

The incongruousness of the phrase, ivhile he %vas a 
Member of the National Assembly ^ with the other phrase, 
during the time for ivhich he ivas elected, may give rise 
in the future to differences in the interpretation of this 
provision. But any doubt as to its meaning should be easily 
resolved by remembering the moral and ethical reason be- 
hind such a provision already mentioned in the preceding 

pages. 

Personally, the author thinks that the insertion of the 
phrase, tohile he teas a Member of the NaMonal Assembly, 
was an unfortunate mistake. Whatever might have been 
the intention of those responsible for its insertion in the 
revised draft of the Constitution coming from the special 
committee on style, it was a fact that the Convention never 
deliberated any more on the change of phraseology of this 
provision. There was no more occasion for the Convention 
to revise squarely and positively its intendment for the 
provision, implied from its leaving intact the provision as 
it was proposed in the first draft of the Constitution and 
from its approval of the entire article on legislative power 
on January 31, 1935. In fact the chain of circumstances 
in the closing days of the Convention seems to show most 
decidedly that owing to the rapidity with which the work 
was done in those days either the presence of this change 
in phraseology was overlooked or the Convention following 
the lead of President Recto did not consider the presence 
of the clause, while he was a Member of the National As- 
sembly, as operating to amend the original intendment be- 
hind the provision. 

Just a little history. 

The special committee on style had been created pri- 
marily to polish the language of the Constitution as ap- 



314 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

proved by the Convention on second reading. That was a 
common understanding among the delegates. 

The special committee on style, however, considered 
it necessary to make some changes in substance as well 
as in form. Printed copies of the revised draft of the Con- 
stitution coming from the special committee on style were 
distributed among the delegates for the first time in the 
morning of February 7, 1935. These copies contained 
changes in form as well as in substance to the draft as 
approved by the Convention on first and second readings. 

To the changes in style or form, the other delegates 
had no objection; but they objected vigorously against the 
idea of the special committee in making changes to the 
substance of the provisions as already approved by them. 

President Recto, who had been assigned to defend the 
changes made by the special committee on style, explained 
to the Convention on that same morning that the changes 
were of style as well as of substance. He proposed that 
the changes in substance were to be considered as if though 
they had been amendments proposed by the special com- 
mittee on style for the Convention to approve or disappi-ove. 

With the Convention approving the proposition. Pres- 
ident Recto then enumerated all the changes in substance 
preliminary, he said, to their consideration one by one by the 
Convention. The change in the provision by the addition 
of the clause, while he was a Member of the National As- 
sembly, was not included in the enumerated changes. 
Consequently, it was no longer acted upon by the Conven- 
tion. 

Why was this change not enumerated in the group of 
changes to the substance? Either the Convention Pres- 
ident overlooked the change in phraseology or he did not 
consider the change in phraseology to have effected a 
change in the substance of the provision as approved by 
the Convention on first and second readings. 

The same may be said of the delegates. They worked 
under the belief that the only changes in substance intended 



PRIVILEGES AND DISQUALIFICATIONS OP MEMBERS 315 



by the special committee on style — changes which were be- 
ing submitted for them to deliberate upon, with the alter- 
native to reject them, thereby maintaining their original 
decision, or to approve them, thereby I’eversing their ori- 
ginal decision — were those enumerated by President Rec- 
to in the morning of February 7, 1935 and considered sep- 
arately in the afternoon, and in the morning of the follow- 
ing day. Had the Convention been infoimed that the 
change made through the insertion of the phrase, xohile 
he tvas a Member of the Natiwud Assembly, was intended 
to be also a change in substance, undoubtedly it would have 
deliberated on it as it did on the others, especially because 
the change would then be a departure from a provision 
consecrated in the Jones Law and in American constitu- 
tions, both federal and state. 

But the Convention was not advised to that effect, so 
that the majority of the Convention either failed to notice 
the change in phi'aseology because they were concentrating 
all attention to the changes in substance enumerated by 
President Recto and being discussed separately, or noticed 
it but they believed that it was only a change in form but 
not in substance. It is more probable that the delegates 
failed to notice the change in phraseology because they 
were busy studying and deliberating on the enumerated 
changes of substance. 

It seems apparent, therefore, that as far as the Con- 
vention was concerned, the original intendment behind 
the provision on first and second readings remained unal- 
tered, nothwithstanding the addition later of the clause, 
while he wets cl Member of the Ndtional Assembly- 
If this intendment is to prevail, no Member of the Na- 
tional Assembly during the time for which he was elected 
may be appointed to any civil office which may have been 
created or the emoluments whereof shall have been in- 
creased during his term. He cannot defeat this intend- 
ment by resigning his legislative membership. 

Disqualification to Engage in Government Contracts. — 
The Philippine Constitution provides: 



316 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

“No Member of the National Assembly shall directly 
or indirectly be financially interested in any contract with 
the Government or any subdivision or instrumentality there- 
of, or in any franchise or special privilege granted by the 
National Assembly during his term of office.” 

Sources. — ^Before the regime of the Philippine Consti- 
tution, there was no such prohibition against members of 
the lawmaking body, although there was a provision in 
the Administrative Code prohibiting a municipal officer “to 
possess a pecuniary interest, either direct or indirect in 
any municipal contract, contract work, or other municipal 
business or to hold such interest in any cockpit or other 
game licensed by municipal authority.” 

The practice of some members of the lawmaking body, 
particularly those who were engineers by profession, to 
bid for contracts with the government — and very frequent- 
ly the contracts were awarded to them — was the object of 
severe criticisms in the press as well as in business circles. 
Attempts to secure the enactment of legislation to prohibit 
members of the lawmaking body to engage in such con- 
tracts proved futile. 

It was primarily for this reason that the committee 
on legislative power recommended in its report the incoz*- 
poration in the Constitution of the following provision : 

Member of the National Assembly shall directly 
or indirectly be financially interested in any contract with 
the government or any subdivision or instrumentality there- 
of* or in any franchise or special privilege granted by the 
National Assembly. Any member violating this provision 
shall be deemed to have forfeited his seat in the Legisla- 
ture.” 

Following the recommendation of the committee on 
legislative power, the sub-committee of seven included in 
the first draft of the Constitution a provision to that effect. 
The corresponding provision of the first draft read: 

^‘No Member of the National Assembly during his term 
in office shall directly or indirectly be financially interested 
in any contract with the Government or any subdivision or 
instrumentality thereof, or in any franchise or special priv- 
ilege granted by the National Assembly.” 



PRIVILEGES AND DISQUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS 317 

Debates. — During the consideration of this provision 
of the draft by the Convention, Delegate Pio presented an 
amendment for the suppression of the word, indirectly, 
thereby limiting the prohibition to direct financial interest. 
In defense of his amendment. Delegate Pio pointed out that 
the prohibition against having an indirect financial inteiest 
would in effect bar from the National Assembly business- 
men who could otherwise conti'ibute their business ability 
in the solution of the economic problems of the country. In 
part the delegate from Cagayan said: 

“Mr. President, the first part of the said subsection 
prohibits members of the National Assembly during their 
terms in office to be directly or indirectly financially inte- 
rested in any contract with the Government or any subdi- 
vision or instrumentality thereof, or in any franchise or 
special privilege granted by the National Assembly. Evi- 
dently, the purpose of the precept is to correct the present 
practice of some members of the Legislature in being direct- 
ly financially interested in some contracts with the Gov- 
ernment. The said practice has been denounced time and 
again by the press and the public, and naturally any provi- 
sion that tends to remedy the situation would be a welcome 
innovation. 

“But, Mr. President, the said precept goes beyond re- 
medying the present situation. It does not only correct 
the practice of some legislators in being directly financially 
interested in some contracts with the Government, but it 
also prohibits all members of the National Assembly from 
being financially interested in business organizations which 
may be financially interested in any contract with the gov- 
ernment, or in any franchise or special privilege granted 
by the National Assembly. 

“Mr. President, I believe that there are only very few 
men, if there are any at all, who make politics their profes- 
sion or means of earning their livelihood. I sincerely be- 
lieve that most of our legislators have professions from 
which they earned their livelihood even before their becom- 
ing legislators and also during their terms of office. In- 
deed, we can point with pride to the fact that our legislators 
are composed of lawyers, physicians, engineers, businessmen, 
and property ovmers. Accordingly, most of our present leg- 
islators must have been financially interested in some cor- 
porations, partnerships, and other business organizations be- 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



fore their becoming legislators and also during their incum- 
bency. 

‘‘Mr. President, what is true with our present legisla- 
tors, I presume, will also be true with our future members 
of the National Assembly. They will also be lawyers, phy- 
sicians, engineers, businessmen, and property owners. They 
will likewise have business connections and will be interested 
in some corporations, partnerships and other business or- 
ganizations before they become members of the National 
Assembly. 

“Mr. President, all the stockholders of a corporation and 
the partners of a partnership, altho they are not officials 
of said corporations and partnerships, are indirectly finan- 
cially interested in all business ventures of the same cor- 
poration and of the same partnership. Accordingly, when 
among the stockholders of a corporation or the partners of 
a partnership are members of the National Assembly, and 
the said corporation or partnership happens to be financially 
interested in a certain contract with the government or in a 
certain franchise or special privilege granted by the Nation- 
al Assembly, as such stockholders or as such partners, they 
are indirectly financially interested in the said contract, 
franchise, or privilege. 

“According to the precept under discussion, such a re- 
mote financial interest, because it is an indirect interest, is 
prohibited to the members of the National Assembly, and, 
therefore, when members of the National Assembly are put 
under such circumstances, they must either sell out their 
stock or their shares which may bring about their financial 
ruin, while on the other hand, their open violation of the 
Constitution may also bring about their impeachment. The 
inevitable outcome would, therefore, be the keeping out of 
the National Assembly good businessmen who as Assembly- 
men would help much in the solution of our economic prob- 
lems, and also the prohibition of members of the National 
Assembly from helping in the organization and finance 
of corporations, partnerships and other business entities of 
corporations that would help in the economic development 
of our country. 

“Mr. President, I sincerely believe that it is not the 
intention of this Convention to put the Members of the 
National Assembly under such an embarrassing position as 
that of compelling them to make their choice from either 
financial ruin or impeachment. I also sincerely believe that 
it is not also the intention of this Convention to keep out 



PRIVILEGES AND DISQUiVLIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS 319 

of the National Assembly good businessmen who as As- 
semblymen would help much in the solution of our econo- 
mic problems nor to prohibit the Members of the National 
Assembly from helping in the organization and finance of 
corporations, partnerships and other business entities that 
would help in the economic development of our country. Yet, 
r.Ir. President, that is exactly what will happen under the 
precept in question, unless we strike out the phrase “or 
indirectly" because while corporations and partnerships have 
personalities that are different and distinct from those of 
the stockholders or partners, such stockholders or partn^ 
are nevertheless indirectly financially interested in the 
transactions of the corporations or partnerships, and, there- 
fore, come under the provision of the said precept. . . 

When put to a vote, the Pio amendment was defeated 
by acclamation. 

Draft of the Provision as Approved by the Convention 
on Second Reading. — As it was approved by the Convention 
with the approval of the entire article on legislative power, 
the provision regarding the disqualification of legislative 
members to engage in business was the same as it was 
in the first draft of the Constitution, no amendment to the 
same having been approved by the Convention. 

In the course of the consideration of this provision by 
the Convention, the following interpellations took place; 

^^Delegate Pio. — Mr. Presidont, may I ask some ques- 
tions to the Chair? For example, a member of the Legis- 
lature forms a partnership with another engineer, and- the 
partnership or corporation enters into a contract with the 
Government. Would that be an indirect entering into a 
contract by the Government? 

"Delegate Briones. — Yes, sir. 

“Delegate Pio . — Then in that case, this is fundamental. 

"Delegate Briones. — Moreover, that is not even indirect. 
That is a direct participation. He belongs to that associa- 
tion. He derives gain from that corporation. 

"Delegate Pio . — Then that would be prohibiting the 
members of the National Assembly to be stockholders in a 
corporation. 

^‘Delegate B'7'iones. — ^Yes. 

Delegate Pio . — And supposing a member or person 
is a stockholder in a corporation, would he have to sell 
his stock before he can be a member of the Legislature? 



32Q FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

^'Delegate Briones. — Naturally, for reasons of propriety, 
he has rio other remedy than to do it. If that entity is 
going to enter into contracts wth the government, as a 
question of public morality, he has no other remedy than 
to do it.” 

Draft of the Provision as Revised by the Special Com- 
mittee on Style and as Finally Approved by the Convention. 
— The special committee on style amended the provision as 
approved by the Convention by striking out the phrase 
“during his term in office'^ and by adding the phrase “dur- 
ing his temi of office’' after the words “National Assembly.” 
The change was no longer reported to the Convention. As 
it was revised by the special committee on style and as it 
was in the Constitution finally approved by the Convention, 
the provision read: 

''No Member of the National Assembly shall directly 
or indirectly be financially interested in any contract with 
the Government or any subdivision or instrumentality 
thereof, or in any franchise or special privilege granted by 
the National Assembly during his term of office.” 

Disqualification to Serve as Counsel. — The Philippine 
Constitution provides : 

''(N)or shall any such Member appear as counsel be- 
fore the Electoral Commission or any court in any civil case 
wherein the Government or any subdivision or instrument- 
ality thereof is the adverse party, or collect any fee for 
his appearance in any administrative proceedings or in any 
criminal case wherein an officer or employee of the Gov- 
ernment is accused of an offense committed in relation to 
his office. No Member of the Commission on Appointments 
of the National Assembly shall appear as counsel before 
any court inferior to the Supreme Court .” 

Sources. — The committee on legislative power recom- 
rnended in its report to the Convention the following pro- 
vision regarding the disqualification of members of the Na- 
tional Assembly to serve as counsel : 

''(Nor) shall any such member appear as counsel in 
any civil case wherein the government or any subdivision 
or instrumentality thereof is the adverse party or collect 
any fees for his appearance in any administrative proceed- 



PRIVILEGES AND DISQUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS 321 

ings. Any member violating this provision shall be deemed 
to have forfeited his seat in the Legislature.” 

The recommendation of the committee was incorpo- 
rated by the sub-committee of seven in the first draft of 
the Constitution, only with certain amendments. It struck 
out that part of the committee report providing for the for- 
feiture of his seat by any member who violated the pro- 
vision, and added a provision to the effect that no Member 
of the National Assembly might appear as counsel before 
any court inferior to the Courts of Appeals the creation 
of which it likewise recommended in the first draft of the 
Constitution. As it appeared in the first di*aft of the Con- 
stitution prepared by the sub-committee of seven, the pro- 
hibition against Members of the National Assembly to ap- 
pear as counsel read : 

“...(N)or shall any such Member appear as counsel 
before any court inferior to the Courts of Appeals, or be- 
fore any other court in any civil case wherein the Govern- 
ment or any subdivision or instrumentality thereof is the 
adverse party, or collect any fee for his appearance in any 
administrative proceedings.” 

Debates. — The prohibition against lawyers to practice 
in the cases embraced in the provision met with opposi- 
tion on the part of a considerable number of lawyer-dele- 
gates who insisted in the total elimination of the provi- 
sion. There were, however, other lawyer-delegates who, 
recognizing the wisdom of the provision, were in favor of 
its retention in the Constitution. 

Finally, a compromise was arrived at in the amend- 
ment presented by Delegates Gullas, Francisco, and others 
for the striking out of the prohibition against assemblymen 
to act as counsel before any court inferior to the Courts 
of Appeals, leaving intact the remaining portion of the pro- 
vision. After it had been accepted by the sub-committee of 
seven, the amendment was put to a vote and was appi’oved 
by the Convention by 67 affirmative votes against 36 
negative votes. 

Later, Delegate Dikit presented another amendment 
for the insertion in the provision, after the phrase, the ad- 
verse party, of the phrase, or in any criminal case wherein 



322 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



an officer or employee of the Government is the accused, 
so that the provision would then read : 

“...(N)or shall any such Member appear as counsel 
before any court in any civil case wherein the Government 
or any subdivision or instrumentality thereof is the adverse 
party, or in any criminal case wherein an officer or em- 
ployee of the Government is the accused, or collect any fee 
for his appearance in any administrative proceedings.” 

Reasoning out his amendment, Delegate Dikit said in part: 

“My reason for this, gentlemen, is that if it is im- 
proper or unethical for the members of the National As- 
sembly to appear in court in a civil case wherein the gov- 
ernment is the party, I believe it is much more improper 
and unethical for the members of the National Assembly 
to appear in court in a criminal case wherein an officer 
of the government is accused. I have actually experienced 
a situation wherein I have accused some government offi- 
cers of malversation of public funds and four senators were 
defending them because there were several of them ... I 
believe that the officer has been required to resign in view 
of the fact that he was a very influential government of- 
ficial, and through the influence of the senators who de- 
fended him he was excluded from the criminal prosecu- 
tion. But I am sure that he was the master mind of the 
crime. So, gentlemen, I believe that we should not allow 
a situation such as this to occur again. It looks to me 
very embarrassing for the employee pei-forming his duty 
to find out the defaulters or those who are guilty of mal- 
versation of public funds that some officers of the govern- 
ment are the ones that are defending those officers, and 
that instead of cooperating with the investigators, they are 
the ones who appear as counsel for the defense.” 

In answer to an interpellation: by Delegate Escareal 
as to whether or not the prohibition would apply also to 
other crimes, Delegate Dikit said that it would apply be- 
ca,use it was the duty of all officers of the government to 
eliminate all undersirable officials from the government 
service. 

When put to a vote, the Dikit amendment was ap- 
proved by 57 affirmative votes against 33 negative votes. 

In the session of December 5, 1934, in a motion for 
reconsideration, Delegate Escareal presented an amendment 



PRIVILEGES AND DISQUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS 323 

to the Dikit amendment, which was accepted by the suD- 
committee of seven, to the effect that the crime alleged 
to have been committed by the accused must be one in re- 
lation to his office., so that the Dikit amendment as amend- 
ed by Delegate Escareal should then read : 

“Or in any criminal case wherein an officer or employee 
of the Government is accused of a crime in relation to his 
office.” 

The Escareal amendment was approved by the Convention. 

The Convention likewise readily approved by accla- 
mation the amendment presented by Delegate Ricardo Ne- 
pomuceno, which had been accepted by the sub-committee 
of seven, the said amendment reading: 

‘‘Nor shall any Member appear as counsel before the 
Electoral Commission provided for in this Constitution.’^ 

On January 31, 1935, the Convention approved the 
amendment presented by Delegate Lim which read: 

“No Member of the Commission on Appointments of the 
National Assembly shall appear as counsel before any court 
inferior to the Supreme Court.” 

Several amendments to the same effect had been pre- 
sented in writing to the Convention. They were not acted 
upon during the consideration of the provision of the first 
draft dealing with the disqualification of members of the 
National Assembly on December 4 and December 5, 1934, 
because by then the Convention had not yet decided whether 
or not to approve the creation of the Commission on Ap- 
pointments. 

The provision referring to the disqualification of law- 
yer members of the National Assembly — the provision of 
the first draft of the Constitution as amended by the Con- 
vention — which was approved by the Convention with the 
approval of the article on legislative power on January 31, 
1935, read: 

“(N) or shall any such Member appear as coxmsel be- 
fore any court in any civil case wherein the Government 
or any subdivision or instrumentality thereof is the adverse 
party or in any criminal case wherein an officer or employee 



324 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



of the Government is accused of a crime in relation to his 
office, or collect any fee for his appearance in any admi- 
nistrative proceedings; nor shall any member appear as 
counsel before the Electoral Conunission provided for in this 
Constitution. No Member of the Commission on Appoint- 
ments of the National Assembly shall appear as counsel 
before any coUrt inferior to the Supreme Court.” 

The Draft of the Provision in the Special Committee 
on Style,— The special committee on style did not intend to 
make any change in the substance of the provision as it 
had been approved by the Convention with the approval 
of the article on legislative power on January 31, 1935. 
Consequently, President Recto did not report any change 
in substance in this provision, and there were no further 
debates on it by the Convention. 

The Draft of the Provision in the Constitution Adopted 
by the Convention. — As it appeared in the Constitution 
adopted by the Convention, the provision reads: 

“(N) or shall any such Member appear as counsel be- 
fore the Electoral Commission or any court in any civil 
case wherein the Government or any subdivision or instru- 
mentality thereof is the adverse party, or collect any fee for 
his appearance in any administrative proceedings or in any 
criminal case wherein an officer or employee of the Gov- 
ernment is accused of an offense committed in relation to 
his office. No Member of the Commission on Appointments 
of the National Assembly shall appear as coimsel before 
any court inferior to the Supreme Court.” 

As it appears in the Constitution adopted by the Con- 
vention, it would seem that a Member of the National As- 
sembly may appear in any criminal case wherein an officer 
or employee of the Government is accused of an offense 
committed in relation to his office, provided that he does 
not collect any fee. But the history of the corresponding 
part of the provision shows that it was the intention, of 
the Convention to prohibit altogether the appearance of as- 
semblymen in criminal cases wherein an officer or employee 
of the government was accused of an offense committed in 
relation to his office. 



PRIVILEGES AND DISQUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS 325 



The mistake was committed in this manner. As it 
has already been seen, Delegate Dikit proposed to insert 
bis amendment after the term, adverse Txirty, so that the 
provision would read: 

‘^(N)or shall any such Member appear before any 
court in any civil case wherein the Government or any sub- 
division or instrumentality thereof is the adverse party, or 
in any criminal case wherein an officer or employee of the 
Government is the accused.” 

With the Dikit amendment further amended by Delegate 
Escareal, the provision then read: 

*‘(N)or shall any such Member appear before any court 
in any civil case wherein the Government or any subdivision 
or instrumentality thereof is the adverse party, or in any 
criminal case wherein an officer or employee of the Govern- 
ment is accused of an offense committed in relation to his 
office.” 

For the use of the members of the special committee 
on style, the office of the secretary of the Convention pre- 
pared typewritten and mimeographed copies of the first 
draft embodying all the amendments approved by the Con- 
vention. Instead of placing the Dikit and Escareal amend- 
ment after the words, adverse party, as intended by the 
authors and the Convention, apparently by mistake the of- 
fice placed it after the word, proceedings. The provision 
in the typewritten and mimeographed copies furnished to 
the members of the special committee on style read: 

**(N)or shall any such Member appear as counsel be- 
fore any court in any civil case wherein the Government or 
any subdivision or instrumentality thereof is the adverse 
party, or collect any fee for his appearance in any adminis- 
trative proceedings or in any criminal case wherein an of- 
ficer or employee of the Government is accused of a crime 
in relation to his office; nor shall any Member appear as 
counsel before the Electoral Commission provided for in 
this Constftution.” 

The misplacement of the portion referring to the dis- 
qualification of assemblymen to appear in criminal cases 
W'herein an officer or employee of the Government was 
accused of a crime must have escaped the notice of the 



326 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

members of the special committee especially because there 
was no thought at all to revise the decision of the Con- 
vention on the matter, agreed as they were on the sub- 
stance of the provision. Neither did the Convention in its 
hurried deliberations in the closing days notice the mis- 
placement especially because no change in substance in this 
provision was reported by President Recto. 

With respect to the scope of the prohibition against 
the appearance of lawyer-assemblymen before any court 
in any civil case wherein the government or any subdivi- 
sion or instrumentality thereof is the adverse party, the 
records of the Convention contain the following interpel- 
lations by Delegate Lim to Delegate Briones: 

"Delegate Lim . — If it is a cadastral case, could a Mem- 
ber of the National Assembly appear, taking into considera- 
tion that cadastral proceedings are in the name of the Gov- 
ernment of the Philippines, or in the name of the director 
of lands. I should like to know from the sub-committee of 
seven if in that case a Member of the National Assembly 
can appear. 

“Delegate Briones . — I believe so, because the pvem- 
ment there is only a nominal party; he is not in the same 
manner an adverse party to the government. 

“Delegate Lim . — It claims titles to land, so that if the 
party interested does not succeed in having his title ap- 
proved, the land becomes public land. 

“Delegate Briones . — I believe, however, that that is not 
the spirit of the precept, except really with respect to lots 
which are public lands, which have the character and the 
nature of public lands, and which are claimed by the gov- 
ernment. 

“Delegate Lim . — How could the nature of a particular 
case be determined? 

“Delegate Briones . — It will be known when the lots are 
claimed by private persons, and when they are claimed by 
the government. I believe that that is a matter of style.” 

In general, the purpose of the provision prohibiting 
assemblsonen to appear as counsel in certain cases was to 
insure justice in the decisions on the same, without creat- 
ing any suspicion whatsoever that friendship with or fear 
of them had any controlling influence. 









CHAPTER XXIV 

THE POWERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 

Sources. — The government of the Philippines under the 
Jones Law was so organized that the Philippine Legisla- 
ture was a lawmaking body with general legislative powers. 
Section 12 of the Jones Law read; 

‘'That general legislative powers in the Philippines, ex- 
cept as herein otherwise provided, shall be vested in a legis- 
lature which shall consist of two houses, one the senate and 
the other the house of representatives, and the two houses 
shall be designated “The Philippine Legislature.” 

In vesting general legislative powers upon the Philippine 
Legislature under the Jones Law, the Congress of the 
United States simply followed the principle adopted in the 
previous organic acts of the Philippines and in American 
state constitutions with respect to the same matter. 

From the very beginning of the Convention days, the 
principle of a general grant of legislative powers upon the 
lawmaking body and that of a unitai'y system for the gen- 
eral organization of the government were assumed by the 
great majority of the delegates to be two of the principles 
to underlie the new Constitution. The reports of practi- 
cally all the Convention committees were based upon that 
assumption. The sub-committee of seven prepared the 
first draft of the Constitution on the basis, among others, 
of those principles. It was for that reason that the sub- 
committee of seven could not include in the first di-aft the 
reports of some committees and only a part of the reports 
of several others. It was likewise for the same reason 
that even some of the provisions of the first draft and many 
proposed amendments to the same draft were disapproved 
by the Convention. For it was said that, in the exercise 
of its general legislative powers, the lavmiaking body could 
very well make them the subject matter of ordinary leg- 
islation. 






328 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

Nature of the Powers of the National Assembly — Un- 
der the Philippine Constitution as drafted, “The Legisla- 
tive power shall be vested in a National Assembly.” In 
that provision, the Constitution vests general legislative 
powers upon the National Assembly. 

Notwithstanding this general grant of legislative 
powers, the Constitution vests in the lawmaking body spe- 
cific powers. Among the specific powers of the National 
Assembly are those found in the provisions authorizing it 
to determine the persons who could become Filipino natu- 
ralized citizens and how citizenship may be lost or re- 
acquired; to define the disqualifications from the exercise 
of suffrage of those otherwise qualified under the Con- 
stitution ; to make an apportionment of its members within 
three years after the return of every enumeration; to de- 
termine how its members from the province of Sulu, Lanao, 
and Cotabato shall be chosen; to determine the manner of 
calling a special election in case of a vacancy in the Na- 
tional Assembly; to fix the date of election for its members 
and the President and Vice-President of the Philippines; 
to transfer the date for the convening of its regular ses- 
sions from that fixed in the Constitution; to increase the 
number of its officers; to determine the manner and the 
penalties which it might impose for compelling the attend- 
ance of its absent members; to determine the rules of its 
proceedings, punish its members for disorderly behavior, 
and, with the concurrence of two-thirds, expel a member; 
to determine what parts of its proceedings should not be 
published in the journal. 

Likewise the Constitution gives the National Assembly 
the specific power to alter the salaries fixed therein for its 
members, including the Speaker, for the President and the 
Vice-President, for the Auditor General, and for the Chief 
Justice and Associate Justices of the Supreme Court, and 
to fix the salaries of other judges — subject to the limita- 
tions set forth in the Constitution; to increase the appro- 
priations recommended by the President for the operation 
of the National Assembly and the Judicial Department; to 



THE POWERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 



329 



prescribe the form of the budget and the information that 
it should contain; to delegate to the President, subject to 
such limitations and restrictions as it may impose, the 
authority to fix within specified limits, tariff rates, import 
or export quotas and tonnage and wharfage dues, and, for 
a limited period and subject to such restrictions as it may 
prescribe, to promulgate rules and regulations to caiTy out 
a declared national policy; to count the votes cast for the 
President and the Vice-President and proclaim the persons 
elected President and Vice-President; to elect the President 
Qj* "\7^i(;^-Pi'0sident in case of a tie, to pass Presidential 
succession acts ; to pass laws regarding the exercise by the 
President of the power of general supervision over local 
goveiTiments ; to increase or decrease the number of per- 
sons who may be appointed by the President, subject to 
the limitations in the Constitution, and to vest the appoint- 
ment of inferior officers in the President alone, in the 
courts, or in the heads of departments ; to concur with the 
President in the granting of amnesty and in the making 
of treaties; to fix the number of departments; to establish 
courts inferior to the Supreme Court; to determine the 
j u of the various courts, subject to the limitations 
in the Constitution; to alter the number of justices in the 
Supreme Court and the manner of their sitting ; to deter- 
mine the residence of judges of inferior courts; to prescribe 
the qualifications of judges of inferior courts, subject to 
the limitations in the Constitution ; to repeal, alter, or sup- 
plement the rules concerning pleading, practice, and proce- 
dure, and the admission to the practice of law in the 
Philippines, promulgated by the Supreme Court. 

It has the specific power to try all impeachments un- 
der the Constitution ; to pass laws in accordance with which 
the Auditor General shall audit all expenditures of funds 
or property pertaining to or held in trust by the Govern- 
ment or the provinces or municipalities thereof; to pre- 
scribe functions of the Auditor General in addition to those 
prescribed in the Constitution ; to fix the time within which 
the decisions of the Auditor General shall be rendered; to 



330 FRAMING OP THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

provide for the manner of appeal by an aggrieved private 
party to a court of record from the decision of the 
Auditor General; to require the Auditor General to submit 
reports in addition to the annual report concerning the 
condition and operation of the Government; to organize a 
civil service system, embracing all branches and subdivi- 
sions of the Government; to authorize additional or double 
compensation for officers or employees of the Government; 
to define the causes for removal or suspension of an officer 
or employee in the civil service. 

And lastly, it has the specific power to determine the 
size of private agricultural land which individuals, corpora- 
tions, and associations may acquire and hold, subject to 
rights existing prior to the enactment of such laws; to 
authorize, upon payment of just compensation, the expro- 
priation of lands to be subdivided into small lots and con- 
veyed at cost to individuals; to take steps toward the 
development and adoption of a common national language 
based on one of the existing native languages; to change 
the official language or languages of the Philippines; to 
provide by general law for the formation, organization, or 
regulation of private corporations, unless such corporations 
are owned or controlled by the Government or any sub- 
division or instrumentality thereof ; to amend, alter, or re- 
peal, when the public interest so requires, a franchise or 
right granted to any individual, firm, or corporation; and 
o amend, alter, repeal, or modify laws of the former Phil- 
ippine government continued into the regime of the Con- 
stitution, 

Limitations Upon the Powers of the National Assem- 
Philippine Constitution contains several limita- 
tions upon the powers of the National Assembly. Some of 
them are implied, while others are express. Of the express 
limitations, some are on the general powers; while others 
are on the specific powers. 

The implied limitations upon the powers of the Na- 
tional Assembly are inferred from the general philosophies 



THE POWERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 



331 



underlying the Constitution and, during the Commonwealtn 
period, likewise from the status of the Philippines in Amer- 
ican-Philippine relations. 



As it will be shown in a subsequent chapter, the Con- 
stitution is founded upon the philosophies, among others, 
of the sovereignty of the people; the separation of powers; 
the independence of the judiciary; social justice; national- 
ism- and limited government. Inferentially, the National 
Assembly can not so exercise its powers that it would con- 
travene these fundamental philosophies woven through the 



fabric of the Constitution. 

During the Commonwealth period, the Philippines re- 
mains a dependency of the United States-although more 
autonomous than it was in the past— still governed by the 
Congress of the United States under its general, plenary, 
and absolute power, subject only to the restrictions neces- 
sary for the protection of life, liberty, and property. Con- 
sequently, the Congress of the United States may enac. 
measures which in effect would operate to narrow the 
sphere of the general legislative powers of the National 

Assembly. 

The specific limitations on the general powers of the 
National Assembly are found in the bill of rights of the 
Constitution and in other provisions. The specific limita- 
tions upon the specific powers are found generally in the 
provisions defining specific powers. 

Power of Taxation. — With respect to the limitations 
upon the taxing power of the National Assembly, the Phil- 
ippine Constitution provides: 



“The rule of taxation shall be uniform.” 

“Cemeteries, churches, and parsonages or convents ap- 
purtenant thereto, and all lands, buildings; and improve- 
ments used exclusively for religious, charitable, or educa- 
tional purposes shall be exempt from taxation.” 

Sources . — ^Upon the general power of the Philippine 
Legislature to impose taxes, the Jones Law contained the 
following limitations: 



332 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



‘'That the rule of taxation in said Islands shall be uni- 
form.'' 

“That no export duties shall be levied or collected on 
exports from the Philippine Islands, but taxes and assess- 
ments on property and license fees for franchises and priv- 
ileges, and internal taxes, direct or indirect, may be imposed 
for the purposes of the Philippine government and the pro- 
vincial and municipal governments thereof, respectively, as 
may be provided and defined by acts of the Philippine Leg- 
islature, and, where necessary to anticipate taxes and rev- 
enues, bonds and other obligations may be issued by the 
Philippine government or any provincial or municipal gov- 
ernment therein, as may be provided by law and to protect 
the public credit." 

Before the regime of the Philippine Constitution, cer- 
y^ere by law exempt from taxation. Section 
of the Administrative Code exempted from taxation 
among others, the following: 

Property owned by the United States of America, 
the Government of the Philippine Islands, or by any prov- 
ince or municipality in the Philippine Islands. 

(b) Cemeteries or burial grounds. 

“(c) Churches and parsonages or conventos appurtenant 
thereto, and all lands, buildings, and improvements used 
exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, or educa- 
lonal purposes; but this exemption shall not extend to prop- 
erty held for investment, or which produces income, even 
ough the income be devoted to some one or more of the 
purposes above specified." 

th Law contained, among others, 

PhV limitations upon the taxing power of the 

I ippine government during the Commonwealth period : 

, ‘Property owned by the United States, cemeteries, 
c urches, and parsonages or convents appurtenant thereto, 
and all lands, buildings and improvements used exclusively 
or religious, charitable, or educational purposes shall be 
exempt from taxation." 

The govemment of the Commonwealth of the Philip- 
pine Islands shall impose and collect an export tax on all 
articles that may be exported to the United States from 
the Philippine Islands free of duty under the provisions of 
existing law as modified..... in subdivisions (a), (b), and 
(c)" (of Sec. 6) ‘^as follows: 



THE POWERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 



333 



"'(1) During the sixth year after the inauguration of 
the new government the export tax shall be 5 per centum 
of the rates of duty which are required by the laws of the 
United States to be levied, collected, and paid on like articles 
imported from foreign countries; 

**(2) During the seventh year after the inauguration 
of the new Government the export tax shall be 10 per centum 
of the rates of duty which are required by the laws of the 
United States to be levied, collected, and paid on like articles 
imported from foreign countries; 

“(3) During the eighth year after the inauguration of 
the new Government the export tax shall be 15 per cent\m 
of the rates of duty which are required by the laws of the 
United States to be levied, collected, and paid on like articles 
imported from foreign countries; 

“(4) During the ninth year after the inauguration of 
the new Government the export tax shall be 20 per cent^ 
of the rates of duty which are required by the laws of &e 
United States to be levied, collected, and paid on like articles 
imported from foreign countries. 

After the expiration of the ninth year after the 
inauguration of the new Government the export tax shall 
be 25 per centum of the rates of duty which are required by 
the laws of the United States to be levied, collected, and paid 
on like articles imported from foreign countries. 

“The Government of the Commonwealth of the Philip- 
pine Islands shall place all funds received from such export 
Lxes in a sinking fund, and such funds shall, in addition to 
other moneys available for the purpose, be applied solely 
to the payment of the principal and interest on the bonded 
indebtedness of the Philippine Islands, its provinces, munici- 
palities, and instrumentalities, until such indebtedness has 
been fully discharged.” 

Several of the Convention committees proposed for in- 
corporation into the Constitution provisions on taxation. 
Some of these provisions simply reaffirmed the principle in 
the Jones Law of giving the lawmaking body general and 
exclusive authority over matters of taxation, subject only 
to certain limitations. Others in effect proposed to divide 
the taxing power between the central government and the 
local govemments — a proposition intended primarily as one 
of the means for guaranteeing local autonomy in the Con- 
stitution. 



334 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



The committee on public finance, for instance, proposed 
in its report the following* provisions on taxation: 

‘‘Section 1. Taxes and fees of any nature shall only 
be levied and collected as prescribed by law. The author- 
ity to levy and collect taxes within the respective jurisdic- 
tions of the local governments may by law be delegated to 
said local governments. 

“Section 2. All taxes shall be uniform throughout the 
jurisdiction of the government imposing them, subject, how- 
ever, to such classifications as the respective legislative 
branches of the central or local government may prescribe. 
No tax or duty shall be laid on articles carried from one 
political subdivision to another within the Philippines. 

“Section 3. The share of the local governments in all 
taxes collected for the Central government wherein the local 
governments participate according to law shall be on the 
basis of the total collections of each year.*' 

The committee on tariff recommended the following 
provisions : 

“Section 1. The Legislature shall, unless herein other- 
wise provided, have exclusive power to levy duties, imposts 
and excises, and to provide for the collection thereto. 

“Section 2. No tax qr duty shall be levied on articles 
exported from one province, city, municipality or any other 
political subdivision to another province, city, municipality 
or any other political subdivision within the Philippine Is- 
lands.” 

The committee on provincial and local governments of 
which Delegate Villanueva was chairman recommended the 
following provision on taxation. 

“Section 6. Provinces, chartered cities, and mimicipali- 
ties shall have power to create their own sources of revenue 
as well as to levy taxes, subject to such limitations as may 
be provided by law; and they shall be entitled to a just and 
equitable share of the proceeds of all internal revenue taxes 
levied by the central government. They shall have control 
over the use and disposition of all public funds held or re- 
ceived by them in any manner.” 

The committee on legislative power proposed only that 
the “rule of taxation shall be uniform.” 

Working under the theory that the government to be 
established under the Constitution would be unitary and 



THE POWERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 



335 



that the legislatux-e would be vested with a general grant 
of legislative powers, the sub-committee of seven left out 
the recommendations of the committees on the matter of 
taxation, with the exception of that of the committee on 
legislative power to the effect that the rule of taxation 
should be uniform. 

According to the first draft, the lawmaking body then 
would have the exclusive power to determine matters of 

taxation among others, the kind of taxes to be imposed, 

the agencies to execute the tax laws, and the properties to 
be exempted from taxation. In the exercise of its general 
legislative powers on taxation, the lawmaking body may 
choose to enumerate the powers of the local governments 
in matters of taxation or may in turn give them a general 
taxing power, subject to the limitations that it may impose. 

The only limitations that the sub-committee of seven 
proposed for the taxing power of the lawmaking body 
were that the rule of taxation should be uniform; that, 
during the Commonwealth period, property owned by the 
United States, cemeteries, churches, and parsonages or 
convents appui'tenant thereto, and all lands, buildings and 
improvements used exclusively for religious, charitable, or 
educational purposes should be exempted from taxation; 
and that beginning the sixth yeai* of the transition period 
there should be imposed and collected an expoit tax on 
certain products of the Philippines. The last two limita- 
tions upon the taxing power of the Philippine government 
were required by the Tydings-McDuffie Law to be included 
in the Constitution, to be enforced only during the Com- 
monwealth period. 

The provision of the Constitution regarding the exemp- 
tion from taxation also after the Commonwealth period 
of cemeteries, churches, and parsonages or convents appur- 
tenant thereto, and all lands, buildings, and improvements 
used exclusively for religious, charitable, or educational pur- 
poses was an amendment introduced by Delegates Cloribel 
and Millar during the consideration of the article on the 



336 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

legislative department of the Constitution. It was inspired 
by a similar provision of the Tydings-McDuffie Law to that 
effect. 

Debates . — There was no opposition in the Convention 
to the principle reincorporated in the first draft of the Con- 
stitution that the rule of taxation should be uniform. 
Everybody was agreed on the reaffirmation in the Consti- 
tution of that principle. 

There were proposed, however, several amendments 
intended to limit the general taxing power of the National 
Assembly. Of them were the Cloribel-Millar amendment 
for the exemption from taxation of cemeteries, churches, 
and parsonages or convents appurtenant thereto, and all 
lands, buildings, and improvements used exclusively for re- 
ligious, charitable, or educational purposes; the Ventenilla 
amendment prohibiting the imposition of direct taxes ex- 
cept on the rent or income of capital? the Araneta-Lim 
amendment prohibiting the imposition of confiscatoi'y taxes, 
with the exception of tariff duties; and the Cuenco amend- 
ment exempting from attachment for delinquency in the 
payment of the cedula tax any property which under the 
law was exempt from execution to satisfy a civil obliga- 
tion. In addition to these amendments were those pro- 
hibiting the imposition of retroactive taxes and of poll 
taxes already dealt with in preceding pages. 

On December 11, 1934, Delegates Cloribel and Millar 
presented an amendment for the incorporation in the Con- 
s itution of a provision exempting from taxation cemete- 
ries, churches, and parsonages or convents appurtenant 
thereto, and all lands, buildings, and improvements used 
exclusively for religious, charitable, or educational pur- 
poses. As it has already been said, the Tydings-McDuffie 
Law required that a provision to that effect should be 
incorporated in the Constitution to be enforced only during 
the Commonwealth period. There was also a similar pro- 
vision existing under Philippine statutes. In order to have 
a constitutional guarantee for such an exemption not only 



THE POWERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 



337 



during the Commonwealth period but also after that time, 
the authors presented the amendment. There was not very 
much opposition in the Convention to the inclusion of such 
a provision. When it was submitted to a vote, the amend- 
ment was approved by 83 affirmative votes against 15 neg- 
ative votes. 

Fi-om the interpellations directed to the proponents of 
the draft and the answ'ers made thereto by them, it was 
made clear that the exemptions were intended to cover 
only the properties directly used for the pui-poses re- 
ferred to. 

On December 12, 1934, the Convention considered the 
amendment presented by Delegate Ventenilla providing that 
“direct taxes shall not be imposed except on the rent or in- 
come of capital.” In defending it, Delegate Ventenilla 
pointed out that the amendment would mean greater equity 
among the taxpayers ; for the amount of the tax paid would 
then be on the basis of their ability to pay. The amend- 
ment was defeated, however, primarily because of the ad- 
ministrative difficulties in its execution so cogently pointed 
out by Delegate Singson Encarnacion. 

On the same day, the Convention considered the Ara- 
neta-Lim amendment which read as follows: 

“No taxes, with the exception of tariff duties, shall be 
imposed under such rate as will amount to a confiscation or 
destruction of private property.” 

The amendment, according to its authors, was pres- 
ented in view of the constitutional principle repeated in 
judicial decisions that the power to tax meant the power 
to destroy. Under the taxing power, then, it was said, 
taxes might be so imposed as to destroy or virtually con- 
fiscate private property. The authors proposed to exclude 
tariff duties because the imposition of confiscatory tariff 
duties might be necessary in some cases for the protection 
of local industries. \Wiat taxes would be considered con- 
fiscatory, the authors explained, would be left to be deter- 
mined by the judiciary just as much as to it had been left 



338 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



to be determined the meaning of such terms as “due pro- 
cess of law” and “equal protection of the laws.” 

The amendment was dpposed by Delegates Ventura, 
Locsin, and Aruego, who pointed out that it would lead to 
a multiplicity of suits in view of the fact that, there being 
no definition laid down for the term, confiscatory, many 
taxpayers might resort to the courts with the allegation that 
the taxes proposed to be collected from them were confis- 
catory; and that its inclusion would impair the flexibility 
and adjustability of the Constitution to changing condi- 
tions. There might be cases at some future time, it was 
said, when the threat to impose confiscatory taxes might 
be profitably used to compel the development of private 
agricultural lands and the circulation of money othei*wise 
lying idle; or when confiscatory taxes would be considered 
necessary to prevent the establishment of activities perni- 
cious to the health, morals, or safety of the people, or to kill 
enterprises that had developed to be such. They appealed 
to the Convention to have more confidence and trust in the 
ability and wisdom of the Members of the National Assem- 
bly to determine the principles of taxation that would be 
followed in the country. 

When put to a vote, the Araneta-Lim amendment was 
defeated. 

On the same day, the Convention also considered the 
amendment presented by Delegate Cuenco, which read: 

‘‘Properties which because of their value are exempt 
by law from execution for the satisfaction of a civil obliga- 
tion are also exempt from attachment for the payment of a 
personal cedula tax/' 

In defense of the amendment, the author explained 
that it was intended precisely to give relief to the poor 
people of the country who could not afford to pay their 
cedula tax; for while it was true that they could not be 
imprisoned for the non-payment of a poll tax by virtue of 
a provision already agreed upon during the consideration 
of the article on the bill of rights, their humble effects 



THE POWERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 



339 



might still be subjected to execution — an act that would 
bring to them greater material misery. 

Delegates Bernabe de Guzman and Ysip respectively 
proposed to amend the Cuenco amendment by extending 
the provision to those who were delinquent in the pa 3 Tnent 
of land taxes and of any other tax whatsoever, but the 
Convention defeated the proposed amendments. 

When it was submitted to a vote, the Convention ap- 
proved overwhelmingly the Cuenco amendment by 106 af- 
firmative votes against 20 negative votes. 

A motion to reconsider the Cuenco amendment, pres- 
ented by Delegate Orense, on the ground that the matter 
covered by it should better be left to legislation in order 
not to make the Constitution very detailed was defeated 
in the Convention by 59 negative votes against 51 affirma- 
tive votes. 

In the special committee on style, the Cuenco amend- 
ment was struck out from the draft of the Constitution be- 
cause it was believed that it should better be left to sta- 
tutory leg-islation. The deletion of the amendment was ap- 
proved readily by the Convention. 

Power of Appropriation. — Upon the general power of 
appropriation of the National Assembly, the Philippine 
Constitution contains the following limitations i 

‘‘The President shall submit within fifteen days of the 
opening of each regular session of the National Assembly 
a budget of receipts and expenditures, which shall be the 
basis of the general appropriation bill. The National As- 
sembly may not increase the appropriations recommended 
by the President for the operation of the Government as 
specified in the Budget, except the appropriations for the 
National Assembly and the Judicial Department. 

“No provision or enactment shall be embraced in the 
general appropriation, unless it relates specifically to some 
particular appropriation in the bill; and any such provision 
or enactment shall be limited in its operation to such ap- 
propriation.^’ 

“All money collected on any tax levied for a special 
purpose shall be treated as a special fund and paid out for 



340 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



such purpose only. If the purpose for which a special 
fund was created has been fulfilled or abandoned, the bal- 
ance, if any, shall be transferred to the general funds of 
the Government. 

“No money shall be paid out of the Treasury except in 
pursuance of an appropriation made by law. 

“No public/^ money or property shall ever be appro- 
priated, applied, or used, directly or indirectly, for the use, 
benefit, or support of any ^t, church, denomination, secta- 
rian institution, or system of religion, or for the use, benefit, 
or support of any priest, preacher, minister, or other reli- 
gious teacher or dignitary as such, except when such priest, 
preacher, minister, or di^itary is assigned to the armed 
forces or to any penal institution, orphanage, or leprosa- 
rium." 

Sources . — ^The Jones Law provided that the budget of 
receipts and expenditures submitted by the Governor-Gen- 
eral to the Legislature should be the basis of the annual 
appropriation bill ; that all money collected on any tax levied 
or assessed for a special purpose should be treated as a 
special fund in the Treasury and paid out for such purpose 
only; that no money should be paid out of the Treasury 
except in pursuance of an appropriation by law; and that 
no public money or property should ever be appropriated, 
applied, donated, or used, directly or indirectly, for the use, 
benefit, or support of any sect, church, denomination, sec- 
tarian institution, or system of religion, or for the use, 
benefit, or support of any priest, preacher, minister, or 
other religious teacher or dignitary as such. 

There was no provision, however, prohibiting the law- 
making body to increase the appropriations recommended 
by the Executive for the operation of the, executive de- 
partment of the government; nor was there any provision 
prohibiting the inclusion in the general appropriation of 
any provision or enactment, unless it related specifically 
to some particular appropriation in the bill. Neither was 
there any provision exempting from the general law that 
no public money or property should be appropriated, ap- 
plied, or used directly or indirectly for the use, benefit, or 
support of any priest, preacher, minister, or other religious 



THE POWERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 



341 



teachei* or dignitary as such, a “priest, preacher, viinister, 
or dignitary assigned to the armed forces or to any penal 
institution, orphanage, or leprosarium.” 

Both the committee on legislative power and the com- 
mittee on finance recommended- in their reports that the 
budget submitted by the Chief Executive should be the 
basis of the annual general appropriation bill; that no 
money should be paid out of the Treasury except in pur- 
suance of an appropriation by law; and that the lawmak- 
ing body should be prohibited to increase the appropria- 
tions recommended in the budget for the operation of the 
executive department. 

The committee on legislative power recommended like- 
wise the continuance of the principle in the Jones Law 
that all money collected on any tax levied of assessed for 
a special purpose should be treated as a special fund in 
the Treasury and paid out for such purpose only; and the 
provision pi'ohibiting the inclusion in the budget or an- 
nual appropriation of a provision or enactment not relat- 
ing specifically to some particular appropriation in the bill. 

The committee on finance also recommended the con- 
tinuance of the principle in the Jones Law of prohibiting 
the use of public money or pi-operty for religious institu- 
tions or teachers. The corresponding provision of the com- 
mittee report read: 

“No public money or property shall ever be appropriat- 
ed, applied, or used directly or indirectly, for the use, ben- 
efit, or support of any sect, church, denomination, sectarian 
institution, or system of religion, or for the use, ^ benefit, 
or support of any priest, preacher, minister, or dignitary 
as such.” 

In the preface of its report, the committee made the fol- 
lowing explanation with respect to the scope of this pro- 
vision : 

“(We) have thought it convenient to state in this re- 
port that it is the sense of your committee that the pro- 
vision contained in section 10 does not prohibit the engag^ 
ment of the services of a priest — for instance — as chaplain 



342 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



in any of the public institutions as the Bureau of Prisons, 
etc. So this explanation will clarify the position of the 
committee in the question herein mentioned that may arise 
in the future.” 

The sub-committee of seven embodied substantially in 
the first draft of the Constitution the recommendations of 
the two Convention committees. The provisions of the 
first draft of the Constitution about the limitations upon 
the power of appropriation of the lawmaking body wei’e as 
follows : 

“The President shall submit within fifteen days of the 
opening of each regular session of the National Assembly 
a budget of receipts and expenditures, which shall be the 
basis of the general appropriation bill. The National As- 
sembly may not increase the appropriations recommended 
by the Chief Executive for the operation of the Govern- 
ment or (us) specified in the Budget, except the appro- 
priations for the National Assembly and the Judicial De- 
partment. 

“No provision or enactment shall be embraced in the 
Budget or annual appropriation, unless it relates specifically 
to some particular appropriation in the bill; and any such 
provision or enactment shall be limited in its operation to 
such appropriation.” 

“All money collected on any tax levied or assessed for 
a special purpose shall bs treated a special fund in the 
Treasury and paid out for such purpose only. 

“No money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in 
consequence of appropriations made by law; and a regular 
statement and account of the receipts and expenditures of 
all public money shall be published from time to time. 

‘'No public money or property shall ever be appro- 
priated, applied, or used directly or indirectly, for the use, 
benefit, or support of any sect, church denomination, secta- 
rian institution, or system of religion, or for the use, ben- 
efit, or support of any priest, preacher, minister or dignitary 
as such, nor shall a pension or gi'atuity be paid to elective 
officers or their heirs.” 

The provision of the Constitution to the effect that if 
the purpose for which a special fund was created has been 
fulfilled or abandoned, the balance, if any, shall be trans- 
ferred to the general funds of the Government was an 



THE POWERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 



343 o 



amendment presented by Delegates Esliza and Dikit during 
the debates on the first draft of the Constitution. That 
provision of the Constitution exempting from the prohibi- 
tion regarding the appropriation or application or use of 
public money or property for religious purposes, any 
“'priest, prcdcher, minister, or dignitary . . . assigned to the 
armed forces or to any penal institution, orphanage, oi 
leprosarium” was an amendment introduced likewise dur- 
ing the debates by Delegates Roman Cruz and Castor Ciuz. 

Debates. — There were no debates on the principle that 
the budget recommended by the Chief Executive should 
be the basis of the general annual appropriation bill. Every- 
body accepted the wisdom of such a principle. There were 
debates, however, on the principle recommended in the first 
draft to the effect that the National Assembly should be 
prohibited to increase the appropriations recommended for 
the operation of the executive department as specified in 
the budget. The Convention finally voted to sustain the 
budget principle of the draft.. 

The Convention approved without debate the principle 
recommended in the first draft prohibiting the inclusion in 
the budget or annual appropriation of a provision or enact- 
ment, unless it related specifically to some particular ap- 
propriation in the bill. Everybody was agreed on the pro- 
position that there should not be permitted undei* the Con- 
stitution the evil of inserting “riders” in appropriation 
measures. 

Likewise, the Convention approved without debate the 
provision of the first draft to the effect that all money 
collected on any tax levied or assessed for a special pur- 
pose should be treated as a special fund in the Treasury 
and paid for such purpose only. An amendment presented 
by Delegates Esliza and Dikit for the addition of the fol- 
lowing provision : 

‘'After the purposes for which a special fund was 
created has been fulfilled or abandoned, the balance, if any, 
in said fund may be transferred to the general fund and 
be subjected to appropriations in the legal manner*' 



344 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

was approved v/ithout debate by the Convention, upon pre- 
vious acceptance of the same by Delegate Singson Encar- 
nacion in behalf of the sub-committee of seven. 

The Convention also approved readily the provision of 
the first draft to the effect that no money should be drawn 
from the Treasury except in consequence of an appropria- 
tion by law. 

On December 10, 1934, the Convention considered the 
amendment presented by Delegates Cuenco and Millar for 
the suppression from the draft of the prohibition against 
the appropriation, use, or application of money for the use, 
benefit, or support of any priest, minister, or dignitary as 
such, so that the provision about appropriation for religious 
ends should then read : 

“No public money or property shall be appropriated, 
applied, or used directly or indirectly for the use, benefit, 
or support of any sect, church, or system of religion, nor 
shall a pension or gratuity be paid to elective officers or 
their heirs.” 

Reasoning out the amendment. Delegates Cuenco and 
^llar explained that, unless the prohibition was suppressed, 
it would be impossible constitutionally to employ with com- 
pensation religious ministers for the service of the state — 
m penal institutions, in leprosariums, and also in the fu- 
ture armed forces of the country. The amendrhent was 
objected to, however, because of the fear that, with the 
Prohibition suppressed, public money or property might be 
appropriated for religious ministers even if they would not 
be in the service of the state. 

There was a general feeling, however, that the appro- 
priation of public money or property for the use, support, 
or benefit of religious ministers in the service of the state 
should be permitted. 

A compromise was consequently in order. To serve 
as a compromise. Delegates Roman Cruz and Castor Cruz 
presented an amendment to the effect that appropriations 
should be permitted for such religious officials, provided that 



THE POWERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 



345 



they would be in the service of the state. As amended by 
them, the corresponding: provision of the draft then read: 

“No public money or property shall ever be appro- 
priated, applied, or used directly or indirectly, for the use, 
benefit, or support of any sect, church, denomination, secta- 
rian institution, or system of religion, or for the use, ben- 
efit, or support of any priest, preacher, minister, or dig- 
nitary as such, except the priest, preacher, minister, or dig- 
nitary assigned to the army or navy or to any penal insti- 
tution, orphanage or leprosarium, nor shall a pension or 
gratuity paid to elective officers or their heirs.’’ 

The Cruz amendment, after a brief defense by Delegate 
Castor Cruz and an opposition speech by Delegate Vinzons, 
was approved on December 11, 1934, with 74 affirmative 
votes against 34 negative votes. 

Draft on the Limitatio^i^ upon the Power of AppropHa^ 
tion of the National Assembly as Approved by the Conveix- 
tion on Second Reading. — As they were approved with the 
approval of the entire article on legislative power on Jan- 
uary 31, 1935, the draft on the limitations upon the iK)wer 
of appropriation of the National Assembly read as follows: 

“The President shall submit within fifteen days of the 
opening of each regular session of the National Assembly 
a budget of receipts and expenditures, which shall be the 
basis of the general appropriation bill. The National As- 
sembly may not increase the appropriations recommended 
t>y the Chief Executive for the operation of the Govern- 
ment as specified in the Budget, except the appropriations 
for the National Assembly and the Judicial Department. 

“No provision or enactment shall be embraced in the 
Budget or annual appropriation, unless it relates specifically 
to some particular appropriation in the bill, and any such 
provision or enactment shall be limited in its operation to 
such appropriation. 

“All money collected on any tax levied or assessed for 
a special purpose shall be treated a special fund in the 
Treasury and paid out for such purpose only* If the pur- 
pose for which a special fund was created has been fulfilled 
or abandoned, the balance, if any, in the said fund may 
be transferred to the general funds and be subject to ap- 
propriation in the regular manner. 



346 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



“No money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in 
consequence of appropriations made by law. 

“No public money or property shall ever be appro- 
priated, appUed, or used directly or indirectly, for the use, 
benefit, or support of any sect, church, denomination, secta- 
rian institution, or system of religion, or for the use, ben- 
efit, or support of any priest, preacher, minister, or digni- 
tary as such, except the priest, preacher, minister, or dig- 
nitary assigned to the army or navy or to any penal insti- 
tution, orphanage or leprosarium, nor shall a pension or 
gratuity be paid to elective officers or their heirs.” 

Draft on the Limitations upon tha Po^oer of Appro- 
priation of the National Assembly as Revised by the Spe- 
cial Committee on Style and as Approved by the Conven- 
tion. — In the special committee on style, there were 
changes to these provisions ; but they were primarily 
changes in style. There was. one change in substance, how- 
ever. It was the elimination of the provision, “nor shall 
a pension or gratuity be paid to elective officers or their 
heirs.” This was a provision inserted in the first draft 
of the Constitution at the instance of President Recto, its 
author. In the special committee on style, it was struck 
out uiK)n the suggestion of President Quezon, who said 
that there might be cases in the future when the pay- 
ment of gratuity or pension to elective officers or their 
heirs would be considered justifiable. He said that for that 
reason it was better to leave the matter to be governed 
by ordinary legislation. The deletion was approved by the 
Convention. 



Power to Borrow Money. Sources . — The Constitution 
contains no limitation upon the power of the National As- 
sembly to borrow money, except that in the ordinance ap- 
pended to it — a limitation which the Tydings-McDuffie Law 
required to be included therein to be operative only during 
the Commonwealth period. This limitation reads: 

‘‘The public debt of the Philippines and its subordinate 
branches shall not exceed limits now or hereafter fixed by 
the Congress of the United States, and no loans shall be 
contracted in foreign countries without the approval of the 
President of the United States/^ 



THE POWERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 347 

At the time of the drafting of the Constitution, the 
Congress of the United States through the Jones Law had 
placed a limitation upon the power of the local lawmaking 
body to contract public indebtedness, in the provision which 
read: 

. .And, where necessary to anticipate taxes and reve- 
nues, bonds and other obligations may be issued by the 
Philippine Government or any provincial or municipal gov- 
ernment therein, as may be provided by law and to protect 
the public credit: Provided, however. That the entire in- 
debtedness of the Philippine government created by the 
authority conferred herein, exclusive of those obligations 
known as friar land bonds, shall not exceed at any one 
time 10 per centum of the aggregate tax valuation of its 
property, nor that of the city of Manila 10 per centum of 
the aggregate tax valuation of its propei'ty, nor that of any 
Pi'ovince or municipality a sum in excess of 7 per centum 
of the aggregate tax valuation of its property at any one 
time. In computing the indebtedness of the Philippine Gov- 
ernment, bonds not to exceed $10,000,000 in amount, issued 
by that Government, secm-ed by an equivalent amount of 
bonds issued by the Provinces or municipalities thereof, shall 
not be counted.” 

During the Convention days, there was manifested 
very much concern about the problem of public indebted- 
ness. There was a general feeling to the effect that the 
government should contract an indebtedness only when de- 
manded by extraordinary circumstances, and then only of 
such a total amount as would not constitute a heavy burden 
upon the people. 

The committee on finance recommended for incorpora- 
tion in the Constitution the following provision: 

‘‘Bonds and other obligations may be issued by the cen- 
tral or any local government in conformity with law. The 
Central Government shall not use its credit to an amount 
exceeding at any one time ten per centum of the total as- 
sessed value of taxable real estate property within the Phil- 
ippines. The said limit may, however, be exceeded by a vote 
of two-thirds of the members of each House of the Legis- 
lature and in case of a presidential veto by three-fourths 
of the members of each House.’’ 



348 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

The first draft of the Constitution imposed no limita- 
tion upon the power of the National Assembly to borrow 
money. The only provision that it contained about public 
debts was to the effect that a bill authorizing an increase 
of the public debt vetoed by the President might be over- 
riden by three-fourth votes of all the Members of the Na- 
tional Assembly. Therefore, in the exercise of its general 
power, the National Assembly would have the power to 
borrow money for the country for whatever occasion and 
regardless of the amount. 

Debates . — It was for this reason that several delegates 
introduced amendments to the first draft proposing limita- 
tions upon the borrowing power of the political department 
of the government. One of them was introduced by Dele- 
gate Bautista; the other by Delegates Lim and Araneta. 

Delegate Bautista’s amendment, considered by the 
Convention on December 11, 1934, was to the effect that 
money could be bon’owed on the credit of the government 
only for the maintenance of war and for the economic de- 
velopment of the nation. It was an amendment inspired bj’ 
similar provisions in European constitutions. In defense 
0 the amendment. Delegate Bautista explained that such 
^ would serve as a brake against any propensity 

“ e part of the government to be loose in the exercise 
o IS borrowing power. Delegate Singson opposed the 
amendment because, he said, it would tie unnecessarily the 
an s of the lawmaking body, which might find it neces- 
sary m the future to borrow money on the public credit 
or really important things other than the maintenance of 
war and the economic development of the country. He said 
a t should be reposed greater confidence in the wis- 
om an ability of the lawmaking body and the Executive 
to etermine when money on the public credit should be 

borrowed. When put to a vote, the Bautista amendment 
was defeated. 

On December 12, 1934, the Convention considered the 
amendment of Delegates Lim and Araneta to the effect 



THE POWERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 



349 



that the central government should in no case contract an 
obligation to an amount exceeding ten per centum of the 
total assessed value of the taxable real estate property 
within the Philippines without the consent of two-thirds of 
the members of the National Assembly. Delegate Araneta, 
in defense of the amendment, explained that it did not pro- 
hibit the National Assembly to contract public debts. It 
only required that the approval of two-thirds, and not a 
mere majority, should be secured before the total amount 
could exceed ten per centum of the total value of the tax- 
able real estate property of the Philippines. After a brief 
speech against it by Delegate Cuademo, who said that it 
was better not to put any limit to the borrowing capacity 
of the government because there might be a case in the 
future when it would really be necessary to exceed the 
limit, the Lim-Araneta amendment was approved by the 
Convention. 

In the special committee on style, however, the Lim- 
Araneta amendment was struck out from the draft in or- 
der not to tie the hands of the lawmaking body, in the 
members of which the country should repose its confidence 
for the wise exercise of the borrowing power. The elimina- 
tion was later on approved readily by the Convention. 

As the Constitution was approved, there was no limita- 
tion whatsoever upon the borrowing power of the National 
Assembly after the Commonwealth period. If could borrow 
money for any purpose that it would deem wise and to any 
amount that it would consider necessary. 

Power to Declare War. — The Philippine Constitution 
provides : 

“The National Assembly shall, with the concurrence of 
two-thirds of all its Members, have the sole power to de- 
clare war.” 

This provision of the Constitution was recommended 
in the report of the committee on legislative power and 
incorporated in the first draft of the Constitution. 

On December 12, 1934, during the consideration of the 
provisions of the first draft on the legislative power, Del- 



350 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

egates Maglanoc and Abella proposed an amendment for 
the suppression of this provision. They reasoned out that 
the provision of the draft would run counter to a provision 
in the article on declaration of principles about the renun- 
ciation of war, which provision from all indications would 
be approved by the Convention; for the phrase “to declare 
war” referred to both defensive and aggressive wars. De- 
legate Araneta spoke in favor not only of the elimination 
of the provision but of a positive declaration in the Con- 
stitution to the effect that the “Government of the Phil- 
ippines shall not have the power to declare an offensive 
war.” Delegate Araneta said that the enunciation of such 
a statement in the Constitution would be the best remedy 
to eradicate war. Delegate Singson Encarnacion, in defense 
of the provision, stated that it had been included in the 
draft not to authorize the declaration of an aggressive war, 
for the latter was renounced as an instrument of national 
policy, but to see to it that when it would be necessary 
to declare war, such a declaration must be by at least two- 
thirds of the Assembly and not by the President. When 
it was submitted to a vote, the Maglanoc-Abella amend- 
ment was defeated. 

In the special committee on style, the provision of the 
first draft, which was approved with the defeat of the Mag- 
anoc- Abella amendment, was amended so as to read: 

“The National Assembly shall have the sole power to 
declare a, state of war, but such declaration shall require 
the concurrence of two-thirds of all its Members.” 

The phrase, “a state of war,” was used in view of the opin- 
ion expressed by some delegates that the phrase, “to de- 
clare war,” applied not only to defensive wars but also to 
aggressive wars ; whereas, there was a common understand- 
ing that the Philippines should not declare an offensive war. 

It was finally decided in the Convention to employ the 
original phrase, to declare war, subject to the understand- 
ing that its interpretation should be qualified by another 
provision in the Constitution, namely, that the Philippines 



THE POWERS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 



351 



renounced aggressive war as an instrument of national 
policy. As it was finally adopted by the Convention, the 
provision read: 

“The National Assembly shall, with the concurrence of 
two-thirds of all its Members, have the sole power to de- 
clare war.” 



«p,^. 

Jp->’ .5 A 



r‘#v 



•^\ 



' « 7H.V % ' ^ ^ 

■iir^" 






.'^•1 



.? /?ir -i^ 



i***' 















71*^ 






P 



flWT i 

■tt «*- H*fc^ ^’1 



CHAPTER XXV 

THE MAKING OF LAWS 

The Sessions of the National Assembly. — ^The Philip- 
pine Constitution provides; 

“The National Assembly shall convene in regular ses- 
sion once every year, on the second Monday of the month 
immediately following that on which the election of its Mem 
hers was held, unless a different date is fixed by law. The 
National Assembly may be called in special session at any 
time by the President to consider general legislation or 
only such subjects as he may designate. No special session 
shall continue longer than thirty days and no re^lar s^- 
sion longer than one hundred days, exclusive o un a 

This provision of the Constitution was recommended 
by the committee on legislative power and was incoipoia e 
in the first draft of the Constitution. The corresponding 
portion of the report of the committee on legis a ive po\ 
was in turn substantially borrowed from the Jones aw. 

Following the provdsion of the Jones Law, the 
of the committee on legislative power and the first di'aft 
of the Constitution provided that the lawma mg o y 
should convene at the capital of the Philippineo. 

On December 4, 1934, during the consideration of 
the article on the legislative department of the firs ra 
of the Constitution, Delegate Sanvictores presented an 
amendment for the substitution of the name, 
the phrase, at the capital; and Delegate Rafols, another 
amendment for the suppression altogether of P lase, 
at the capital. Reasoning out his amendment. Delegate 
Rafols pointed out that in cases of epidemic, war, or 
calamities, it might be considered very necessary to ho 
the session of the National Assembly in another place, 
but that would be impossible if the Constitution would spe- 
cify as it was specified in the first draft that the National 
Assembly should convene at the capital. 



354 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



V 



Having been accepted hy the committee of seven, the 
Rafols amendment for the suppression of the phrase, 
nt the capital, was readily approved by acclamation. 

The National Assembly shall convene in regular ses- 
sion once eveiy year. Unless a different date is fixed by 
law, the regular session begins on the second Monday of 
the month immediately following that on which the elec- 
tion of its Members was held. The regular session shall 
not continue longer than one hundred days, exclusive of 
Sundays. 



The National Assembly may be called in special ses- 
sion at any time by the Pi’esident. The special session thus 
called shall not continue longer than thirty days, exclusive 
of Sundays. When it meets in special session, it may con- 
sider general legislation unless the President specifies in 
Ws proclamation calling the National Assembly the sub- 
jects which the latter may take up, in which case it may 
consider only the subj'ects thus designated. 



The repoii; of the committee on legislative power and 
the first draft of the Constitution, following the phraseo- 
logy of the Jones Law, provided that the special session 
might be called “for general legislation or for action on 
such specific subj'ects as he may designate.” It was in this 
phraseology that this provision was approved with the ap- 
proval on second reading of the entire article on legislative 



power on January 31 , 1935 . In the special committee on 
style, however, the phraseology was altered to make the 
provision read: 



^ The National Assembly may be called in special session 

at any time by the President to consider general legislation 
or only such subjects as he may designate.” 

The purpose of the amendment was to limit the National 
Assembly to the consideration only of such subj'ects as the 
Executive might designate in case he would thus designate. 

Drafting of Bills. — ^With respect to the drafting of 
bills, the Philippine Constitution contains the following li- 
mitations : 



THE MAKING OF LAWS 



355 



**(1) No bill which may be enacted into law shall em- 
brace more than one subject which shall be expressed in 
the title of the bill. 



“No bill shall be passed or become a law unless it shall 
have been printed and copies thereof in its final form fur- 
nished the Members at least three calendar days prior to 
its passage by the National Assembly, except when the Pres- 
ident shall have certified to the necessity of its immediate 
enactment. Upon the last reading of a bill no amendment 
thereof shall be allowed, and the question upon its final 
passage shall be taken immediately thereafter, and the yeas 
and 7 iays entered on tlie Journal.” 



The first provision was recommended in the report of 
the committee on legislative power and embodied in the 
first draft of the Constitution. In tum it had been copied by 
the committee from the Jones Law. The provision of 
latter on the matter was copied from American consti u- 
tions. The purpose of constitutional requirements of this 
kind was, in the words of Justice Cooley in his Co7ishtu- 
tional Limitations, 



“First, to prevent hodge-podge or log-rolling legisla- 
tion; second, to prevent surprise or fraud upon the legis- 
lature by means of provisions in bills of which the titles 
gave no intimation, and which might therefore be overlook- 
ed and carelessly and unintentionally adopted, and, third, 
to fairly apprise the people, through such publication of 
legislative proceedings as is usually made, of the sheets of 
legislation that are being considered in order that they 
may have opportunity of being heard thereon, by petition 
or otherwise, if they shall so desire. 

' There was no amendment to this provision of the 
draft of the Constitution, and it was adopted by the Con- 
vention readily with the approval of the article on legisls.- 
tive power. The special conunittee on style did not make 
a.ny change in substance to the provision of the first draft-. 



The second provision was recommended in the report 
of the committee on legislative power and embodied in the 
first draft of the Constitution. The report of the commit- 
tee on the matter found its counterpart in the constitu- 
tions of some of the states of the United States. 



356 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

The portion of the provision regarding the printing of 
bills and the distribution of copies thereof at least three 
calendar days prior to their final passage except when the 
President should have certified to the necessity of their im- 
mediate enactment was readily approved by the Convention. 

Delegate Ricardo Nepomuceno proposed an amendment 
to the last part of the provision to the effect that any 
amendment would be permitted with the consent of four- 
fifths of all the Members, in order to make possible the cor- 
rection of a manifest error discovered after the last reading 
of a bill; but the Convention defeated the proposed amend- 
ment. 

The special committee did not make any change in 
substance to the entire provision. 

During the debates on the article on the legislative de- 
partment, there were proposed several precepts intended to 
prevent hasty and improvident legislation and to compel a 
careful examination of proposed laws. These precepts were 
aimed specially against the evil so repeatedly occurring in 
the Philippines of railroading measures in the sine die 
session of the lawmaking body. But it was explained that 
the provision requiring the printing and distribution in 
their final form of bills at least three calendar days prior 
to their passage by the National Assembly had been in- 
tended precisely as a means to compel a careful considera- 
tion of measures before they were enacted into law and to 
prevent the practice of I'ailroading measures in the closing 
days of the session of the lawmaking body. 

The Process of Lawmaking under the Constitution. — 
Outside of the limitation regarding the printing and distri- 
bution of copies in their final form of bills at least three 
calendar days prior to their passage by the National As- 
sembly, the Philippine Constitution does not dwell at length 
on the procedure to be followed in lawmaking. The Con- 
vention left that matter to be determined by the National 
Assembly as a part of the rules of its proceedings. 



THE MAKING OF LAWS 



357 



With respect to the process of lawmaking, the Consti- 
tution provides : 

“Every bill which shall have passed the National As- 
sembly shall, before it becomes a law, be presented to the 
President. If he approve the same, he shall sign it; but 
if not, he shall return it with his objections to the National 
Assembly, which shall enter the objections at large on its 
Journal and proceed to reconsider it. If, after such recon- 
sideration, two-thirds of all the Members of the National 
Assembly shall agree to pass the bill, it shall become a 
law. In all such cases the votes of the National Assem- 
bly shall be determined by yeas and nays, and the names 
of the Members voting for and against shall be entered 
on the Journal. If any bill shall not be returned by the 
Pi-esident as herein provided within twenty days (Sundays 
excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the 
same shall become a law in like manner as if he had 
signed it, unless the National Assembly by adjournment pre- 
vent its return, in which case it shall become a law unless 
vetoed by the President within thirty days after adjourn- 
ment.” 

This provision was substantially copied from the 
Jones Law, It was recommended in the report of the com- 
mittee on legislative power and embodied in the first draft 
of the Constitution. The only substantial differences be- 
tween the two are the fact that this provision contem- 
plates a unicameral legislature, while the provision of the 
Jones Law contemplated a bicameral legislature; and the 
fact that while under the Jones Law, if a bill or joint reso- 
lution vetoed by the Governor-General was reconsidered fa- 
vorably in each House, the same was forwarded again to 
the Governor-General who, in case he should not then ap- 
prove, should transmit the same to the President of the 
United States, who had the power to approve or disapprove 
the same, while in the Constitution there is no such limita- 
tion. The reason for the latter difference was the fact that 
there was no suclf limitation placed in the Tydings-McDuffie 
Law, which authorized the framing of the Constitution. 
And the Convention was exercising to the limit the auto- 
nomy granted to it in the framing of the same. 



358 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

During the Convention days, there were some propo- 
sitions for the adoption in the Philippines of the institu- 
tions of the initiative and the referendum. While the pro- 
position for the adoption of the initiative was not consider- 
ed seriously by the Convention, there were quite a number 
of delegates in favor of the idea of a referendum. 

On December 14, 1934, the Convention considei'ed the 
amendment for the adoption of the referendum, presented 
jointly by Delegates Jesus Perez and Lizares, which I’ead: 

“Upon the petition of twenty-five per centum of all the 
municipal councils, a referendum must be held, coincident 
with the next general elections, on any law passed by the 
National Assembly, and a majority vote of the electorate 
against said law will annul the same.*' 

In its defense. Delegate Perez, one of the authoi's, 
said that the amendment would furnish to the people a 
means by which they could carry out their opposition 
against a law which would not be satisfactory to them, 
pointing out that making an issue of the measure in an 
election would not be adequate in view of the fact that 
generally there were other election issues. Delegate Vin- 
zons, another defender, said that the adoption of the re- 
ferendum would serve as a check against ill-considered and 
hasty legislation which would be more in number because 

of the adoption by the Convention of a unicameral legis- 
lature. 

The amendment was opposed, however, by Delegate 
Singson Encamacion, who said that the adoption of the 
referendum would only tend to make more complicated the 
governmental machinery and to create a condition of in- 
stability in the laws of the country. He pointed out em- 
phatically that the referendum would operate to kill in the 
hands of the people some measures that were good al- 
though not popular with them because of their nature, 
mentioning specifically tax measures. 

When it was submitted to a vote on 'December 15, 1934, 
the Perez-Lizares amendment was defeated. 



THE MAKING OF LAWS 



359 



The Veto Poiver of the President 

Constitutional Pro>isions on the Veto Power. — Re- 
garding the veto power of the President of the Philippines, 
the Philippine Constitution px-ovides: 

‘‘Every bill which shall have passed the National As- 
sembly shall, before it becomes a law, be presented to the 
President. If he approve the same, he shall sign it; but 
if not, he shall return it with his objections to the Na- 
tional Assembly, which shall enter the objections at large 
on its Journal and proceed to reconsider it. If, after such 
reconsideration, two-thirds of all the Members of the Na- 
tional Assembly shall agree to pass the bill, it shall become 
a la\v. In all such cases the votes of the National Assem- 
bly shall be determined by yeas and nays, and the names 
of the Members voting for and against shall be entered on 
the Journal. If any bill shall not be returned by the Pres- 
ident as herein provided within twenty days (Sundays ex- 
cepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the same 
shall become a law in like manner as if he had signed it, 
unless the National Assembly by adjournment prevent its 
return, in which case it shall become a law unless vetoed 
by the President within thirty days after adjournment. 

“The President shall have the power to veto any parti- 
cular item or items of an appropiiation bill, but the veto 
shall not affect the item or items to wiiich he does not 
object. When a provision of an appropriation bill affects 
one or more items of the same, the President cannot veto 
the provision without at the same time vetoing the parti- 
cular item or items to w^hich it relates. The item or items 
objected to shall not take effect except in the manner here- 
tofore provided as to bills returned to the National Assem- 
bly without the approval of the President. If the veto re- 
fers to a bill or any item of an appropriation bill which 
appropriates a sum in excess of ten per centum of the total 
amount voted in the appropriation bill for the general ex- 
penses of the Government for the preceding year, or if it 
should refer to a bill authorizing an increase of the public 
debt, the same shall not become a law unless approved by 
three-fourths of all the Members of the National Assembly. 

“The President shall have the power to veto any sep- 
arate item or items in a revenue or tariff bill, and the 
item or items vetoed shall not take effect except in the 
manner provided as to bills vetoed by the President.” 



360 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

Sources. — ^The veto power of the Chief Executive was 
recognized in the Jones Law. The provision in the Jones 
Law about the Govemoi-’s veto was copied from American 
constitutions. The veto power of the Chief Executive was 
readily recognized in the Convention, and there were no 
debates hinging on the principle of whether or not the 
acts of the lawmaking body were subject to the veto 
of the Chief Executive. Everybody in the Convention 
seemed agreed on the necessity of continuing under the 
Constitution the institution of the executive veto. 

The report of the committee on legislative power pro- 
vided for the executive veto. Following the recommenda- 
tion of the committee, the sub-committee of seven incor- 
porated provisions regarding the executive veto in the first 
draft of the Constitution. 

Under the Jones Law, with the exception of appro- 
priation bills, the Chief Executive could veto or approve 
measures only in their entirety. He could not approve a 
part and veto the other parts as he could with appropria- 
tion measures. 

The Convention continued in the Constitution the prin- 
ciple of the Jones Law, wth the change, however, that, 
in addition to those in appropriation bills, the Chief Exe- 
cutive could also veto item or items in a revenue or tariff 
measure, leaving the others in full force and effect. 

The continuation of the rule under the Jones Law of 
permitting the Chief Executive to veto separate item or 
items in appropriation measures was recommended in the 
reports of the committee on legislative power and the com- 
mittee on finance, and a pi'o vision to that effect was em- 
bodied in the first draft of the Constitution. The provi- 
sion of the first draft read: 

“The President shall have the power to veto any par- 
ticular item or items of an appropriation bill, but the veto 
shall not affect the item or items to which he does not 
object/' 

The provision authorizing the President to veto sepa- 
rate 'item or items in a revenue or tariff measure was re- 



THE MAKING OP LAWS 



3&1 



r 



commended in the report of the committee on finance, 
'Section 4 of the report I'ead: 

‘'The President shall have the power to veto any sep- 
arate source of tax included in any revenue or tariff bill, 
and the item vetoed shall not take effect except in the 
manner provided as to bills vetoed by the President.” 

The inclusion of this provision in the report of the 
committee was inspired by the constitutions of some of the 
states of the United States. There was no such provision 
in the Jones Law nor in the American federal Constitution. 
Not long before the drafting of the Philippine Constitu- 
tion, the Congress of the United States imposed an excise 
tax on coconut ofls from the Philippines. It was said that 
the President of the United States was not in favor of the 
imposition of the excise tax, but he could not do otherwise 
than approve the entire revenue bill of Congress in which 
the excise tax proposed for Philippine coconut oil was only 
an item, because under the Amei'ican federal constitution he 
had no power to veto separate item or items in a revenue 
bill. This experience of the Filipino people had not yet 
been forgotten at the time of the calling of the Convention 
and helped influence the inclusion of this provision. 

The recommendation of the committee on finance was 
embodied in the first draft of the Constitution in the pro- 
vision which read: 

“The President shall have the power to veto any sep- 
arate source of tax included in any revenue or tariff bill, 
and the item vetoed shall not take effect except in the man- 
ner provided as to bills vetoed by the President.” 

Debates. — On December 7, 1934, the Convention con- 
sidered the amendment presented by Delegate Enriquez 
for the suppression of the provision empowering the Chief 
Executive to veto separate item or items in an appropria- 
tion measure because, according to him, that provision 
would constitute in the hands of the Chief Executive an 
instrument of oppression. After a brief defense of the 
provision by Delegate Singson Encamacion, the Enriquez 
amendment was defeated by the Convention, 



362 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



The provision of the first draft of the Constitution 
empowering the President to veto any separate source of 
tax included in any revenue or tariff bill was most wamily 
debated, the Convention taking three days for its considera- 
tion. The debates which took place on December 7, 10, 
and 11, 1934 centered on the Jose Reyes-Vinzons amend- 
ment for the suppression of the same. Delegates Abella, 
Vinzons, Roxas, Perfecto, IMarabut, and Lim argued in 
favor of the amendment; while it was opposed by Dele- 
gates Araneta, Singson Encamacion, Quirino, Romero, and 
Buslon. 



In opposition to the provision of the draft, it was ar- 
gued principally by Delegate Marabut, staunch defender of 
the rights and prerogatives of the lawmaking body, that 
the provision would tend to impair the prerogative of the 
National Assembly — a prerogative possessed by every leg- 
islature in a democracy — to determine the taxes that the 
people should pay to the state. The legislature, he pointed 
out, was in a better position because of its representative 
character to determine the sources of revenue that would 
affect fairly the greatest number of people. Secondly — 



and the argument was most stressed by Delegates Roxas, 
Vinzons, and Lim — the provision would give the Chief 
Executive an instrument which he might easily use 
to favor certain interests, discriminating against others, 
more especially because executives more often than not 
were conservative, with a tendency to protect large inte- 
rests. Moreover, the opponents of the draft said, the pro- 
vision would unnecessarily increase the powers of the Pres- 
ident, making him more tremendously powerful when 
there should be a well-balanced system of government. 

The provision of the draft was defended primarily on 
the ground that it would enable the President as a nation- 
al representative to improve a tariff or revenue measure 
which would be defective because of the insertion of items 
not wise in themselves but nevertheless included as a re- 
sult of the bargaining among the representatives, each 
thinking of his particular district, regardless of the inte- 



THE MAKING OF LAWS 



363 



rests of other districts. Because of the national character 
of the office which he held, it was pointed out, the Pres- 
ident would be in a better position to judge what would 
be best for the country as a whole: he would be more 
obliged to see to it that the tariff or revenue bill would 
be utilitarian because it would be hard for him to shift his 
responsibility to others. 

Delegate Singson Encarnacion, the most able defender 
of the pi’ovision of the draft, pointed out that the provi- 
sion would be specially useful in a case where the defects 
of the tariff or revenue measure were discovered only af- 
ter it had left the lawmaking body and after a more 
thorough study in the executive department of the govern- 
ment. Oftentimes, he said, the effects of tariff provisions 
could not be immediately seen. Why, he asked, should the 
Chief Executive be compelled to approve in its entii'ety a 
revenue or tariff bill with provisions found to be defective 
only after the bill had been passed by the lawmaking body, 
when he could veto the defective provisions, putting in full 
force and effect the other provisions, in accordance with 
the provision of the draft? In answer to the statement 
made by the opponents that the defect could be cured by 
the National Assembly when acting to reconsider the vetoed 
revenue or tariff bill, the Hocos Sur delegate said that 
while that might be true as long as the veto took place 
during the legislative session, it would not be true if the 
veto was made after the closing of the session. 

After the thrilling debates, the Convention on Decem- 
ber 10, 1934 voted on the Reyes-Vinzons proposition to sup- 
press the provision, with 46 votes in favor of the proposi- 
tion and 90 votes against it. 

On December 11, 1934, Delegate Briones moved to re- 
consider the proposition, stressing as his main argument 
the necessity of preserving the balance between the Exe- 
cutive and the Legislative branch. He was aided in the de- 
fense of his motion by Delegate Godofredo Reyes. But the 
Convention again voted to retain the provision after an- 
other brilliant defense by Delegate Singson Encarnacion. 



364 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE C3ONSTITUTI0N 

Reasons for the Veto. — ^The Philippine Constitution 
provides that if the Chief Executive shall not approve a 
bill presented to him, he shall return it with his objections 
to the National Assembly which shall enter the objections 
at large on the Journal and proceed to reconsider it. The 
purpose of this provision is to inform the National As- 
sembly as well as the people of his objections and to enable 
the former, should it deem wise, to offer a correspond- 
ing remedy. 

What should be the grounds of the Chief Executive 
for vetoing a bill or parts thereof? There were no de- 
bates in the Convention on this matter. 

Under the regime before the adoption of the Consti- 
tution, there were no constitutional limitations with respect 
to the ground of the Chief Executive for vetoing measures 
or parts thereof presented to him. By certain authorities 
on constitutional law, it was said that the veto power might 
be exercised by the Executive to protect himself or his of- 
fice against attempts to diminish or increase authority un- 
constitutionally, or to check legislation which he deemed 
to be practically inexpedient or which he believed not to 
be expressive of the sentiments of the people or which in 
his opinion was unconstitutional. The veto power was 
exercised by the President of the United States oi* by state 
governors or by the Governor-General of the Philippines 
because of any one or two or more of these reasons. 

Reconsideration of the Veto. — ^The veto of the Pres- 
ident is subject to reconsideration by the National Assem- 
bly. The latter might sustain the President’s veto or it 
might override it. The Philippine Constitution provides 
on the matter as follows : 

“* * * If he approve the same, he shall sign it; 

but if not, he shall return it with his objections to the Na- 
tional Assembly, which shall enter the objections at large 
on its Journal and proceed to reconsider it. If, after such 
reconsideration, two-thirds of all the Members of the Na- 
tional Assembly shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be- 
come a law. * * * 



THE MAKING OF LAWS 



365 : 



**♦ ♦ ♦ »p}^g item or items (in an appropriation bill) 

objected to shall not take effect except in the manner here- 
tofore provided as to bills returned to the National Assem- 
bly without the approval of the President. If the veto re- 
fers to a bill or any item of an appropriation bill which 
appropriates a sum in excess of ten per centum of the total 
amount voted in the appropriation bill for the general ex- 
penses of the Government for the preceding year, or if it 
should refer to a bill authorizing an increase of the public 
debt, the same shall not become a law unless approved by 
three-fourths of all the Members of the National Assembly. 

, * * (A)nd the item or items (in a revenue or 

tariff bill) vetoed shall not take effect except in the man- 
ner provided as to bills vetoed by the President.*' 

The practice under the Jones Law of permitting the 
lawmaking body to reconsider a measure vetoed by the 
Chief Executive was continued into the Philippine Consti- 
tution by the Convention. Its continuation was recom- 
mended in the reports of the committees on legislative 
power and finance and in the first draft of the Constitu- 
tion. There was no dissenting opinion in the Convention 
against the recommendation. 

Under the Constitution, a bill vetoed by the President 
shall become a law if two-thirds of all the Members of the 
National Assembly shall agree to pass the bill; and any 
item or items in an appropriation bill or in a revenue or 
tariff bill vetoed by the President shall not take effect 
unless reconsidered favorably by two-thirds of all the 
Members of the National Assembly. But the affirmative 
votes of three-fourths of all the Members of the National 
Assembly shall be necessary in order to convert into a law 
any bill or item in an appropriation bill vetoed by the Pres- 
ident, which appropriates a sum in excess of ten per cetv- 
tum of the total amount voted in the appropriation bill for 
the general expenses of the Government for the preceding 
year. Likewise, three-fourths of all the Members of the 
National Assembly shall be necessary to override the Pres- 
ident’s veto of a bill authorizing an increase of the public 
debt. 



366 FRAMING OP THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

The provision of the Constitution requiring a greater 
number of Members of the National Assembly to override 
the veto of the President of a bill or of certain items in 
an appropriation bill which appropriates a sum in excess 
of ten per centum of the total amount voted in the appi’o- 
priation bill for the general expenses of the Government 
for the preceding year or of a bill authorizing an increase 
of the public debt is one of the new provisions in our Con- 
stitution. 

The principle in the Constitution of placing a double 
check on the tendency toward excessive appropriations to 
the prejudice of the stability of the finances of the coun- 
try— the veto power of the President and the overriding 
power by only a great number of the Members of the As- 
sembly-found its beginnings in the Convention in a pre- 
cept introduced by Delegate Singson Encarnacion on the 
third day of the sessions. The precept read: 

“When a law or item of a law appropriating funds for 
public expenditures which involves an amount greater than 
25% of the appropriations for the general expenses of the 
government of the Commonwealth for the preceding year is 
vetoed by the Executive, said law or item of a law will 
not become effective unless the same has been unanimously 
approved in both houses.’* 

In an accompanying note to his constitutional precept, De- 
legate Singson Encarnacion said: 

“The balancing of the budget is an ideal which many 
nations more experienced than we in the management of 
their own destiny and of their own finances have not been 
able to attain. The obligations of the past have forced 
them to incur expenditures out of proportion to their in- 
come, and, in representative governments, preelectoral prom- 
ises, naturally loose and generous, have caused the repre- 
sentatives to be extravagant in theTr appropriations for ex- 
penditures, the necessity for which was not so evident nor 
the justification for which was very clear. 

The executive power in these countries frequently has 
been opposed to those appropriations, exercising the right 
of veto; but we know of various cases in which said veto 
has been annulled by two-thirds vote of the houses. Nay, 
in said governments, sometimes an interested group or an 



THE MAKING OF LAWS 



367 



association of persons who look only after their own private 
interest, although relatively few in number but counting 
with sufficient electoral forces, have obtained the votes of 
two-thirds of the members of the legislative chambers for 
the approval of enormous appropriations destined for selfish 
ends against the decided will of the Executive; and said 
appropriations for being enormous have placed in serious 
danger the stability of the finances of the nation. In such 
cases, nevertheless, it has always been seen that when the 
veto of the Executive has been annulled by the vote of two- 
thirds of the legislative chambers, no one among the legis- 
lators themselves has ever raised a voice of prudence op- 
posing the waste and ready to meet without fear an appa- 
rent and momentary unpopularity in exchange for the fu- 
ture praise of the same people when they have reflected 
and seen that the stability of their financial situation has 
been saved.” 

The principle in the Singson Encarnacion precept was 
embodied in the reports of the committee on legislative 
power and the committee on finance, of which lattei com- 
mittee Delegate Singson Encarnacion was chairman. There 
was a change made, however, to the effect that instead 
of 25% it should be 10%. And instead of a unanimous 
vote to override the President’s veto, the committee on leg- 
islative power recommended that it should be a vote of 
three-fourths of all the members of each house ; while the 
committee on finance recommended that it should be four- 
fifths of the members of each house. The committee on fi- 
nance recommended further that if the total amount appro- 
priated for the different special appropriation acts rejected 
by presidential veto and reconsidered favorably by the Leg- 
islature exceeded 25% of the total amount of the present 
appropriation law for the general expenses of the govern- 
ment, the President could suspend the effect of anyone of 
the said bills or any item of the same. And the committee 
on legislative power also recommended that if the bill 
vetoed would be one increasing the public debt, said bill 
should not become a law unless approved by three-fourths 
of all the members of each house of the National Legisla- 
ture. 



368 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

The corresponding part of the report of the commit- 
tee on legislative power read: 

“PTOvided, however, that if the veto refers to a bill or 
any item of an appropriation bill which appropriates a sum 
in excess of ten per centum of the total amount voted in 
the budget for the general expenses of the government for 
the preceding year, or if it should refer to a bill authoriz- 
ing an increase of the public debt, the same shall not be- 
come a law unless it is approved by three-fourths of^ all 
the members of each house of the National Legislature.” 
The corresponding part of the report of the commit- 
tee on finance read: 

“If the total amount of any bill or items of a bill ve- 
toed by the President is more than ten per cent (10%) 
of the total amount of the current appropriation law cov- 
ering the general expenses of the Central Governmen^ the 
affirmative vote of four-fifths of the members of each House 
shall be necessary to override the veto of the President. 
If the aggregate amount provided in the different ^ specie 
appropriation bills vetoed and repassed by the egis a ure 
exceeds twenty-five per cent (25%) of the total amoun 
. of the current appropriation law covering the general ex- 
penses of the Central Government, the President may sus- 
pend the effect of any such bills or any item thereof. 

In the first draft of the Constitution, the sub-commit- 
tee of seven followed essentially the recommendation of 
the committee on legislative power. The corresponding 
provision of the first draft read: 

“Provided, however, That if the veto refers to a bill 
or any item of an appropriation bill which appropriates 
a sum in excess of ten per centum of the total amount 
voted in the appropriation bill for the general expenses 
of the Government for the preceding year, or if it should 
refer to a bill authorizing an increase of the public debt, 
the same shall not become a law unless it is approved by 
three-fourths of all the Members of the National Assembly.” 

This provision of the draft was approved readily by 
the Convention. The special committee on style made a 
slight change in phraseology, but none in substance. 

Veto after the Adjournment of the National Assembly. 
— According to the Constitution, if any bill shall not be 



THE MAKING OF LAWS 



369 



returned by the President within twenty days (Sundays ex- 
cepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the same 
shall become a law in like manner as if he had signed it, 
unless the National Assembly by adjouniment prevent its 
return, in which case it shall become a law unless vetoed 
by the Pi*esident within thirty days after adjournment. 

Journal. — Where the National Assembly reconsidei*s a 
measure vetoed by the President, the Constitution requires 
that the votes of the National Assembly shall be deter- 
mined by yeas and nays, and the names of the Members 
voting for or against shall be entered on the Journal. The 
object of the provision is to make a public record which 
would disclose how each Member voted on any particular 
vetoed measure, which may be opened to anj’^one for in- 
spection. 

Draft on the Veto Power of the President as Approved 
by the Convention on Second Reading. — As it was approved 
by the Convention on second reading with the approval 
of the entire article on legislative power, the draft on the 
veto power of the President read as follows: 

''Every bill which shall have passed the National As- 
sembly shall, before it becomes a law, be presented to the 
President. If he approve the same, he shall sign it; but 
if not, he shall return it, with his objections, to the National 
Assembly, which shall enter the objections at large on its 
Journal and proceed to reconsider it. If, after such recon- 
sideration, two-thirds of the National Assembly shall agree 
to pass the bill, it shall become a law. In all such cases 
the votes of the National Assembly shall be determined by 
yeas and nays, and the names of the Members voting for 
and against shall be entered on the Journal. If any bill 
shall not be returned by the President as herein provided 
within twenty days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have 
been presented to him, the same shall become a law in 
like manner as if he had signed it, unless the National As- 
sembly by adjournment prevent its return, in which case 
it shall become a law unless vetoed by the President within 
thirty days after adjournment. 

"The President shall have the power to veto any parti- 
cular item or items of an appropriation bill, but the veto 
shall not affect the item or items to which he does not 



370 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



object. When a provision of an appropriation bill affects 
one or more items of the same, the President cannot veto 
the provision without at the same time vetoing the particu- 
lar item or items to which it relates. The item or items 
objected to shall not take effect except in the manner here- 
tofore provided in this Constitution as to bills returned to 
the National Assembly without the approval of the Pres- 
ident. Provided, however, That if the veto refers to a bill 
or any item of an appropriation bill which appropriates 
a sum in excess of ten per centum of the total amount voted 
in the appropriation bill for the general expenses of the 
Government for the preceding year, or if it should refer 
to a bill authorizing an increase of the public debt, the 
same shall not become a law unless it is approved by three- 
fourths of all the Members of the National Assembly. 

‘The President shall have the power to veto any sepa- 
rate source of tax included in any revenue or tariff bill, 
and the item vetoed shall not take effect except in the man- 
ner provided as to bills vetoed by the President."' 

Draft on the Veto Power of the President as Revised 
by the Special Committee on Style and as Finally Approved 
by the Convention. — ^The special committee on style made 
some changes, but they were primarily changes in style, 
not in substance, with the exception possibly of the fact 
that instead of the words, tivo-thirds of the National As- 
semhly, in the first paragraph, the special committee used 
the words, two-thirds of all the Members of the Natioiwl 
Assembly. 

The Constitution as finally approved by the Conven- 
tion uses the phrases, ttvo-thirds of all the Members of the 
National Assembly and three-fourths of all the Members 
of the National Assembly . 

The report of the committee on legislative power used 
the words, two-thirds of that house; and the first draft 
of the Constitution, the words, two-thirds of the National 
Assembly. But both the committee report and the first 
draft used the phrase, three-fourths of all the Members of 
the National Assembly. As it has already been said, the 
jvord “all” was inserted in the special committee on style. 
The change was not reported separately anymore in the 



THE MAKING OF LAWS 



371 



Convention. The use of the word “all" was designed to re- 
move all doubts as to the meaning intended; for the ex- 
pression, tivo-thirds of the house, had been interpreted in 
some states to mean two-thirds of the members present, 
there being a quorum; in others, to mean two-thirds of all 
the members of the house. 

As it was revised by the special committee on style 
and as it was finally approved by the Convention with the 
final adoption of the Constitution, the provisions on the 
veto power of the President read: 

‘‘Every bill which shall have passed the National As- 
sembly shall, before it becomes a law, be presented to the 
President. If he approve the same, he shall sign it; but 
if not, he shall return it with his objections to the National 
Assembly, which shall enter the objections at large on its 
Journal and proceed to reconsider it. If, after such re- 
consideration, two-thirds of all the Members of the National 
Assembly shall agree to pass the bill, it shall become a 
law. In all such cases the votes of the National Assembly 
shall be determined by yeas and naySy and the names of 
the Members voting for and against shall be entered on 
the Journal. If any bill shall not be returned by the Pres- 
ident as herein provided within twenty days (Sundays ex- 
cepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the same 
shall become a law in like manner as if he had signed it, 
unless the National Assembly by adjournment prevent its 
return, in which case it shall become a law unless vetoed 
by the President within thirty days after adjournment. 

“The President shall have the power to veto any par- 
ticular item or items of an appropriation bill, but the veto 
shall not affect the item or items to which he does not ob- 
ject. When a provision of an appropriation bill affects 
one or more items of the same, the President cannot veto 
the provision without at the same time vetoing the particu- 
lar item or items to which it relates. The item or items 
objected to shall not take effect except in the manner here- 
tofore provided as to bills returned to the National Assem- 
bly without the approval of the President. If the veto re- 
fers to a bill or any item of an appropriation bill which 
appropriates a sum in excess of ten per centum of the total 
amoimt voted in the appropriation bill for the general ex- 
penses of the Government for the preceding year, or if it 
should refer to a bill authorizing an increase of the public 



372 framing of the PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

debt, the same shall not become a law unless approved by 
three-fourths of all the Members of the National Assembly. 

“The President shall have the power to veto any sepa- 
rate item or items in a revenue or tariff bill, and the item 
or items vetoed shall not take effect except in the manner 
provided as to bills vetoed by the President.” 

Budgetary Relations between the President amd the 
National Assembly 

Constitutional Provision on the Budget. — With respect 
to the budgetary relations between the President and the 
National Assembly, the Philippine Constitution provides: 

“The President shall submit within fifteen days of the 
opening of each regular session of the National Assembly 
a budget of receipts and expenditures, which shall be the 
basis of the general appropriation bill. The National As- 
sembly may not increase the appropriations recommended 
by the President for the operation of the Government as 
specified in the Budget, except the appropriations for the 
National Assembly and the Judicial Department. The form 
of the Budget and the information that it should contain 
shall be prescribed by law.” 

Sources. — ^The Philippine Autonomy Act of 1916 
(Jones Jmw) provided with respect to this matter: 

“* * * He shall submit within ten days of the open- 

ing of each regular session of the Philippine Legislature 
a budget of receipts and expenditures, which shall be the 
basis of the annual appropriation bill.” 

The principle of leaving to the Chief Executive the 
preparation of the budget, as set forth in the J ones Ijaw, 
was incorporated in the reports of the committee on legis- 
lative power and the committee on finance. The committee 
on legislative power recommended that the budget should 
be submitted within fifteen days of the opening of each 
regular session; while the committee on finance left for 
legislative determination the time within which it should 
be submitted. 

Both committees recommended, however, an innova- 
tion in the traditional budgetary relations between the 
Chief Executive and the lawmaking body. For while un- 



THE MAKING OF LAWS 



,373 



der the Jones Law the lawmaking body had been free to 
make amendments to increase or to decrease the items or 
the amounts of the items recommended by the Chief Exe- 
cutive in the budget for the operation of the government, 
the two committees proposed that under the Constitution 
the National Assembly should have no power to increase 
the appropriations recommended, except those for the Na- 
tional Assembly and the Supreme Court. The purpose of 
the pi’ohibition was to curb the propensity of the legisla- 
ture to extravagant expenditures of public funds. The ap- 
propriations for the National Assembly and the Supreme 
Court were not included in the appropriations that could 
not be increased by the National Assembly, otherwise the 
Executive could wipe out the lawmaking body and the Su- 
preme Court if he wished to. 

The corresponding provision in the report of the com- 
mittee on legislative power i*ead: 

‘‘The general appropriations for the expenses of the 
Government shall be submitted to the National Legislature 
\vithin fifteen days of the opening of each regular session 
in the form of a budget. The Budget bill shall originate 
in the House of Representatives and the National Legisla- 
ture may not increase the appropriations recommended by 
the Chief Executive for the operation of the Government 
as specified in the Budget, except the appropriations for 
the National Legislature and the Supreme Court.” 

The corresponding provision in the report of the com- 
mittee on finance read: 

“Within the time provided by law, the President shall 
submit to the Legislature a budget comprising the estimate 
of income and ordinary expenditures of the Central Gov- 
ernment for the ensuing year, which shall be the basis of 
the general appropriation bill. In this bill no item con- 
tained in the budget shall be increased nor any new items 
inserted therein by the Legislature with the exception of 
the items relating to the Legislature and the Supreme 
Court.” 

With slight modifications, the sub-committee of seven 
incorporated in the first draft of the Constitution the re- 
commendation of the two committees. The corresponding 
provision of the first draft of the Constitution read: 



374 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



“The President shall submit within fifteen days of the 
opening of each regular session of the National Assembly 
a budget of receipts and expenditures, which shall be the 
basis of the general appropriation bill. The National As- 
sembly may not increase the appropriations recommended 
by the Chief Executive for the operation of the Govern- 
ment or (os) specified in the budget, except the appropria- 
tions for the National Assembly and the Judicial Depart- 
ment.” 

The part of the budget provision of the Constitution 
as finally adopted to the effect that the form of the Bud- 
get and the information that it should contain shall be 
prescribed by law” was an amendment introduced by Del- 
egate Marabut during the considration of the budget 
provision. 

Debates.— There was no objection in the Convention 
against the readoption of the principle that the budget 
should be prepared by the Chief Executive. There was no 
serious proposition whatsoever about leaving the prepara- 
tion of the budget to the lawmaking body. 

But there was a vehement opposition against the pro- 
position in the first draft of the Constitution to limit the 
traditional power of the lawmaking body to increase as 
well as to decrease public expenditures proposed by the 
Chief Executive in the budget. Leading this opposition 
was Delegate Serafin Marabut, at the time chairman of 
the House Committee on Appropriations of the Tenth Phil- 
ippine Legislature, who fought hard to pi-eserve the right 
of the National Assembly to determine how the money of 
the people should be spent. 

The debates on this proposition in the first draft of 
the Constitution were some of the most thrilling and vigor- 
ous debates in the Convention. 

While the formal debates on the floor of the Conven- 
tion did not take place until December 7, 1934, there were 
informal debates in the columns of the press primarily be- 
tween Delegate Cuademo in defense of the provision of 
the first draft of the Constitution and Delegate Marabut 



THE MAKING OF LAWS 



375 



against it. Both delegates sent out loose leaflets to the 
members of the Convention summarizing their arguments. 
The blocs of the Convention also considered the question in- 
formally in their caucuses. The Lopez bloc came nearly 
to endorsing the Marabut opposition in one of its caucuses 
at a luncheon offered by the head of the bloc, which en- 
dorsement would have added very much greater strength 
to the Marabut movement. It was only the plea made by 
Delegate Singson Encaniacion to the members present that 
they postponed commitment on the matter until he had 
been given a chance on the floor of the Convention dur- 
ing the coming debates to reason out the provision of the 
draft, which prevented the bloc from making a formal co- 
mitment. 

Several delegates of the Convention wanted to sup- 
press the provision of the draft prohibiting the National 
Assembly to increase the appropriations recommended by 
the Chief Executive for the opei’ation of the Government 
as specified in the Budget, except the appropriations for 
the National Assembly and the Judicial Department. An 
amendment to that effect was presented by Delegates Cas- 
tor Cruz, Cuenco, Ventura, Villai*ama, Sanchez, and Carin. 
The proponents of the amendment later on agi-eed, how- 
ever, to adopt instead the amendment by Delegate Marabut 
for the suppression of the provision of the draft and for' 
the substitution of the following precept: 

“The National Assembly may not increase the total 
amount of the appropriations recommended by the Chief 
Executive for the operation of the Government to a sum 
exceeding the total amount available for appropriation as 
specified in the Budget.” 

The debates on the provision of the first draft and 
on the Marabut amendment took place on December 7, 1934. 
The provision of the fii’st di'aft of the Constitution was 
defended by Delegates Singson Encaimacion, Cuaderno, 
Elpidio Quirino, and Dikit; and opposed by Delegates 
Orense and Marabut. Other delegates who wanted to speak 
in favor of the Marabut amendment ceded to Delegate Ma- 



376 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

rabut all the time which would have been theirs in the 
debate. 

Delegate Marabut, main opponent of the provision, 
centered his arguments primarily upon the philosophy that 
the National Assembly, composed as it was of members 
elected by the people from the different districts of the 
country, should retain the traditional right and privilege 
of lawmaking bodies in a democracy to determine not only 
what revenues should be collected from the people but also 
how the money thus raised should be spent. The provi- 
sion of the draft in effect, he said, would be a violation 
of that precious right; for while the National Assembly 
might decrease or strike out appropriations recommended 
by the Chief Executive with the exception of those foi 
the National Assembly and the Judicial Department, it 
could not increase the same. 

Not only would this traditional right be impaired, he 
added, but the provision would place in the hands of the 
Executive a weapon with which to reduce to subseiviencj^ 
the Members of the National Assembly. For deprived of the 
power to insert new items dr increase items in the expendi- 
tures proposed by the Chief Executive, the Members of the 
National Assembly would be beggars before him, pleading 
for the inclusion in the budget of appropriations whicli 
they desired. The powers of the National Assembly and 
the President, he argued, should be balanced at the same 
tune that the necessary checks were provided. No one 
should be placed above the other. Especially with a uni- 
cameral legislature, great care should be taken not to make 
the Chief Executive a dictator over the lawmaking body. 

He argued that according to the rule under the 
Jones law, which the draft sought to change, both the 
Chief Executive and the lawmaking body contributed 
jointly to turn out a good appropriation bill. For althougn 
the budget was prepared by the executive department, the 
lawmaking body could insert items for services which in 
good faith it believed necessary for the people but the pro- 



THE MAKING OF LAWS 



377 



\ision for which had been overlooked by the Chief Execu- 
tive, with the latter in many cases sustaining the inser- 
tion. And both the Chief Executive and the lawmaking 
body could, to the benefit of the people, check against — 
the first by the exercise of the veto power, the latter by 
refusing to approve — any propensity to extravagance. But 
under the provision of the draft, the lawmaking body 
would be deprived of the privilege to improve upon the 
appropriations side of the budget, with the exception of 
those for the legislative and the judicial departments of 
the government. 

He added that the adoption in England of the principle 
of the draft was not a justification for its adoption in the 
Philippines. For in England, the budget was proposed by 
the Cabinet, composed of the chancellor of the exchequer 
and other ministers, who not only were leaders of Paidia- 
ment but depended for the continuance of their positions 
in the executive department directly on the votes of mem- 
bers of Pai’liament. Consequently, the members of Par- 
liament could secure through the chancellor of the exche- 
quer and the ministers the inclusion in the budget of the 
appropriations that they desired. But in the Philippines, 
he said, the government proposed to be established was 
of the presidential type, with the executive depai'tment 
independent of the lawmaking body. Consequently, the 
members of the lawmaking body could not have, unlike in 
England, the same degree of control over the Executive 
with respect to the determination of items of the budget. 

In answer to the objection against the old system that 
subordinate officials of the executive departments went 
over their superiors directly to the legislature for increases 
in salary or increased appropriations for their respective 
divisions or departments. Delegate Marabut said that the 
Chief Executive could issue orders prohibiting them to 
approach the Legislature directly for such increases. But 
by all means, he said, the right of the National Assembly 



378 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

to determine how the money of the people should be spent 
must be preserved. 

The Samar delegate said that if what was desired was 
to insure the existence of a sound budget, or one in which 
the total proposed expenditures did not exceed the total 
sum available for appropriation, it was not necessary to 
violate the democratic principle of leaving* to the legisla- 
ture the determination of what revenues should be collect- 
ed and how the money thus collected should be spent. It 
was enough to so limit the increases which the legislature 
might make that the total expenditures would not be more 
than the total sum available for appropriations as specified 
in the budget — which was the object of the Marabut 
amendment. 

In reply, the defenders of the provision of the draft 
pointed out that it was intended primarily to curb the 
propensity of the legislature to extravagant and haphazard 
expenditures of public funds. 

They said that, under the Constitution, the determina- 
tion of revenues as well as expenditures would not be an 
exclusive prerogative of the National Assembly. It would 
be a joint prerogative of the President and the National 
Assembly, for like the members of the latter, the former 
would also be elected by the direct vote of the people. 

The provision of the draft, they contended, would only 
be a recognition of the principle of the separation of power’s 
and the consequent equality of the departments of gov- 
ernment. For just as it would be rank discourtesy to and 
undue interference with the National Assembly for the 
Chief Executive to insist that there should be more appro- 
priations for the National Assembly than what it had ask- 
ed for, so it would be for the National Assembly to insist 
that the Chief Executive should have more appropriations 
that what he said he needed for the operation of his own 
department. The Chief Executive, they said, was in a bet- 
ter position than the National Assembly to know what he 
needed for his department. 



r 

' THE MAKING OP LAWS 379 

r 

* Moreover, they argued, the provision of the draft 

would be a means to help the Chief Executive carry out 
his function as the head of the administration, with the 
responsibility to direct, supeiwise, and control the manage- 
ment of the administrative affaii-s of the government, par- 
ticularly in matters of finance. It would operate to put to an 
end the practice so common under the old system of rep- 
resentatives of the bureaus and the departments to lobby 
directly in the legislature, without the knowledge and con- 
sent of the Chief Executive, for increases to the appropria- 
tions recommended by the latter — a practice which tended 
to destroy administrative discipline and to demoralize the 
civil service system. 

In opposition to the Marabut amendment to the effect 
that the National Assembly might “not increase the total 
Qf the appropriations recommended by the Chief 
Executive for the operation of the Government to a sum 
exceeding the total amount available for appropriation as 
specified in the Budget,” they said that it was objection- 
able for under that amendment it could happen that the 
government would incur in deficits because the total 
amount of appropriations approved by the National As- 
sembly might approximately equal the amount specified in 
the budget as available for appropriation, when it would 
be possible that the latter could not all be collected owing 
to the intervention of certain unforseen impediments. 
^Moreover, under the proposed amendment, the N^ational As- 
sembly could in effect present a new budget, determining 
the items thereof including those for the executive depart- 
ment and thereby bringing about a disorganization, when it 
would be better that the budget should be prepared in the 
executive department of the government — a principle be- 
lieved by all the members of the Convention. 

In the early part of the debates, there was a confu- 
sion arising from conflicting interpretations of the terms, 
budget, and appropriations . . . for the operation of the 
Government, used in the first draft of the Constitution. 



380 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



Delegate Marabut and many other delegates believed that 
the budget mentioned in the draft meant a complete finan- 
cial program of the State for a certain period of time, in- 
cluding all expenditures considered necessary for the wel- 
fare of the State, and accordingly that the term, appro- 
priations. . . for the operation of the Govei-nmcnt, included 
appropriations for public works. It was thjs belief which 
caused many delegates to oppose the budget rule in the 
first draft of the Constitution. But in the course of the 
debates. Delegate Singson Encarnacion, in behalf of the 
sub-committee of seven, explained that the term “budget” 
was intended to include only current expenditures and not 
special appropidations, and consequently the term, “appro- 
priations . . . for the operation of the Government,” referred 
only to current appropriations, and therefore excluded ap- 
propriations for public works. Herewith were the portions 
of the records to the effect: 



''Delegate Singson Encarnacion. — But before goin^ 
further, many delegates spoke to me about clarifying the 
point in controversy, and I am going to do it. It seems 
that there is really a certain confusion, because some under- 
stand that the budget which is treated in the Constitution 
is the same as the budget of the French government, whicn 
IS a parliamentary government. The budget of the French 
government is a list of all the possible expenditures which 
said government ought to have during the year. It in- 
cludes not only the current expenditures of the government 
but also the possible appropriations during that year and 
within the possibilities of the estimates of income. And 
that has tended to confuse more the part of the budget of 
1931, cited by the delegate for Samar, in which appeared 
the expenses for public works. 



"I do not know if the delegate for Samar has done 
it deliberately, to pick out that budget and not those of 
1932 and 1933, for example, and I believe that it is deli- 
berate because in the budget for 1932 and 1933 those spe- 
cial appropriations do not appear. 

^'Delegate Marabut. — If the speaker permits me to in- 
terrupt him, Mr. President. I have said in my speech that 
in the year 1932, 1933, they do not appear, because the 
funds of the government did not permit, and I have ex- 
plained that that depends upon the Executive, when it is 



THE MAKING OF LAWS 



381 



desired to include those expenditures. He included them 
when the funds permitted that they be included. 

Delegate Sing son Encarnacion . — The proposed draft of 
the Constitution seems to me clear in the sense that the 
budget which we are speaking of here refers to the cur- 
rent appropriations. If it is meant to include here also 
special appropriations, I would be the first to support the 
Marabut .amendment. But it is not thus. In the budget, 
a complete political, economic, legislative program is not 
presented as is done by the French government which pre- 
sents a general plan of all the appropriations during the 
year; so that we are not voting one or another, that we are 
discussing a budget where only the current expenditures 
for the year appear, that is to say, all the expenditures 
of all that have been created by the Legislature, of all 
those institutions which have already been approved and 
which exist according to law. It is in those appropriations 
where we are claiming that the Legislature should not in- 
crease any item. We are not speaking, for example, of 
special appropriations, because the Legislature can make 
them when it wishes to and to the extent that it likes. 

Delegate Ventura.— President, I should like to di- 
rect some questions to the speaker, if he permits me. 

*^Delegate Singson JS'ncamacion.— With much pleasure. 

^^Delegate Ventura . — Under the provisions which we are 
discussing, can the Executive include in his budget the ap- 
propriation for public works? 

'^Delegate Singson Encamacion . — If that appropriation 
be included, it would not extend to it, because that appro- 
priation {in the draft) refers precisely to the current ex- 
penditures of the year. 

Delegate Ventura . — The delegate for Samar, Mr. Ma- 
rabut, mentioned this morning the case that in 1931 the 
Governor-General included in the budget the appropriation 
for public works... 

‘^Delegate Singson Encamacion . — Supposing that the 
Governor-General would include it^ the limitation does not 
extend to those new expenditures because precisely the draft 
clearly says that it refers to current expenditures of the 
year. 

♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ 

‘^Delegate Singson Encamacion . — I understand by the 
current expenditures of the government the ordinary ex- 
penses to maintain that which exists and nothing more; not 



382 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



new things like public works. If it concerns the opening 
of a road, this is a new expense. It is a new entity which 
is created by the Legislature with the approval of the Exe- 
cutive. So that even if the Executive put all the special 
appropriations, that limitation refers only to current ex- 
penditures. 

^'Delegate Carin. — Mr. President, is there already any 
definite definition of the term ^‘appropriation for the opera- 
tion of the government?^’ 

^'Delegate Sing son Encamacion . — Clearly there is. I 
am saying the expenditures of existing things, that is to 
say, that such and such bureaus, such and such activities 
have been created by the Legislature. Now, the following year 
enters. The current expenditure is that which those entities 
created by the Legislature need; it is that which is placed 
in the appropriation for current expenditures. Now, if 
there are new activities, they should be made through new 
laws. If new amounts are appropriated for other purposes, 
then they are the object of a new law and a new appro- 
priation. 

'^Delegate Carin . — As insinuated by Delegate Marabut, 
this phrase has already been interpreted by our Governor- 
General in the sense that it {appropriations) includes also 
expenditures for public works. Will not that happen after- 
wards that our Executive will interpret it in the same sense 
that it has been interpreted by our former Governor-Gen- 
eral? 

**Delegate Singson Encamacion . — The Jones Bill, Dele- 
gate Cuademo calls my attention, does not state that which 
is in the draft; therefore the draft is not copied from 
the Jones Law. 

'^Delegate Quirino, E , — For some questions to the 
speaker, Mr. President, if he permits me. 

President . — Does the speaker yield? 

** Deleg ate Singson Encamacion. — Yes, sir. 

^'Delegate QuirinOj E . — Is it not true that, even suppos- 
ing that our interpretation now of the constitutional appro- 
priations under consideration be distinct from the interpre- 
tations of the present laws, the interpretation which shall 
prevail shall be the interpretation which is now given to 
this provision? 

^'Delegate Singson Encamacion . — Yes sir; it is clear. 
We are not following that which has passed, we are creat- 
ing a new thing for ourselves. The Assembly is making 



THE MAKING OF LAWS 



383 



a new law. It is not that we are trying to in erpre an 
follow the old laws; for that reason, it is c e onven on, 
because we are seated here to make fundamen a aws or 
the State. 



•*Mr. Abaya^—l would like to be verified. This operat- 
ing expense, do you ihean to say that it in u es e expenses 
for the maintenance of roads, new buildings, or i a so in 
eludes the new expenses for the new construe ion o cer am 
public works? 



**Dclcgate Siiigson Encaniacion.—l^o, sir, it does not 
include the expenses for new buildings and new roa s, ut 
includes the expenses for the maintenance of t e ui mgs 
because they have been already built. 



** Delegate Abaya.—So, public works appropnal ion is 
not included in the budget? 

**Delegate Singson Encarriacion.—^o, sir, it does not 

refer. . . . 



••Delegate Abnya.— So that the Legislature can aPProve 
any law which appropriates money to spenu, or examp , 
for new roads or new schools. 

Delegate Singson Enca/macio7U Yes, sir, it can do 
Delegate Abaya , — Independently of the budget through 
special laws? 

^‘Delegate Singson Encarnacio^u — Yes, sir, it can do it. 
It can appropriate through special laws all remaining money 
in the Treasury; even the amount which does not exist in 
the Treasury, the Assembly can appropriate if it likes. 

The clarification to the effect that the appropriations 
referred to in the provision of the draft in question applied 
only to current expenditures and did not include public 
works appropriations, whether included in the subject or 
contained in special laws, — a clarification which evidently 
Delegate Marabut also accepted in his rebuttal speech — did 
niuch to diminish the strength of the opposition to the bud- 
get provision of the draft. 



And when it was put to a nominal vote on December 
7, 1934, the Marabut amendment was defeated by 89 neg- 
ative votes against 56 affirmative votes. With the defeat 
of the Marabut amendment was accordingly approved the 
budget provision of the first draft of the Constitution. 



384 FRAMING OP THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

With respect to the form of the budget and the infor- 
mation that it should contain, there was no law under the 
Jones Law. Consequently, the Chief Executive could 
determine its form and the information that it should con- 
tain. 

Inspired by the fact that the budget law of the United 
States government prescribed the form of the budget and 
the information that it should contain. Delegate Marabut 
presented an amendment which was considered by the Con- 
vention on December 7, 1934, the amendment reading: 

“The form of the budget and the information that it 
should contain shall be prescribed by law.” 

Explaining his amendment, Delegate Marabut said 
that under the provision just approved by the Convention, 
the President was authorized to prepare the budget. Con- 
sequently, he might consider that provision as giving him 
the exclusive authority even to detennine the form of the 
budget and the contents thereof. There might be a case 
in the future, he said, when a certain infoi-mation consi- 
dered by the Legislature to be important in order to know 
the economic condition of the government would be deli- 
berately omitted by the Chief Executive in the budget be- 
cause there was no law which required it to be included. 
In order to avoid any possible conflict on the matter, the 
amendment was proposed. 

Delegate Singson Encarnacion said, however, that the 
proposed amendment was unnecessary because the budget 
as used in the draft referred only to receipts and ordinary 
expenditures, so that if the Chief Executive would include 
more information, like a complete program of activities, 
the Legislature could consider only as suggestions the ad- 
ditional information. 

When put to a vote, the Convention approved the Ma- 
rabut amendment by 58 affirmative votes against 32 nega- 
tive votes. 

Under the draft, therefore, the form of the budget 
and the information that it should contain should be deter- 



THE MAKING OF LAWS 



385 



mined by law; provided, however, that there must appear 
in it receipts and current expenditures of the Government, 
Draft of the Budget Provision as Approved by the 
Convention on Second Reading. — As it was approved with 
the approval of the entire ai'ticle on legislative power on. 
January 31, 1935, the budget provision of the Constitu- 
tion read: 

‘‘The President shall submit within fifteen days of the 
opening of each regular session of the National Assembly 
a budget of receipts and expenditures, which shall be the 
basis of the general appropriation bill. The National As- 
sembly may not increase the appropriations recommended _ 
by the Chief Executive for the operation of the Govem- 
ment as specified in the Budget, except the appropriations 
for the National Assembly and the Judicial Department. 
The form of the budget and the information that it should 
contain shall be prescribed by law.” 

Draft of the Budget Provision as Revised by the Spe- 
cial Committee on Style and as Finally Approved by the 
Convention. — The special committee on style did not make 
any change in this provision with the exception of the 
substitution of the term, President, for the tei'm, Chief 
Executive. With the change introduced by the special 
committee on style, the budget pi'ovision as approved by 
the Convention on second reading was appi'bved finally with 
the adoption of the Constitution. 

The Budget as the Basis of the General Appropriation 
Bill . — As it was under the Jones Law* under the Philip- 
pine Constitution the budget of receipts and expenditures 
submitted by the President should be the basis of the gen- 
eral appropriation bill. The Constitution further provides: 

“No provision or enactment shall be embraced in the 
general appropriation, unless it relates specifically to some 
particular appropriation in the bill; and any such provision 
or enactment shall be limited in its operation to such ap- 
pi'opriation.” ^ 

The inclusion of this provision in the Constitution was 
recommended by the committee on legislative power in or- 
der to prevent the insertion of “riders” which was possible 



386 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



under the Jones Law, which contained no similar provision. 
It was embodied in the first draft of the Constitution and 
was approved readily by the Convention. 

Failure of the Assembly to Pass an Appropriation Bill. 
— The Jones Law contained a provision for the contingency 
that the lawmaking body would fail to pass an appropria- 
tion measure for the ensuing year. The provision stated: 

“If at the termination of any fiscal year the appro- 
priations necessary for the support of the government for 
the ensuing fiscal year shall not have been made, the several 
sums appropriated in the last appropriation bills for the 
objects and purposes therein specified, so far as the same 
may be done, shall be deemed to be reappropriated for the 
several objects and purposes specified in said last appro- 
priation bill; and until the legislature shall act in such 
behalf the treasurer shall, when so directed by the Gover- 
nor-General, make the payment necessary for the purposes 
aforesaid.” 



The inclusion of a similar provision in the Constitution 
was recommended in the report of the committee on 
finance. The first draft of the Constitution, however, con- 
tained no such provision. 



There were amendments to the same effect presented 
by Delegates Marabut, Confesor, and Ocampo. 

When the Convention came to consider the Marabut 
amendment, borrowed almost verbatim from the Jones 
Law, Delegate Marabut withdrew it as a consequence, he 
said, of the disapproval of the first Marabut amendment 
to the budget rule provision of the Constitution. The 
amendment was withdrawn in order not to weaken further 
the National Assembly in favor of the Chief Executive. 

Immediately thereafter, the Convention considered the 
Confesor amendment which read: 



‘The general annual appropriation bill shall be pres- 
ented to the President fifty days after the budget has been 
submitted to the National Assembly... 

“In case the National Assembly shall fail to pass the 
general annual appropriation bill for the ensuing fiscal year, 
the general annual appropriation act for the previous fiscal 



THE MAKING OF LAWS 



387 



year shall remain enforced for a period of ninety days 
after a proclamation by the President reappropriating the 
amounts under the various items therein.” 

The amendment was defeated without debate. 

Likewise was defeated the Ocampo amendment which 
w'as substantially the same as the Marabut amendment. 

Delegation of Legislative Potver to the President 

Constitutional Provisions on Delegation of Legislative 
Powers. — The Philippine Constitution provides: 

‘‘The National Assembly may by law authorize the Pres- 
ident, subject to such limitations and restrictions as it may 
impose, to fix within specified limits, tariff rates, import 
or export quotas, and tonnage and wharfage dues.*' 

“In times of war or other national emergency, the Na- 
tional Assembly may by law authorize the President, for 
a limited period and subject to such restrictions as it may 
prescribe, to promulgate rules and regulations to carry out 
a declared national policy.” 

Sources. — ^Three committees of the Convention report- 
ed in favor of the idea of delegating legislative powers to 
the President in certain cases — the committee on tariff, 
presided by Delegate Marabut; the committee on finance, 
presided by Delegate Singson Encarnacion; and the com- 
mittee on legislative power, presided by Delegate Briones. 

The committees on tariff and finance recommended the 
delegation of legislative authority to the President in eco- 
nomic matters. The corresponding portion of the report 
of the committee on tariff read: 

“The Legislature may authorize the Chief Executive 
to enter, upon the advice of a board to be created by law, 
into trade agreements with other countries. 

“The Legislature may delegate to the Chief Executive, 
to be exercised by him, with the advice of a board to be 
created by law, the power to fix within specified limits, 
duties, wharfage dues, tonnage dues or other imposts or 
excises, and to regulate, restrict or prohibit imports or 
exports.” 



388 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

The corresponding portion of the report of the committee 
on finance read: 

‘'The Legislature may delegate by law to the President 
to be exercised by him, with the advice and consent of a 
board to be created by law, the follo\sdng powers concerning 
economic and financial matters: 

“(a) To conclude commercial treaties, to fix im- 
port duties, wharfage, tonnage dues from the entrance 
of foreign vessels, quotas of import and export. 

“(b) By a vote of two-thirds of the members of each 
house, to fix and regulate production, prices, credit and 
wages so as to coordinate priv’ate economic activities 
in the public interest.^’ 

The committee on legislative power recommended a 
provision empowering the National Assembly to authorize 
the President to promulgate rules and regulations to carry 
out a declared national policy. The corresponding portion 
of the report of the committee read: 

“In times of war or other national emergency, the Na- 
tional Legislature may authorize the President, for a li- 
mited period and subject to such restrictions as it may 
prescribe, to promulgate rules and regulations to carry out 
a declared national policy/' 

The recommendation of the committees on tariff and 
finance was inspired by a desire to enable the nation through 
the President to carry out a unified national economic pro- 
gram and to so administer the laws of the country that its 
economic interests would be amply protected. 

The recommendation of the committee on legislative 
power, included in the report largely through the initiative 
of Delegate Roxas, was inspired by the desire to make pos- 
sible in the Philippines a delegation of legislative power in 
times of emergency, similar to what was being done in the 
United States under the administration of President Frank- 
lin D. Roosevelt. At the time, there were some doubts 
entertained in the United States regarding the constitu- 
tionality of some of the “New Deal” measures. In order 
that the constitutionality of similar measures in case they 
would be deemed necessary in the Philippines some day 



THE MAKING OF LAWS 



389 



would be sure, the committee included in its report a re- 
commendation pei-mitting in effect a delegation of legislative 
power to the President, subject to such restrictions as the 
National Assembly might prescribe, to cany out a declared 
national policy. Under the proposed provision, the Na- 
tional Assembly would declare a certain thing to be a na- 
tional policy and then proceed to authorize the Px*esident 
to promulgate rules and regulations to cai’ry it out. The 
authoi'ity to promulgate such rules and regulations would 
be, however, subject to such restrictions as it might im- 
pose. 

Following the principles recommended in the reports 
of the thx'ee foregoing committees, the sub-committee of 
seven embodied in the fix*st draft of the Constitution the 
following provisions: 

“The National Assembly may delegate to the President, 
subject to such limitations and restrictions as it may im- 
pose, the power to fix within specified limits, tariff rates, 
wharfage and tonnage dues. 

“In times of war or other national emergency, the Na- 
tional Assembly may authorize the President, for a limited 
period and subject to such restrictions as it may prescribe, 
to promulgate rules and regulations to carry out a declared 
national policy.” 

Debates. — The Convention considered the first provi- 
sion on December 11, 1934 ; and the second provision on 
December 12, 1934. 

During the consideration of the first px'ovislon, there 
was an attempt on the part of some delegates, led by Dele- 
gates Ai'aneta and Lim, to restrict to some extent the dis- 
cretion of the President in the exercise of the power dele- 
gated to him. They sought to bi'ing about this restric- 
tion in the passage of an amendment which would authorize 
the President to exercise the delegated power only upoii- 
the advice of a hoard or commission created by for 
that purpose. 

In defense of the amendment. Delegate Araneta ex- 
plained that the purpose was to prevent the occurrence of 



390 



framing of the PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



a case where the President, without any proper study, 
might raise or lower the tariff at pleasure, and incident- 
ally to prevent the concentration of powers in the hands 
of a single person. Under the amendment proposed, he 
said, before the President could raise or lower the tariff, 
the action must be recommended by a commission which 
should be created by the same law that would authorize 
the delegation of the power to the President. In opposi- 
tion to the amendment. Delegate Singson Encamacion 
pointed out that it Was unnecessary because under the 
draft, should it wish to, the National Assembly could create 
a commission to advise the President. And even if the 
creation of the commission had not been provided for in 
the Constitution, when the power would be delegated to 
him, the President before the exercise of the power thus 
delegated would consult the membei-s of his cabinet and 
other experts that he would have. 

When put to a vote on the same day, the Araneta 
amendment was defeated. 

The amendment by Delegate Ocampo to the draft, 
adding the word, quotas, was readily approved by the Con- 
vention on December 12, 1934, after it had been accepted 
by Delegate Singson Encamacion on behalf of the sub- 
committee of seven. 

With respect to the second provision. Delegate Vin- 
zons presented an amendment for its suppression, which 
amendment was considered by the Convention on Decem- 
ber 12, 1934. Delegate Vinzons summarized his arguments 
for suppression thus : 

"I would want to say. Mister President, that our reasons 
for the elimination of this provision may be considered 
briefly, as follows : 

First, that this provision of the Constitution violates 
the doctrine of the separation of powers. Second, that un- 
der the draft now being considered by this Assembly the 
President has been given vast and tremendous powers, al- 
most dictatorial in nature. Third, that an analysis of the 
ordinance-making power does not warrant the grant of such 



THE MAKING OF LAWS 



391 



an extensive power to the President of the Philippines. 
And finally, Mr. President, we advocate the elimination of 
this provision on the ground that the system of government 
that we are implanting gives rise to the possibility of the 
vast control of government by a single, strong man and 
the establishment of a virtual dictatorship.*' 

Then the Camarines Norte delegate proceeded to show that 
while in the United States and in other countries the ordin- 
ance-making power of the Chief Executive was limited to the 
promulgation of rules and regulations to carry into execu- 
tion laws already passed, that was not the case in the 
Philippines under the draft; for under the latter, he said, 
there was absolutely no limit except that specified by the 
National Assembly in the inception of the grant of the 
power. He expressed the fear that the delegation to the 
President of the power to promulgate rules and regulations 
might prove to be a source of great powers to the Pres- 
ident. Then he concluded: 

'‘I would want to say. Mister President, that I am not 
very positive in stating here that we shall have a dictator- 
ship because the structure of the government that we are 
creating permits its establishment; but I say, Mister Pies- 
ident, that such a power to promulgate rules and regula- 
tions gives rise to a strong man who might, in a desire to 
perpetuate himself and his personal ambition, seize the reins 
of government and impose upon the National Assembly, 
called by his vast powers, such limitations as are grante 
under this draft." 

The Convention after listening to the argumente of 
Delegate Vinzons, nevertheless, appi’oved ovei'whelmingly 
the provision of the di*aft. 

Delegate Maza then proposed an amendment to the 
effect that, in respect to these two provisions regarding the 
delegation of legislative powers to the Pi*esident, the Pres- 
ident should submit to the National Assembly in the follow- 
ing session for its information the rules and regulations he 
had promulgated as well as the steps he had taken. Although 
it had been accepted by Delegate Singson Encarnacion on 
behalf of the committee of seven, the Convention defeated 



392 



framing of the PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



the Maza amendment for being unnecessary; for after all, 
it v;as said, the rules and regulations issued by the Pres- 
ident as well as the steps that he might take to execute the 
delegated powers would be matters of public notice. 

Draft of the Provisions on Delegated Powers as Ap- 
proved on Second Reading. — As they were approved on sec- 
ond reading with the approval of the entire article on legis- 
lative power, the provisions read: 

“The National Assembly may delegate to the President, 
subject to such limitations and restrictions as it may im- 
pose, the power to fix within specified limits, tariff rates, 
quotas, wharfage and tonnage dues.*’ 

times of war or other national emergency, the Na- 
tional As.sembly may authorize the President, for a limited 
period and subject to such restrictions as it may prescribe, 
to promulgate rules and regulations to carry out a declared 
national policy.” 

Draft of the Provisions on Delegated Powers as Re- 
vised by the Special Committee on Style and as Finally 
Approved by the Convention. — ^The special committee made 
no change in substance to the provisions. As they were 
revised by the special committee on style and as they were 
finally approved by the Convention with the final adoption 
of the Constitution, the provisions read: 

The National Assembly may by law authorize the 
President, subject to such limitations and restrictions as 
it may impose, to fix within specified limits, tariff rates, 
impon or export, quotas, and tonnage and wharfage dues. 

‘‘In times of war or other national emergency, the Na- 
tional Assembly may by law authorize the President, for 
a limited period and subject to s'uch restrictions as it may 
prescribe, to promulgate rules and regulations to carry out 
a declared national policy.” 



CHAPTER XXVI 

THE EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT 

Sources The article on the executive department of 

the Philippine Constitution was taken partly from the re- 
port of the committee on executive power of which Dele- 
gate Cuenco was chairman; partly from propositions intro- 
duced on the floor of the Convention during the debates 
on the article ; and partly from the suggestions of the mem- 
bers of the sub-committee of seven. These sources were 
in turn inspired largely by the Jones Law, by the Ameii- 
can federal Constitution, and by American state constitu- 
tions. 

Debates. — ^The debates on the executive department 
commenced on Decembei* 12, 1934 with the question of 
whether or not there should be created the office of the 
Vice-President. The Convention finished the debates on 
the corresponding provisions of the first di*aft on Decem- 
ber 21, 1934, with the exception of the matter of compen- 
sation and a few other points which were taken up on Jan- 
uary 31, 1935. Further debates on the article were held 
on February 7 and 8, 1935 on the changes proposed on the 
article by the special committee on stjde. 

There were not so many extended debates on the pio- 
visions of the first draft of the Constitution on the execu- 
tive powei’ principally because they had beeif taken laigely\ 
from the Jones Law and the American federal and state ^ 
constitutions, which for historical reasons exercised a veiy i 
dominating influence among the delegates in the determi- ^ 
nation of their decisions.^/ The great debates on the exe- 
cutive department were those on whether or not there 
should be a Vice-President; whether the Vice-Presidenc 
should succeed permanently to the office of the President 
in the event that the President-elect died before the com- 
mencement of his term; and whether or not persons in 



394 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

active military or naval service should be eligible for the 
Presidency. Likewise were those on the proposed estab- 
lishment of a department of health; on the qualifications 
for President and Vice-President, especially that respecting 
nationality; and on the qualifications for department secre- 
taries. 

The Executive Department of the Government — ^The 
Convention readily recognized the propriety of establishing 
a distinct executive department to exercise the executive 
powers of the government. Its establishment was but a 
consequence of the adoption of the principle of the separa- 
tion of powers as one of the underlying principles of the 
Constitution. Upon this principle, among others, had been 
founded the government under which the people had been 
living since the inception of American sovereignty. 

The Philippine Constitution vests the executive power 
in the President, thereby making him the executive depart- 
ment of the government. As such, he is equal to and in- 
dependent of the legislative and the judicial departments. 
With respect to the other departments, legally speaking, 
the Chief Executive, therefore, occupies a position in the 
governmental system similar to that occupied by the Chief 
Executive under the Jones Law. 

Within the orbit of his own sphere, the President was 
intended to be a strong executive, representing as he did 
the arms of the government to maintain internal peace and 
order and to conduct the foreign relations of the country. 
The adoption of a single-executive and centralized organ- 
ization, the Convention believed, would make for unity of 
authority accompanied by a unity of responsibility. It 
would bring about dispatch rather than delay in dealing 
with cases requiring expedient action. ^The prohibition 
j against reelection and the provision for a fairly long term 
w’^ould remove from him one source of weakness — ^forced 
^subserviency at times to procure a reelection./ The provi- 
sion to the effect that his salary could not be increased nor 
diminished during his term would make him independent 



THE EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT 



395 



of the lawmaking body. Likewise the Constitution ex- 
pressly grants to him extensive powers. 

During the Convention days, some delegates raised a 
voice of protest against the provisions in the first draft of 
the Constitution, setting up a rather extraordinarily strong 
Executive who, they feared, might easily develop into a 
dictator. But the Convention, intent on creating a strong 
Executive, voted down all propositions tending to weaken 
the Executive. It voted down the amendment for the elec- 
tion of the President By the National Assembly rather than 
by the people. It voted down the amendments for the sup- 
pression of the provisions of the draft authorizing him to 
veto separate items in appropriation and revenue measures, 
which, according to the proponents of the amendments, 
would make the Executive unduly strong. It voted down 
the Marabut amendment against the provision of the draft 
prohibiting the National Assembly to increase appropria- 
tions recommended by the Executive in the Budget for the 
operation of the executive department and consequently 
diminishing the traditional powers of the lawmaking body 
of the Philippines in favor of the Executive. It voted 
do^vn the amendment for the suppression of the Commis- 
sion on Appointments, a body which confirms appointments 
by the Executive, and for vesting the confirming power 
in the entire Assembly, in order not to weaken the Execu- 
tive who would otherwise be compelled to approach a very 
much greater number of assemblymen and possibly to 
make promises that he would not otherwise make or grant 
concessions that he would not otherwise grant in order to 
secure confirmation for the appointments that he would 
make. It voted down the amendment for the suppression 
of the provision authorizing the National Assembly to dele- 
gate to the Executive the authority to promulgate rules and 
regulations to carry out a declared national policy, notwith- 
standing the argument to the effect that this delegation 
of authority would increase the powers of the Executive to 
the extent of virtually making him a dictator for some time. 



396 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

Likewise the Convention approved readily other provi- 
sions of the draft making- for a strong- Executive, some 
of which were taken from the Jones Law. Of these were 
the provisions to the effect that the President should have 
control of all the executive departments, bureaus, or offices 
and general supervision over all local governments — a pro- 
vision which would make him the administrat^e head of 
the entire nation ; that he should be the comi^ander-in-chief 
of all armed forces of the Philippines, with the authority, 
when it would become necessary, to call out such armed 
forces to prevent or suppress lawless violence, insurrection, 
or rebellion, and to suspend the privileges of the writ of 
habeas corqms and to place the Philippines or any part 
thereof under martial law in case of invasion, insurrection, 
or rebellion, ^ imminent danger thereof; that he should 
have the authonty to appoint the ranking officials of the 
government in the armed forces, in the diplomatic service, 
in the judiciary, and in th^ civil service system; that he 
should be the official spokesman of the country in foreign 
affairs, with the power to receive ambassadors and other 
ministers duly accredited to the Government of the Phil- 
ippines and consequently the power to recog^ze new states 
and new governments ; that he should ne^tiate treaties 
With foreign countries, although they would not become a 

ratified by a majority of all 
e Members of the National Assembly; that he would 
ave the power to veto measur'^s enacted by the National 
ssembly, which could only be repassed by tv/o-thirds of 
^ ® Members of the latter, except in the cases of a bill 

au orizing an increase of the public debt or of a bill or 
any item of an appropriation bill appropriating a sum in 
excess of ten per centum, of the amount voted in the ap- 
propriation bill for the general expenses of the Government 
for the preceding year, which could only be repassed by 
three-fourths of all the Members ; that he could make ad 
interim appointments; that he could certify to the imme- 
diate necessity of the enactment of a measure in order that 
it could be passed even if it had not been printed and copies 



TPIE EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT 



397 



thereof disti-ibuted to the Members at least three calendar 
days prior to its passage by the National Assemblj^; and 
that his department secretaries upon their own initiative 
could appear before and be heai’d by the National Assem- 
bly and that he could refuse to have them appear when 
requested to do so by the National Assembly. 

There was a general opinion in the Convention in favor 
of a strong Executive in the Philippines. But he must be, 
above all, an Executive in a republican constitutional gov- 
ernment. 

The Convention placed checks in the Constitution 
against the development of dictatorships as they were 
known in othei* counti'ies at the time of the diafting of 
the Constitution. There is the pi'ohibition against the re- 
election of the President or the eligibility for Pi'pident of 
the Vice-President or any other person Avho might have 
succeeded to the office of the Pi'esident at least one year 
before the election. Then fiiere is the provision foi 
peachment of the President for culpable violation ^ ® 
Constitution, treason, bribei*y> or other high crimes. T en 
there is the provision giving to the Supreme Court the 
power of judicial review. And finally comes the check o 
public opinion which from a sense of responsibility to t e 
people who elevated him to his office he could not very 
well ignore. 



CHAPTER XXVII 

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

The Office of the President. — From the very beginning 
of the Convention days, there was a unanimous sentiment 
among the delegates in favor of a single Executive at the 
head of the executive department of the national govern- 
ment. That sentiment was itself a reflection of the popu- 
lar feeling in the country since pre-Convention days. 

The plan for a single Executive for the national gov- 
ernment was in keeping with the political traditions of the 
people. During the Spanish regime in the Philippines, 
there was a single Executive, known as the Govemor-Gen- 
eral. During the American regime before the drafting of 
the Philippine Constitution, American sovereignty was rep- 
resented in the Philippines by a single Executive who was 
at the head of the executive branch of the government. 
His title was at first Civil Governor, but later by an Act 
of Congress of February 6, 1905, it was changed to Gov- 
ernor-General. The different local governments had been 
organized in accordance with a single-executive system. 
Primarily because of the influence of the traditions of the 
people and also because of the fact that the single-execu- 
tive system was in vogue in practically all the countries 
of the world, including the United States, the Convention 
adopted in the Constitution a single-executive organiza- 
tion. 

For the title of the Chief Executive, the Convention 
adopted the term. President. So unanimous was the 
opinion in favor of its adoption that it was no longer con- 
sidered necessary to submit the matter for a vote of the 
Convention. The Convention could not have adopted the 
title, Governor-General, for the Chief Executive; for it 
was a term which in their experience was associated witn 
the representative of the mother country in the Philippines, 



400 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



like the Govenior-General of the Spanish regime and the 
Govemox'-General during the American regime prior to the 
framing of the Constitution. Moi-eover, the term, Pres- 
ident, was more than any other term expressive of the 
sovereign character of countries under a republican govern- 
ment. It was the title of the Chief Executives of the 
United States, of France, of Germany under the Weimar 
Constitution, of Mexico, of the Spanish Republic, and of 
other republican countries. While it was true that the 
Philippines would not yet be sovereign duidng the Com- 
monwealth period, it was nevertheless deemed advisable to 
use the term. President, for the Constitution was intended 
to be both for the Commonwealth and for the Republic. 

The Qualifications for the Presidency. — In its delibera- 
tions, the Convention considered jointly the qualifications 
for the Presidency and those for the Vice-Presidency. There 
was a unanimous sentiment in favor of I’equiring identical 
qualifications for both offices. 

In its report, the committee on executive power re- 
commended for incorporation in the first draft of the Con- 
stitution the following provisions on the qualifications for 
the Presidency and the Vice-Presidency: 

“No person except a native-born citizen of parents who 
are also native-born citizens, shall be eligible to the office 
of President or Vice-President, neither shall any person be 
eligible to any of these offices who shall not have attained 
to the age of at least forty years at the time of the elec- 
tion; who is not able to read and write either the Spanish 
or English language and any native language or the na- 
^onal language, and who has not been a resident of the 
Philippineg for at least ten consecutive years. 

“No relatives, whether by blood or by affinity, within 
he first and second degree, of the President or Vice-Pres- 
^^o is in the exercise of his functions at the time 
o the election, or who was so six months before the elec- 
lon, shall be. eligible to the office of President or Vice- 

President.” 

The report of the committee on the nationality of the 
candidate for President or Vice-President manifested the 
highly nationalistic spirit not only of the members of that 



THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 



401 



committee but of several other delegates with respect to 
the highest executive offices of the land. In the contem- 
plation of the committee, the only persons eligible for the 
Presidency and the Vice-Presidency would be those born 
in the Philippines, not abroad, of Filipino citizens born in 
the Philippines, not of naturalized Filipino citizens. It 
was felt that, by virtue of the key positions of the Pres- 
ident and the Vice-President in the Philippine government, 
every precaution should be taken to insure the fact that 
the persons elected, instead of being or developing to 
be mere instruments of foreign governments or foreign 
groups, would be loyal to the country and to its people. 

The part of the report prohibiting relatives by affinity 
or by blood within the first and second degrees of the Pres- 
ident or the Vice-President to run for the offices was 
only a means proposed by the committee to pi*event the 
development in the country of a dictatorship. 

The sub-committee of seven incorporated partially the 
recommendation of the committee on executive power, the 
corresponding provision of the first draft of the Constitu- 
tion reading: ^ 

“No person except a natural-born citizen of the Philip- 
pines, shall be. eligible to the office of President or Vic^ 
President; neither shall any person be eligible to any ot 
these offices who shall not have attained to the age o or y 
years, and been for ten years immediately prece mg sucn 
election a resident of the Philippines.” 

Debates. — The provision of the first draft of the Con- 
stitution on the qualifications for the Presidency an e 
Vice-Presidency was taken up by the convention on e- 
cember 14, 1934 and again on December 17, 1934. 

It had been very evident that one of the most contro- 
versial questions on the article on executive power would 
be the question on the nationality of the President and the 
Vice-President. For that reason, the Convention decided 
to take it up immediately after the decision on the proposi- 
tion of whether or not there should be created the office 
of Vice-President. 



402 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

On December 14, 1934, the Convention considered the 
amendments presented by Delegates Artadi, Confesor, and 
Alejandrino respectively. 

Delegate Confesor’s amendment was to the effect that 
the Presidency and the Vice-Presidency should be open not 
only to natural-born citizens of the Philippines but also to 
citizens natui’alized at least five years prior to the adoption 
of the Constitution. 

In defense of his amendment. Delegate Confesor said 
that, as a matter of justice, those who had already become 
naturalized citizens sufficiently long enough before the 
adoption of the Constitution should be permitted to con- 
tinue enjoying the right that they had had along with other 
citizens to aspire for any position in the land. Primarily 
because of the fact that there were only a few cases to which 
it could apply so that it would be a dead letter in the Con- 
stitution in the not distant future and because of the in- 
tense nationalistic spirit that dominated the Convention, 
the Confesor amendment was disapproved after a few in- 
terpellations had been directed to the author. 

Delegate Alejandrino’s amendment was to the effect 
that the only persons eligible for the Presidency and the 
Vice-Presidency should be Filipino citizens born in the Phil- 
ippines of parents who were not naturalized. It was in 
effect the same as the recommendation of the committee 
on executive power; namely, that they must be native-born 
citizens of native-born parents. The amendment was like- 
wise defeated by the Convention. 

Delegate Artadi’s amendment was for the suppression 
of the phrase, “nacido en ella” (born therein), in the Span- 
ish text of the Constitution. The expression, “natural-born 
citizen of the Philippines,” in the English text of the draft 
was translated in the Spanish text into “ciudadano de Fili~ 
pinas ncbcido en ella” (citizen of the Philippines born 
therein). 



THE PRESIDENT OP THE PHILIPPINES 



403 



In defense of his amendment, Delegate .Artadi pointed 
out that the provision of the draft would work an injustice 
to the children born abroad of Filipinos who were there or 
who had been there temporarily for business reasons or by 
order of their govemment. It would be a very sad case, 
he said, for these children born accidentally abroad, with 
nothing foreign in them, to be deprived of the right pos- 
sessed by Filipino citizens to serve as President or as Vice- 
President if they were capable for the post and if they were 
elected by the people. If the children born in the Philip- 
pines of foreigners who had become naturalized citizens 
could be eligible for these offices — ^for they would be Fili- 
pino citizens under the pi'ovisions on citizenship of the Con- 
stitution, already approved by the Convention — with more 
reasons, Delegate Artadi said, these children of Filipinos 
bom abroad should be eligible because they could not be 
less patriotic, having been brought up with their Filipino 
parents. 

The amendment was defeated, however, primarily on 
the ground that if the requirement of birth in the Philip- 
pines would be eliminated, even naturalized Filipino citizens 
could be eligible for the Presidency and the Vice-Presidency, 
which fact, the Convention felt, should not be permitted. 

It was evident from his arguments that, in proposing 
his amendment, Delegate Artadi did not intend to open the 
Presidency or the Vice-Presidency to naturalized Filipino 
citizens. His amendment was intended only to prevent the 
closing of the door of opportunity to the children of Fili- 
pinos, who were accidentally born abroad. For that rea- 
son, immediately after the defeat of his amendment, he 
presented a suggestion for its alteration to the effect that 
there should be included a proviso for qualifying Filipinos 
bom abroad of native parents, for the office of President 
or Vice-President. His suggestion was, however, not ap- 
proved by the President. 

On December 17, 1934, Delegate Artadi asked the Con- 
vention for the reconsidei'ation of the provision containing 
the expression, “natural-born citizen of the Philippines.” 



404 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



For while in the Spanish text of the draft the expression, 
‘^natural-bom citizen of the Philippines,’’ was translated to 
mean “citizen of the Philippines bom therein,” there were 
many delegates who were of the opinion that the transla- 
tion was not correct. Hence the motion for reconsidera- 
tion. 

Herewith were the corresponding portions of the rec- 
ords: 

**Delegate Artadi, — I am going to ask a reconsidera- 
tion with respect to the matter appearing on page 22-A 
which treats of the interpretation of the words, ‘natural- 
bom,' because I would like to inform the Assembly that 
I have had a conversation with some members of the com- 
mittee... and they explained to me that the words, ‘natural- 
bom,* do not necessarily mean ‘born in the Philippines; 
that is to say, translated into Spanish, they mean that 
one who possesses all the qualifications to be President of 
the republic, as it is written, is not necessarily born in the 
Philippines. So that for purposes of the record, I would 
like one of the members of the committee to explain the 
true interpretation of the words, ‘natural-born,* for the in- 
formation of the Assembly. 

''The President. — The delegate from Capiz, Mr. Roxas, 
niay please tell what is the exact equivalent of those words. 

"Delegate Roxas. — Mr. President, the phrase, ‘natural- 
bom citizen,* appears in the Constitution of the United 
States; but the authors say that this phrase has never been 
authoritatively interpreted by the Supreme Court of the 
United States in view of the fact that there has never been 
raised the question of whether or not an elected President 
fulfilled this condition. The authors are imiform in the fact 
that the words, ‘natural-bom citizen,* means a citizen by 
birth, a person who is a citizen by reason of his birth, and 
not by naturalization or by a further declaration required 
by law for his citizenship. In the Philippines, for example, 
under the provisions of the article on citizenship which we 
have approved, all those born of a father who is a Filipino 
citizen, be they persons bom in the Philippines or outside, 
would be citizens by birth or ‘natural-born.* 

“And with respect to one born of a Filipino mother 
but of a foreign father, the article which we approved about 
citizenship requires that, upon reaching the age of majority, 
this child needs to indicate the citizenship which he prefers, 
and if he elects Philippine citizenship upon reaching the age 



THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 



405 



of majority, then he shall be considered a Filipino citizen. 
According to this interpretation, the child of a Filipino 
mother with a foreign father would not be a citizen by birth, 
because the law or the Constitution requires that he make 
a further declaration after his birth. Consequently, the 
phrase, 'natural-boi’n citizen,’ as it is used in the English 
text means a Filipino citizen by birth, regardless of where 
he was born.” 

In view of the explanation given by Delegate Roxas to 
the effect that the expression, natiirai-bom citizen of the 
Philippines, meant a Filipino citizen by birth, Delegate Ar- 
tadi withdrew his motion for reconsideration, with the un- 
derstanding that the pi'ovision in the Spanish text should 
be corrected so that the phrase, *‘ciudadano filipino na- 
cido en ella” (Filipino citizen born therein), should be 
changed to *‘cmdadano filipino por ■nacimienio” (Filipino 
citizen by birth). The Spanish text of the Constitution 
was accordingly corrected. The tei*m, “natural-bora citizen 
of the Philippines,” was therefoi*e intended by the Con- 
vention to mean “Filipino citizen by birth.” 

On December 14, 1934, the Convention approved readily 
the provision of the first draft of the Constitution fixing the 
age at not less than forty years, after having disposed with- 
out debate of the Osias axnendment setting it at thirty- 
five years. Whether or not at the time of the drafting 
of the Constitution there was already a natural-born citizen 
of the Philippines, forty-years of age or over, was the sub- 
ject of a query by Delegate Barrion addressed to Delegate 
Roxas. The corresponding portions of the records were as 
follows : 

“Delegate Barrion. — Following your interpretation of 
the natural-born citizen, do we have in the Philippines now 
a natural-born citizen forty years old? 

^*Delegate Roxas . — Yes, sir. 

*^Delegate Barrion, — Those who were born forty years 
SigOy were they born Filipino citizens? 

^"Delegate Roxas, — If their parents were Filipino citi- 
zens. 

**Delegate Barrion, — Was there any Filipino citizenship 
before the American occupation? 



406 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

"Delegate Roxae . — They were Spanish citizens, but by 
che Treaty of Paris and by the law of Congress, they were 
naturalized ere masee. 

"Delegate Barrion . — Do you mean to say that even dur- 
ing the Spanish time, while the Civil Code was in force, 
Filipinos born of parents who were Filipinos, you will call 
them natural-born citizens? 

"Delegate Roxas . — I think so, necessarily.” 

The provision of the first draft of the Constitution re- 
garding the qualification of being a natural-born citizen, 
forty years of age or over, was approved with the general 
understanding that those bom during the Spanish time of 
parents who were Filipinos were to be considered as na- 
tural-born citizens of the Philippines. 

The provision of the first draft about the qualification 
of having been a resident of the Philippines for at least 
ten years immediately preceding the election was approved 
readily by the Convention, there having been no amendment 
proposed for it. 

On December 17 and 18, 1934, the Convention consi- 
dered the amendment presented by Delegate Dim to pro- 
hibit the election to the Presidency of men in active military 
or naval service. As amended by Delegate Cuenco, who 
proposed that it should be three years instead of five years, 
the Lim amendment read: 

“No person in active military or naval service or who 
has not retired therefrom at least three years before the 
election can be elected President.” 

In defense of the amendment. Delegate Lim said that 
prevent the staging of a coup d’etat by 
eral forces, similar to what had happened in sev- 

th f Latin-American countries. He expressed 

Ph^ilinnf control of the armed forces of the 

pp nes, military men might be inspired to stage a 
OMp e at to secure control of the Presidency, This fact 
wou e especially true, he said, where the results of the 
con ^ would be very close, making the defeated military 
men believe that there were frauds committed against them. 



THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 



407 



The amendment was vigorously opposed by Delegate 
Briones, who stressed the fact that it would be dangerous 
to be making a division between the civil men and the mil- 
itary men of the body politic. He said that the remedy 
for the evil feared by the proponents of the amendment 
should be determined by statutoi’y legislation in defining the 
disqualifications for the office rather than by the Consti- 
tution. 

When submitted to a vote, the Lim amendment was 
defeated by 58 negative votes against 50 affirmative votes. 

As it was approved by the Convention with the ap- 
proval of the entire article on the executive power, the pro- 
vision on the qualifications for the Presidency and the Vice- 
Presidency was the same as it was in the first draft of the 
Constitution. 

Provision of the Constitution on the Qualifications for 
President or Vice-President. — ^The special committee on 
style inserted in the provision as approved by the Conven- 
tion on second reading the qualification of being a qualified 
voter. As it was revised by the special committee on style 
and as it was approved by the Convention with the final 
adoption of the Constitution, the provision on the qualifica- 
tions for the Presidency and Vice-Pi'esidency read; 

“No person may be elected to tlie office of President or 
Vice-President, unless he be a natural-born citizen of the 
Philippines, a qualified voter, forty years of age or over, 
and has been a resident of the Philippines for at least ten 
years inunediately preceding the election.” 

The Election of the President. — From the opening days 
of the Convention, there had been a prevailing opinion in 
favor of the election of the President and the Vice-Pres- 
ident by the direct vote of the people. This only reflected 
the popular sentiment of the people who had generally 
associated with the institution of a democratic state the 
idea of a popular election of the Executive. 

The committee on executive power recommended in its 
report the election of the President and the Vice-President 
by the qualified electors of the Philippines. This recom- 



408 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

mendation was incorporated in the first draft of the Con- 
stitution. 

A few delegates under the leadership of Delegate 
Palma believed, however, that the President and the Vice- 
President should be elected by the National Assembly 
rather than by the people. An amendment to that effect 
had been presented by Delegate Palma, which read: 

“The President and the Vice-President shall be elected 
for six years by the National Assembly. Their election shall 
take place immediately after the organization of the Na- 
tional Assembly, under such procedure as may be adopted 
by the same/' 

The Palma amendment was taken up by the Conven- 
tion on December 14, 1934. In the absence of Delegate 
Palma, the main proponent. Delegate Villareal undertook 
the defense of the amendment, reasoning out that it was 
necessary to leave the election of the highest executive 
officers of the land to the National Assembly rather than 
to the people because the latter had not as^ yet attained 
such a degree of political education as would insure beyond 
doubt a peaceful and orderly national election. In opposi- 
tion to the amendment. Delegate Bueno explained that the 
I system of indirect election would mean the election of a 
Weak executive, a creature and working tool of the Na- 
j tional Assembly, responsible and accountable to it, instead 
of the strong executive contemplated in the draft, respon- 
SI le and directly accountable to the people. 

When it was submitted to a vote immediately after 
the brief debates, the Palma amendment was disapproved 
easily by the Convention, witli only a few delegates voting 
in Its favor. 

The Philippine Constitution provides that the election 
for President and Vice-President should be held once every 
six years on a date to be fixed by the National Assembly. 
The principle of leaving the determination of the date of 
the election to the National Assembly was recommended in 
the report of the committee on executive power, embodied 



THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 



409 



in the first draft of the Constitution, and approved readily 
by the Convention. 

Determination of the Election of the President. — In- 
fluenced largely by provisions of the Ameidcan federal con- 
stitution, the Philippine Constitution provides that the elec- 
tion returns for President, duly certified by the board of 
canvassers of each province, shall be transmitted to the 
National Assembly. Upon receipt of such returns the Na- 
tional Assembly shall forthwith, in public session, count the 
votes and proclaim the persons elected President and Vice- 
President. The persons respectively having the liighest 
number of votes for President and Vice-President shall be 
declared elected, but in case two or more shall have an 
equal and the highest number of votes for either office, the 
National Assembly shall, by a majority vote of all its Mem- 
bers, elect one of said persons as President or Vice-Pres- 
ident. 

In the event of a contest in the election of the Pres- 
ident or Vice-President, how should the contest be deter- 
mined and by what body? 

In the first draft of the Constitution, the provision for 
this matter, which was adopted by the Convention without 
debate, read as follows: 

“Whenever the election of the President or the Vice- 
President shall be contested, the contest shall be tried and 
determined, in accordance with the procedure fixed by law, 
by an Electoral Commission composed of ten Members of 
the National Assembly equally divided between, and chosen by 
the major parties therein, and five members of the Supreme 
Court including the Chief Justice who shall preside over said 
Commission. The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court shall 
designate the four other members who shall sit in the Elec- 
toral Commission.” 

In the special committee on style, this provision of the 
draft of the Constitution was struck out because it was 
feared that the independence and the prestige of the Su- 
preme Court might be dragged down when its members, 
including the Chief Justice, would be called upon to pass 



410 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



upon election contests for the highest executive offices of 
the land. 



The suppression of this provision met with ready ap- 
proval by the Convention on February 8, 1935. Election 
protests for the Presidency and the Vice-Presidency were 
left to be judged in a manner and by a body decided by 
the National Assembly. Herewith were the corresponding 
portions of the records: 



“President Recto . — Under the Executive Power, the 
firgt important amendment which the committee recommends 
to be accepted is the elimination of the Electoral Commis- 
sion for protests for the positions of President and Vice- 
President; and I ask that it be voted upon \vithout debate. 

“The Acting President.— Is there any objection to this 
proposition? {Silence). The Chair does not hear any. 
Approved. 

“Delegate Saguin . — For an information. It seems that 
this Constitution does not contain any provision with re- 
• spect to the entity or body which will look into the protests 
for the positions of President and Vice-President. 

“President Recto . — Neither does the American consti- 
tution contain a provision over the subject. 

“Delegate Saguin. — But, then, who will decide these 
protests? 



“President Recto. I suppose that the National Assem- 

bly will decide that.” 

Oath of the President ^The Constitution requires that 

enter on the execution of his office, the President 
^ 3.ke the following oath or affirmation: 



‘‘I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully 
and conscientiously fulfill my duties as President of the 
hilippines, preserve and defend its* Constitution, execute 
is laws, do justice to every man, and consecrate myself to 
affi the Nation. So help me God. (In case of 

Th last sentence will be omitted), 

rnnof office of the President as it appears in the 

• fh ^ ^recommended in the first draft. The oath 

m e rst draft was in turn borrowed substantially from 
committee on executive power, 
though it Would not add new duties nor confer addi- 
tional rights upon him, the Convention believed that the 



THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 



411 



making of this oath or affirmation would place upon the 
President an additional moral obligation to fulfill faithfully 
and conscientiously his duties as President of the Philip- 
pines, preserve and defend its Constitution, execute its laws, 
do justice to every man, and consecrate himself to the 
service of the Nation. 

Like every other officer of the Commonwealth gov- 
ernment, the President is required to declare also in his 
oath that he recognizes and accepts the supreme authority 
of the United States and will maintain true faith and alle- 
giance to her. 

The Constitution does not specify the person before 
whom the President should take his oath of office. He 
may take his oath before any pei*son having authority to 
administer the same, although precedents that will be set 
up may determine otherwise. 

The Term of the President. — In its report, the commit- 
tee on executive power recommended that the President 
and the Vice-President should be chosen by the direct vote 
of the people for a term of four years with only one re- 
election permitted. 

The sub-committee of seven recommended in the first 
draft of the Constitution, however, that the President and 
the Vice-President should be elected for a term of six years, 
prohibiting altogether the reelection of the President. It 
further recommended: “(N) or shall the Vice-President or 
any other person who may have succeeded to the office of 
President as therein provided, one year before the election, 
be eligible to the Presidency at such election.” 

The proposition in the first draft prohibiting reelection 
for the Pi'esident received general support in the Conven- 
tion. It was a proposition brought to their attention not 
for the first time. In pre-Convention days, there were sug- 
gestions to that effect in the press and in addresses on the 
future Constitution. The great Filipino leader, Manuel L.i 
Quezon, conceded by the public to become elected as thej 
first President under the future Constitution (and he was ■ 



412 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

elected) manifested in his public addresses his support 
to such a proposition. And while abi'oad during the 
first months of the Convention days, he reminded the Con- 
vention President in a letter to him about his preference 
for a provision in the Constitution prohibiting the reelec- 
tion of the President. 

The delegates believed that the prohibition against re- 
election would project the President from the level of or- 
dinary politics, making of him the statesman that he should 
be as the Chief Magistrate of the Nation. With the lure 
of a reelection removed, it was generally expected that from 
the time of his inauguration he would proceed to his tastc 
Vrith the determination to make good during his term, exe- 
cuting the functions assigned to him in the Constitution in 
a manner dictated only by his sense of responsibility and 
j by the general welfare of the people, regardless of its vote- 
'vdrawing power. 

To make stronger the influence that would compel him 
him to bid for immortality in the history of his country, 
some delegates proposed even to go further by providing 
in the Constitution that no person could have more than 
one term as President. But this proposition, ably defended 
by Delegate Vinzons, was defeated after a stirring speech 
by Delegate Ricardo Nepomuceno, who said that the Con- 
vention should not deprive the country of the privilege of 
recalling an ex-President whose leadership would be con- 
sidered necessary especially in critical times. 

The Convention also hoped that the prohibition would 
prevent the maintenance of a dictatorship in the office of 
the Presidency, by the President elected by the people or 
by any person who might have succeeded him at least one 
year before the election, in accordance with the rules on 
succession of the Constitution. 

The Philippine Constitution provides that the terms of 
the President and the Vice-President shall end at noon on 
the thirtieth day of December following the expiration of 
six years after their election, and the terms of their sue- 



THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 



413 



cessors shall begin from such time. The thirtieth day of 
December was selected by the special committee on style 
because of its historical significance, being the date of the 
execution of the Filipino patriot, Dx\ Jose Rizal, a martyr 
to the cause of liberty. 

Compensation. — ^The Philippine Constitution provides 
with respect to the compensation of the Pi*esident: 

"The President shall receive a compensation to be 

ascertained by law which shall be neither increased nor 
diminished during the period for which he shall have been 
elected, and he shall not receive wthin that period any 
other emolument from the Government or any of its sub- 
divisions or instrumentalities. Until the National Assembly 
shall provide otherwise, the President shall receive an annual 
salary of thirty thousand pesos.” 

This provision was recommended in the first draft of 
the Constitution. The con-esponding provision of the first 
draft was in turn borrowed from the report of the com- 
mittee on executive power, with the only difference that the 
latter did not provide for the salary that would be received 
by the President until the National Assembly should pro- 
vide otherwise. 

The Convention approved readily the principle of the 
draft that the salary of the President, while it was to be 
ascertained by law, should neither be increased nor dimin- 
ished during the period for which he should have been 
elected. The reason for this prohibition was to maintain 
the independence of the Executive. It was believed that, 
with this provision, the National Assembly could not weaken 
his fortitude by' a threat to reduce his salary nor by the 
promise to increase it induce him to follow a line of con- 
duct or action which he would not otherwise do. 

The amount of thirty thousand pesos as the salary of 
the President until the National Assembly should provide 
otherwise was approved readily by the Convention. 

Succession to the Presidency. — ^The first draft of the 
Constitution provided foi' succession to the Presidency be- 



414 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

fore and after the commencement of the tenn of the Pres- 
ident respectively in the following' provisions: 

'"Sec. 8. If, at the time fixed for the beginning of the 
term of the President, a President shall not have been 
chosen, or the President-elect shall have died, the National 
Assembly, by a majority vote, shall elect a President. Pend- 
ing an election by the National Assembly, the Vice-President 
shall act as President. If the President-elect shall have 
failed to qualify at the time fixed for the beginning of his 
term, then the Vice-President shall act as President until 
the President shall have qualified. In case neither the 
President-elect nor the Vice-President-elect shall have qual- 
ified at the beginning of their terms, the National Assembly 
shall by law provide who shall then act as President, or the 
manner in which one who is to act shall be selected, and 
such person shall act accordingly until the President-elect 
or Vice-President-elect shall have qualified.'^ 

*‘Sec. 10. In the event of the removal of the President 
from office or of his death, resignation, or inability to dis- 
charge the powers and duties of the said office, the same 
shall devolve on the Vice-President, and the National As- 
sembly shall by law provide for the case of removal, death, 
resignation or inability, both of the President and Vice- 
President, declaring what officer shall then act as President, 
and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability 
be removed, or a President shall be elected.’’ 

These provisions of the draft were inspired by the 
merican federal constitution. There was, however, this 
while under the American federal consti- 
th ^ice-President-elect could succeed pei*manently 

in the event that the latter died before 
drnff^S.^ beginning of his term, under the 

th ^^^®-President-elect of the Philippines could not. 

President-elect in that case being 
elected by the National Assembly. 

Debates. ^While there was no difference of opinion 
wi I respect to the principle of permitting the automatic 
succession of the Vice-President after the commencement 
o le erm of the President, as provided in the draft, there 
was a general opposition against the idea in the draft of 
not permitting his automatic succession in the event of the 



THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 



415 



death of the President-elect before the commencement of 
his term. Delegates Bueno and Chioco presented an 
amendment to the effect that such an automatic succes- 
sion should be permitted. Other delegates, like Garin, Se- 
^dlla, Lim, and Vinzons presented similar amendments. 
The Bueno-Chioco amendment, which was substantially co- 
pied from a corresponding provision in the American fede- 
ral constitution read: 

“If, at the time fixed for the beginning of the term 
of the President, a President shall not have been cliosen or 
shall not have qualified, the Vice-President shall act as 
President until the President shall have qualified, but if 
the President-elect shall have died before the time fixed for 
the beginning of his term, the Vice-President-elect shall be- 
come President.*’ 

Speaking in defense of the amendment in the session 
of December 15, 1934, Delegate Bueno in part said: 

“I can very well understand why in case of death or 
resignation of the President, the Vice-President should act 
as President, but I fail to understand and follow the logic 
of the draft why the Vice-President-elect should not be al- 
lowed to succeed to the Presidency if it happens that the 
President-elect dies before assuming his office. Mr. President, 
we have here a case where a Vice-President is required to 
have the same qualifications as those of a President and who 
is voted upon like the President, by the same electorate, 
but who, under the disposition of this draft, is denied auto- 
matic succession to the Presidency unless the President re- 
signs or is removed from office or unable to perform his 
duties. To illustrate this peculiar situation let us suppose 
that at noon today the President of the Commonwealth is 
going to be inaugurated but at eight o’clock this morning 
the President-elect was taken seriously ill and died before 
taking his oath. According to the draft, the Vice-President 
cannot fill the vacancy, but it authorizes the National Assem- 
bly instead to elect a President. Now, let us take for granted 
that the President-elect takes his oath of office at noon to- 
day but a few hours later he accidentally dies. The Vice- 
President-elect in accordance with the draft would succeed 
to the deceased President. Thus, it is seen that the Vice- 
President-elect which this draft disqualifies from succeeding 
the President-elect if the latter happens to die before his 
term begins and who, according to some opponents of this 



416 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



amendment, may not be of a presidential calibre, succeeds 
to the Presidential office without any legral impediment by 
virtue of the provisions of this draft. Curiously enough, 
the time limit and the meaningless ceremony of official in- 
vestiture in this particular case are the prime considerations 
and as such it is unthinkable that they should play a de- 
cisive part in the determination of an orderly succession to 
the Presidency for they do not materially add or detract to 
the disqualification and capacity of the Vice-President.” 

In answer to the expression of fear that there might 
be cases when the Presidency would be filled by a person 
belonging to a party different from that which the people 
intended to be in power, should the Vice-President be per- 
mitted to succeed the President in the event that he died 
before the commencement of his term, the Ilocos Norte del- 
egate said: 

“There is fear in certain quarters that in this principle 
of automatic succession the Vice-President who may not 
happen to be in the same party as the President may re- 
verse the policy of the latter and throw out of gear the 
harmony that exists in the administration. While the fear 
has a basis in fact in our political practice in this country, 
I have every reason to hope that as soon as the Common- 
wealth government is inaugurated there may appear clearer 
cleavages among party groups, and affiliations may be 
drawn more definitely; and as we progress in political ex- 
perience and are more thoroughly instructed in party gov- 
ernment, the men elevated to the posts of President and 
Vice-President will invariably belong to the same party. 
This is another strong argument which supports the amend- 
ment under consideration, for the Vice-President, in case 
he succeeds to the Presidency, will continue the policies of 
his predecessor as both represent the high councils of their 
party.” 

In conclusion, he said: 

amendment under consideration intends to elevate 
tne dipiity of the Vice-Presidency which has been miser- 
ably divested of its prestige and power and the high regard 
which that office should naturally carry. We should not be 
satisfied of making the Vice-President a mere decorative of- 
ficial and the pawn of an unscrupulous National Assembly; 
for I take it that he is a President *'en potencia”, and as 
such he should be a respon^ble official clothed with the 



THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 



417 



dignity of an executive official and not a mere substitute, 
and should contribute decisively in carrying out the policies 
of the party and the administration.” 

Explaining- the reason for the provision of the dx'aft, 
Delegate Filemon Sotto, following Delegate Bueno’s speech 
and several interpellations directed to him, said that there 
was a division of opinion in the sub-committee of seven, 
with the majority in favor of the pi'ovision of the draft. 
The main reason for the provision, he said, was the fact 
that ordinarily in presidential elections the attention, con- 
cern, and interest of the electorate were concentrated al- 
most exclusively on the position of the President. The 
person selected for Vice-President, he added, was usually 
of less calibre than the person presented for President, be- 
ing usually chosen as a result of compromises within the 
party during the period of nomination. He concluded by 
sa3ring that the committee had no preference between the 
proposition in the draft and that in the amendment and 
was consequently leaving the matter to the discretion of 
the Convention. 

In view of the presence of several amendn\ents more 
or less similar with respect to the succession to the Pres- 
idency, following Delegate Sotto’s explanation, there was 
a move to postpone the consideration of the proposition of 
presidential succession, against the objection of several del- 
egates, including the Convention President. 

The proponents of all the amendments managed 
to agree, after a few minutes conference, to the conso- 
lidation of the same into one amendment, a verbatim copy 
of a corresponding provision of the American federal con- 
stitution which read: 

“If, at the time fixed for the beginning of the term 
of the President, the President-elect shall have died, the 
Vice-President-elect shall become President. If a President 
shall not have been chosen before the time fixed for the be- 
ginning of his term, or if the President-elect shall have 
failed to qualify, then the Vice-President shall act as Pres- 
ident until a President shall have qualified, and the Na- 
tional Assembly may by la-w provide for the case -wherein 



418 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

neither a President-elect nor a Vice-President-elect shall 
have qualified, declaring who shall then act as President, 
or the manner in w’hich one who is to act shall be selected, 
and such person shall act accordingly until a President or 
Vice-President shall have qualified. 

After a brief defense by Delegate Sevilla, who aigued 
that in keeping with a previous decision by the Convention 
to have the President elected by the people and not by the 
National Assembly, the successor to the President in the 
event that he died before the beginning of his term should 
not be chosen by the Assembly, the Convention easily ap- 
proved by an overwhelming majority the consolidated 
amendment. 

y On December 18 , 1934 , Delegate Sevilla proposed to in- 
I sert the word, permanent, before the word, inability, so 
that the provision would then read: 

‘Tn the event of the removal of the President from of- 
fice or of his death, resignation, or pervianent inability to 
discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the same 
shall devolve on the Vice-President.” 

The object of the amendment, according to the author, 
was to make all the causes of succession permanent, as 
death, removal from office, resignation, and permanent in- 
ability; and to make succ4sion to the Presidency perma- 
nent in order to prevent the raising of the question of 
whether or not, in the event that the President recovered 
from his inability, the Vice-President would be forced to 
give up the office of the Presidency which he had been oc- 
oupying. The amendment was defeated because, according 
to Delegate Cuenco, who was sponsoring the provision of the 
draft, the sub-committee believed that the word proposed 
to be inserted was unnecessary. For the section “speaks 
of cases of a permanent character. It could be inferred 
. from the same section that death, resignation, inability are 
a permanent character.” 

Provision on Succession as Finally Approved by the 
Convention. — In the Constitution finally approved by the 
Convention, the provisions on succession to the Presidency 
read : 



THE PRESIDENT OP THE PHILIPPINES 



419 



“Sec. 7. If, at the time fixed for the beginning of the 
term of the President, the President-elect shall have died, 
the Vice-President-elect shall become President. If a Pres- 
ident shall not have been chosen before the time fixed for 
the beginning of his term, or if the President-elect shall 
have failed to qualify, then the Vice-President shall act as 
President until a President shall have qualified, and the 
National Assembly may by law provide for the case wherein 
neither a President-elect nor a Vice-President-elect shall 
// have qualified, declaring who shall then act as President, 
or the manner in which one who is to act shall be selected, 
and such person shall act accordingly until a President or 
Vice-President shall have qualified. 

“Sec. 9. In the event of the removal of the . President 
from office or of his death, resignation, or inability to dis- 
charge the powers and duties of the said office, the same 
shall devolve on the Vice-President, and the National As- 
sembly shall by law provide for the case of removal, death, 
resignation, or inability, both of the President and Vice- 
President, declaring what officer shall then act as President 
and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability 
be removed, or a President shall be elected.” 

The Constitution states that in the event of the re- 
moval of the President from office or of his death, resigna- 
tion, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the 
said office, the same shall devolve op the Vice-President. 
The corresponding provision of the American federal con- 
stitution has been construed by some authorities on Ameri- 
can constitutional law to imply the fact that the Congress 
might empow’^er the Vice-President only to act as the Pres- 
ident, not to be President. The provision of the Philippine 
Constitution could not be construed in a similar manner; 
for the Convention provided for the Vice-President for no 
other reason than to succeed to the office of the Presidency 
in the succession cases of the Constitution. The Conven- 
tion intended the provision to mean that in the event of 
the removal of the President from office by impeachment, 
or of his death, or of his resignation, or of his permanent 
inability, the Vice-President should succeed to the Pres- 
idency, discharging the powers and duties of said office. 

In the event of the temporary inability of the Pres- 
ident, like sickness or absence, who shall then perform the 



420 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

powers and duties of the Presidency? That case seeiM 
not to have been covered by the provision of the Consti- 
tution on succession. It w'ould seem from the fact that 
the term, iruibility, was intended to mean per manent in- 
ability that the President may continue to govern as Pres- 
ident if he wishes to ; but should he decide to leave tem- 
porarily the office of President and the dischaige of its 
duties and powers, then the Vice-President should act as 
President. On his return or on his recovery , the President 
may resume his work as President, exeicising his duties 
and powers as such. 



CHAPTER XXVIII 

TPIE VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

The Office of the Vice-President. — Following the pro- 
visions of the American federal constitution and acting on 
the belief that the lawmaking body of the Philippines would 
be bicameral, the reports of the committees on executive 
power and legislative power provided for the office of Vice- 
President, with the Vice-President to serve as the presid- 
ing officer of the Senate. 

There would have been most probably a unanimous 
sentiment in favor of the office of the Vice-President had 
the bicameral plan been continued under the Constitution. 
But, with the adoption of a unicameral system by the Con- 
vention on October 22, 1934, there gradually developed an 
opposition against the creation of the office in the Consti- 
tution. 

The sub-committee of seven recommended in the first 
draft of the Constitution the creation of the office of Vice- 
President. It further recommended that the President 
might appoint the Vice-President as a member of his ca- 
binet and might also appoint him as head of an executive 
department. Should the President-elect die before the time 
fixed for the beginning of the term of the President, pend- 
ing the election of his successor by the National Assem- 
bly, the sub-committee recommended that the Vice-Pres- 
ident should act as President. He should likewise act as 
President until the President-elect should have qualified, 
in the event that he should have failed to qualify at the 
time fixed for the beginning of his term. And in the event 
of the removal of the President from office or of his death, 
resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties 
of the said office, the same should devolve on the Vice- 
President. 

By the time the Convention came to consider the ar- 
ticle on the executive department of the first draft of the 
Constitution, the opposition against the creation of the of- 



422 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

fice of Vice-President had become so strong that it was 
decided to throw open for debate as the first question un- 
der the article the proposition of whether or not there 
should be created the office of Vice-President. 

The debates on the Cuenco-Morales-Kapunan proposi- 
tion to suppress the office of Vice-President took place on 
December 14, 1934, with Delegates Ysip, Kapunan, Mora- 
les, and Eusebio Lopez speaking in favor of the proposi- 
tion ; and with Delegates Grageda, Santos, and Cinco speak- 
ing against. 

It was pointed out in opposition to the creation of the 
office that, with the abolition of the Senate for which the 
Vice-President had been i ntended by the corresponding 
committees to be the presiding officer, there was no longer 
any necessity for the office. Consequently, the compen- 
sation that would attach to it would be only an unnecessary 
additional expense to the government. In answer to the 
argument that the Vice-President could be designated by 
the President as a member of his Cabinet and as head of 
an executive department, the opponents stated that, while 
that might be feasible if the President and the Vice-Pres- 
ident belonged to the same political party, it would be im- 
probable because of its impracticability that the President 
would designate him to be such if he belonged to another 
political party in view of the confidential nature of the 
functions of a department secretary. Moreover, they said, 
p would not always be the case that a person elected Vice- 
President would have the requisite qualifications for a de- 
partment secretary. They proposed that the National As- 
sembly could elect the successor of the President in any 
of the succession cases contemplated in the draft, and it 
could even be provided in the Constitution or by a law of 
the National Assembly that department secretaries would 
succeed to the Presidency. 

The defenders of the office stressed the fact that the 
Vice-President was necessary for the presidential succes- 
sion cases in the draft. By virtue of the national char- 
acter and importance of the position of the President, they 



THE VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 



423 



said, the person to succeed the President in any presidential 
succession case should be elected in the same manner as 
he was, namely, by the popular vote of the people. It 
would be highly undemocratic, they added, for a depart- 
ment secretary, in the selection of whom they had not had 
a say, to become the highest executive official of the land. 
It would be equally undemocratic to leave to the National 
Assembly the selection of the successor; for, in addition 
to the fact that that body was composed of only a sm.all se- 
lect group of people, the members were elected by the peo- 
ple for their ability not to select for them the President but 
to make wise laws for the country. And not only that. With 
the members of the National Assembly elected from geo- 
graphical districts it would not be impossible for the major- 
ity thereof to come from a party different from that of the 
President. Should it happpen when there would arise the 
necessity for presidential succession that the National As- 
sembly was controlled by a different party, the country 
would then witness the case of a man elected to the Pres- 
idency against the express will of the people in the selec- 
tion of the Pi'esident to be succeeded. What should be 
done, they concluded, would be to provide for a Vice- 
President, whose duty, among others, v^ould be to succeed 
the President in any of the cases of presidential succession. 
For the compensation that he would receive, he could be 
assigned to one of the executive departments. While it 
was true that it would not be wise and practicable for the 
President to assign the Vice-President to a cabinet port- 
folio if he belonged to a different political party, they main- 
tained that, in view of the identical national area from 
which they were elected, the cases would be very few and 
far apart, if any, when the President and the Vice-Pres- 
ident would come from different political parties because 
of the presence of national party organizations in the coun- 
try. The case mentioned by the opponents to the creation 
of the office about the fact that the Vice-President might 
not have any work although he was receiving compensa- 
tion would, they said, therefore be very far fetched. 



424 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



When submitted to a vote after the debates, the Cuen* 
co-Morales-Kapunan amendment for the suppression of the 
office of Vice-President was defeated. 

The Qualifications, Election, Term, and Compensation 
of the Vice-President. — As it has already been said in the 
preceding chapter, the qualifications, election, and term of 
the Vice-President were considered simultaneously but only 
incidentally with the consideration of the qualifications, 
election, and term of the President. Thez’e appeared to be 
a unanimous sentiment among the delegates during the 
Convention days that the qualifications, election, and term 
of the President and the Vice-President should be identical. 
The delegates had in mind the President principally and 
the Vice-President only incidentally during the debates 
on these matters. 

The Convention decided that, like the President, the 
Vice-President should be a natural-born citizen of the Phil- 
ippines, a qualified voter, forty years of age, and should 
have been a resident of the Philippines for at least ten years 
immediately preceding the election ; that he should be elect- 
ed by the direct vote of the people for a period of six years 
on a date to be fixed by the National Assembly j and that 
his term should expire at noon on the thirtieth day of 
December following the expiration of six years after his 
election. 

^ The Vice-President may be reelected Vice-President. 
' He may also be elected as President, unless he happens to 
have succeeded to the office of the President in any one 
of the succession cases at least one year before the elec- 
tion. The reason for this provision is to prevent him as 
much as possible from using the influence of the office to 
procure his election to the Presidency. It was felt, however, 
that if the succession took place within one year before 
the election, he could run for the Presidency because one 
year was not considered long enough for him to intrench 
himself in power, giving him too great an advantage over 
i jjjs opponents. 



THE VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 



425 



The Convention likewise decided that, until otherwise 
provided by law, he should receive an annual compensation 
of fifteen thousand pesos, except when acting as President, 
in which case he should receive the salary provided for 
the President. 

The Duties of the Vice-President. — Although the Con- 
vention voted to create the office of the Vice-President on 
December 14, 1934, it was not until December 19, 1934 
that it took up the question of what his duties should be 
under the Constitution. 

Under the first draft of the Constitution, except when 
succeeding to the Presidency under the rules of succession 
of the same, he might be appointed as member of the Pres- 
ident’s cabinet and also as head of an executive depart- 
ment. His appointment was discretional with the Pres- 
ident. Consequently, there might be times when he would 
be without any work at all. But with or without work, 
according to the draft, he would be entitled to compensa- 
tion. 

Many delegates were of the opinion that, when he was 
not succeeding to the Presidency, the Vice-President should 
be performing certain duties in return for the compensa- 
tion that he would be receiving ; otherwise it would be bet- 
ter to abolish the position. For that reason, a group of 
delegates proposed an amendment making mandatory, not 
permissive only, the appointment of the Vice-President as 
an ex-officio member of the cabinet and as head of an exe- 
cutive department. The amendment was defeated, how- 
ever, in view of the fact that, owing to the highly con- 
fidential nature of the position of department secre- 
tary, the President should not be compelled to appoint, as 
one of his department secretaries, the Vice-Pi*esident if he 
did not like to, especially when he happened to belong to 
an opposition party, which fact would not be improbable 
under the Constitution. Whether to appoint him or not, 
it was said, should be left to the sound discretion of the 
President. 



426 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

With the defeat of the amendment, another move was 
made to reconsider the question of suppressing the office 
of the Vice-President. It was only the settled decision by 
the Convention to make the Vice-President, not one chosen 
by the National Assembly, to succeed to the Presidency 
in one of the succession cases under the Constitution that 
saved the office of the Vice-President from being abolished. 

According to the Constitution as finally approved, if, 
at the time fixed for the beginning of the term of the 
President, the President-elect shall have died, the Vice- 
President-elect shall become President; and, if a President 
shall not have been chosen before the time fixed for the 
bginning of his term, or if the President-elect shall have 
failed to qualify, then the Vice-President shall act as Pres- 
ident until a President shall have qualified. The National 
Assembly may by law provide for the case wherein neither 
a President-elect nor a Vice-President-elect shall have qual- 
ified, declaring who shall then act as President, or the 
manner in which one who is to act shall be selected, and 
such person shall act accordingly until a President or Vice- 
President shall have qualified. 

Likewise the Constitution provides that in the event 
of the removal of the President from office or of his death, 
resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties 
of the said office, the same shall devolve on the Vice-Pres- 
Jdent, and the National Assembly shall by law provide for 
p e case of removal, death, resignation, or inability of the 
Resident and Vice-President, declaring what officer shall 
ben act as President, and such officer shall act accord- 
ingly, until the disability be removed, or a President shall 
be elected. 



CHAPTER XXIX 



THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE 
PRESIDENT 

Introduction. — Before he enter on the execution of his 
office, the Constitution requires the President-elect to 
swear or affirm that he will faithfully and conscientiously 
fulfill his duties as President of the Philippines, preserve 
and defend its Constitution, execute its laws, do justice 
to every man, and consecrate himself to the service of the 
Nation. 

In order to help him carry out what he has sworn to 
do, the Constitution vests in the President certain specific 
powers. These powers are as follows: 

“SEC. 11 (1) The President shall have control of all 
the executive departments, bureaus, or offices, exercise gen- 
eral supervision over all local governments as may be pro- 
vided by law, and take care that the laws be faithfully 
executed. 

“(2) The President shall be commander-in-chief of all 
armed forces of the Philippines and, whenever it becomes 
necessary, he may call out such armed forces to prevent or 
suppress lawless violence, invasion, insurrection, or rebel- 
lion. In case of invasion, insurrection, or rebellion, or im- 
minent danger thereof, when the public safety requires it, 
he may suspend the privileges of the writ of habeas corpus^ 
or place the Philippines or any part thereof under martial 
law. 

“(3) The President shall nominate and \vith the con- 
sent of the Commission on Appointments of the National 
Assembly, shall appoint the heads of the executive depart- 
ments and bureaus, officers of the Army from the rank of 
colonel, of the Navy and air forces from the rank of captain 
or commander, and all other officers of the Government 
whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for, 
and those whom he may be authorized by law to appoint; 
but the National Assembly may by law vest the appoint- 
ment of inferior officers, in the President alone, in the 
courts, or in the heads of departments. 






428 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

‘‘(4) The President shall have the power to make ap^ 
pointments during the recess of the National Assembly, but 
such appointments shall be effective only until disapproval 
by the Commission on Appointments or until the next ad- 
journment of the National Assembly. 

‘‘(5) The President shall from time to time give to 
the National Assembly information of the state of the Na- 
tion, and recommend to its consideration such measures aa 
he shall judge necessary and expedient. | 

**( 6 ) The President shall have the pow’er to grant re- 
prieves, commutations, and pardons, and remit fines and 
forfeitures, after conviction, for all offenses, except in cases 
of impeachment, upon such conditions and with such restric- 
tions and limitations as he may deem proper to impose. He 
shall have the power to grant amnesty with the concurrence 
I of the National Assembly. 

'*(7) The President shall have the power, with the con- 
currence of a majority of all the Members of the National 
Assembly, to make treaties, and with the consent of the 
I Commission on Appointments, he shall appoint ambassadors, 

I other public ministers, and consuls. He shall receive am- 

bassadors and other ministers duly accredited to the Gov- 
ernment of the Philippines.'' i 

The Administrative Power. — ^With respect to the ad- 
ministrative powers of the President, the Philippine Con- 
stitution provides : I 

'‘The President shall have control of all the executive . 
departments, bureaus, or offices, exercise general supervi- i 

Sion over all local governments as may be provided by law, i 

and take care that the laws be faithfully executed." 

Under the Jones Law, the Chief Executive had general 
• supervision and control over the departments and bureaus 

of the government. This grant of the power of supervi- 
sion and control was found in the following provisions: 

/ "He shall have general supervision and control of all 
the departments and bureaus of the government in the Phil- 
ippine Islands as far as is not inconsistent with the provi- 
sions of this Act." 

‘^That all executive functions of the government must I 

be directly under the Governor-General or within one of 
the executive departments under the supervision and con- ( 

trol of the Governor-General." 



ly 



THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE PKESmENT 429 



This power of supervision and control over all executive de- 
partments and bureaus of the government made the Gov- 
ernor-General virtually the administrative head of the gov- 
ernment. It made for a strongly centralized administrative 
organization. The Jones Law also provided that the Gov- 
ernor-General “shall be responsible for the faithful execu- 
tion of the laws of the Philippine Islands and of the United 
States operative within the Philippine Islands.” 

In the determination of the administrative powers of 
the Chief Executive, these provisions of the Jones Law had 
a controlling influence. The political traditions of the peo- 
ple had been for an integrated and centralized administra- 
tive system. 

In its report, the Committee on executive power re- 
commended that: 

“The President shall be responsible for the faithful 
execution of the laws of the Philippine Islands and shall 
take care that the provisions of this Constitution are not 
violated, and shall have general supervision and control of 
all of the departments and bureaus of the Government of 
the Philippine Islands, and supervision over all its political 
subdivisions as far as is not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Constitution.” 

The sub-committee of seven substantially copied the 
recommendation of the committee on executive power, the 
corresponding provision of the first draft reading: 

“The President is the head of the State and shall have 
control of all the executive departments, bureaus, or offices, 
shall exercise general supervision over all local governments 
as may be provided by law, and shall take care that the 
laws be faithfully executed.” 

This provision of the draflTwas readily approved by 
the Convention. With the exception of the suppression of 
the phrase, “The President is the head of the State,” for 
being superfluous, the special committee on style made no 
change in substance in this provision. » 

The Military Power. — ^The Philippine Constitution pro- 
vides : 



430 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



“The President shall be commander-in-chief of all armed 
forces of the Philippines and, whenever it becomes necessary, 
he may call out such armed forces to prevent or suppress 
lawless violence, invasion, insurrection, or rebellion. In case 
of invasion, insurrection, or rebellion, or fmminent danger 
thereof, when the public safety requires it, he may suspend 
the privileges of the writ of habeas corpus, or place the 
Philippines or any part thereof under martial law.” 

This provision was almost an exact reproduction of a 
corresponding provision in the first draft of the Consti- 
tution. The provision of the first draft of the Constitu- 
tion was in turn influenced by the report of the committee 
on executive power. The corresponding portion of the lat- 
ter was largely reproduced from the Jones Law. 

There was a unanimous support in the Convention in 
favor of making the President the constitutional command- 
er-in-chief of all the armed forces of the Philippines. It 
was a principle embodied in the fundamental laws of possi- 
bly all the countries of the world. 

As such commander-in-chief, it was naturally expected 
that all military operations in time of peace as well as in 
time of war would be conducted through or under his or- 
He would have the power to ^deter mine and _control 
the_mov^^nt and destination o f the armed forces and to 

cfl^fligrTnianZ Ofcourse the Na- 
“o^^al Assenibly would hav^tlre'^pbwer to raise and sup- 
port the armed forces, determining their number and the 
nature of their organization, the methods of their 'fecruit- 
nient, and the appropriations for their maintenance. When 
necessary, the President might call the armed forces to 
prevent or suppress lawless violence, invasion, ipsurrection, 

or rebellion, ^ / 

With respect to the authority of the President to sus- 
pend the writ of habeas corpus, there were two carnps of 
thought in the Convention. One was in favor of tKe pro- 
vision of the first draft giving the authority to the Pres- 
ident; the other, in favor of giving it to the National As- 
sembly when it was in session, otherwise to the President 







7 ^ 



THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE PRESIDENT 431 

with the consent of the majority of the Supreme Court. 
An amendment to the latter effect was presented by Dele- 
gate Araneta, the amendment reading: 

‘‘In case of rebellion, insurrection or invasion, when the 
public safety requires it, the National Assembly may sus- 
pend the privileges of the writ of habeas corpus. In case 
the National Assembly is not in session, the President may 
suspend the privileges of the writ of habeas corpus with 
the consent of the majority of the members of the Supreme 
Court, but this suspension of the privilegres of the writ of 
habeas corpus will be considered revoked if tlie President 
does not call a special session of the National Assembly 
within 15 days from the decree suspending the writ of ha- 
beas corpus or if the National Assembly fails to confirm 
the action of the President wdthin 30 days.” 

Defending his amendment, which was considered by 
the Convention on December 17, 1934, Delegate Araneta 
pointed out that its object was to protect the life and the 
liberty of the people. Under the provision of the draft, 
he said, the Chief Executive would be the only authority 
to determine the existence of the reasons for the suspen- 
sion of the writ of habeas corpiis; and, according to Philip- 
pine jurisprudence, the Supreme Court would refuse to 
review the findings of the Executive on the matter. Con- 
sequently, he added, arrests would be effected by military 
men who were generally arbitrary. They would be arrest- 
ing persons connected with the rebellion, insurrection, in- 
vasion; some of them might also be arresting other per- 
: sons without any cause whatsoever. The result would be 
that many persons might find themselves detained when 
in fact they had ho connection whatsoever with the dis- 
turbances. And because there would be no legal remedy 
to bring about their release, they would be unduly deprived 
of their life and liberty — ^victims of abuses committed by 
milit^'y men. To give to the National Assembly the power 
to suspend the writ of habeas oo7'pus or even to the Pres- 
ident provided that it be with the consent of the majority 
of the members of the Supreme Court would be, according 
to the Manila delegate, to reduce if not remove the possi- 



432 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

bility of abuse and, accordingly, to protect the life and li- 
berty of individuals. 

Notwithstanding the brilliant defense by Delegate Ara- 
neta, the Convention voted down the amendment, thereby 
approving the continuation under the Constitution of the 
principle of the Jones Law of vesting the power of sus- 
pending the writ of habeas coi-vas in the Executive, 

There was no opposition in the Convention to the pro- 
vision of the draft giving the President the power to place 
the Philippines or any part thereof under martial law. 

The Appointing Power. — With respect to the appoint- 
ing power of the President, the Philippine Constitution pro- 
vides : 

“The President shall nominate and with the consent 
of the Commission on appointments of the National Assem- 
bly, shall appoint the heads of the executive departments 
and bureaus, officers of the Army from the rank of colonel, 
of the Navy and air forces from the rank of captain or 
commander, and all other officers of the Government whose 
appointments are not herein otherwise provided for, and 
those whom he may be authorized by law to appoint; but 
the National Assembly may by law vest the appointment of 
inferior officers, in the President alone, in the courts, or 
in the heads of departments.” 

“The President shall have the power to make appoint- 
ments during the recess of the National Assembly, but such 
appointments shall be effective only until disapproval by 
the Commission on Appointments or until the next adjourn- 
ment of the National Assembly.” 

"And with the consent of the Commission on Appoint- 
ments, he shall appoint ambassadors, other public ministers, 
and consuls.” 

“The members of the Supreme Court and all judges of 
inferior courts shall be appointed by the President with the 
consent of the Commission on Appointments of the National 
Assembly.” 

“The Auditor General shall be appointed by the Pres- 
ident with the consent of the Commission on Appointments.” 

These provisions of the Constitution were inspired 
largely by the American federal constitution and the Jones 



THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE PRESIDENT 433 



Law. They were embodied generally in the reports of the 
committees on executive power, judicial power, and finance, 
and incorporated in the first draft of the Constitution. 

Under these provisions, the President has the power 
to nominate and with the consent of the Commission on 
Appointments to appoint: 

(1) the heads of the executive departments and bureaus; 

(2) officers of the Army from the rank of colonel, of tlie 
Navy and air forces from the rank of captain or com- 
mander; 

(3) all other officers of the Government whose appoint- 
ments are not herein otherwise provided for; 

(4) those whom he may be authorized by law to appoint; 

(5) ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls; 

(6) the members of the Supreme Court and all judges of 
inferior courts; and 

(7) the Auditor General. 

As it has already been shown in preceding pages, the 
creation of the Commission on Appointments occasioned 
some of the greatest debates in the Convention. For while 
there was a general sentiment in favor of the proposition 
of having a body to check upon appointments by the Pres- 
ident, there was a division of opinion with respect to the 
body that would serve as such. One group of delegates 
was in favor of making the entire National Assembly con- 
firm the appointments; and another in favor of an inner 
body. The opinion of the latter group prevailed. Hence 
was established the Commission on Appointments. 

The authority of the Chief Executive to appoint the 
heads of the executive departments and bureaus under the 
Constitution was an authority enjoyed by the Chief Exe- 
cutive under the Jones Law. Through the influence of 
tradition, the rule of the Jones Law was continued into the 
Constitution. And the Constitution adds further that “the 
President shall have conti’ol of all the executive depart- 
ments, bureaus, or offices.” 

The provision authorizing the President to appoint am- 
bassadors, other public ministers, and consuls was insph'ed 
by a corresponding provision of the American constitution. 



434 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

The delegates to the Convention believed that, being the 
spokesman of the Nation in foreign relations, the President 
should be given the power to detez'mine the representatives 
of his department abroad. 

Under the Jones Law, the members of the Supreme 
Court were appointed by the President of the United States 
by and with the advice and consent of the United States 
Senate, Likewise was the Insular Auditor. The judges 
of the inferior courts were, however, appointed by the Gov- 
eiTior-General with the advice and consent of the Philip- 
pine Senate. There being no limitation in the Tydings- 
McDuffie Law with respect to the appointment of the Jus- 
tices of the Supreme Court and the Auditor General, the 
delegates naturally provided in the Constitution for theii 
appointment by the President of the Philippines with the 
consent of the Commission on Appointments. With lespect 
to the other members of the judiciary, the Convention sim- 
ply followed the pi’inciple of the Jones Law of leaving their 
appointment to the Chief Executive, subject to the con- 
firmation of a checking body. 

Relative to ad interim appointments by the President, 
the committee on executive power, following the principle 
of the Jones Law, recommended that he “shall have the 
power to fill up all vacancies that may happen during the 
recess of the Senate, by granting commissions which shall 
expire at the end of their next session or upon disapproval 
by the Senate.” The sub-committee of seven, varying the 
report of the committee on executive power, recommended, 
however, in the first draft of the Constitution the follow- 
ing provision: 

“The President shall have the power to make appoint- 
ments during the recess of the National Assembly, but such 
Appointments unless confirmed by the Permanent Commis- 
sion will become ineffective after a period of three months 
or upon disapproval by the said Commission.” 

There being no amendment to it, this provision of the 
draft was approved readily on second reading with the ap- 
proval of the entire article on executive power. 



THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE PRESIDENT 



435 



In the special committee on style, this provision was 
revised to its present phraseology. The change was ap- 
proved readily by the Convention. 

The Pardoning Power. — ^The Philippine Constitution 
provides : 

‘'The President shall have the power to grant reprieves, 
commutations, and pardons, and remit fines and forfeitures, 
after conviction, for all offenses, except in cases of impeach- 
ment, upon such conditions and with such restrictions and 
limitations as he may deem proper to impose. He shall 
have the power to grant amnesty with the concurrence of 
the National Assembly.” 

Under the Jones Law, the Chief Executive was vested 
with the pardoning power. The corresponding provision 
of that Law read: 

“He is hereby vested with the exclusive power to grant 
pardons and reprieves and remit fines and forfeitures.” 

As it was thus provided, the pardoning power might be 
exercised by the Chief Executive for any reason he deemed 
just and at any time — ^before trial, during trial, after trial 
and before conviction, after conviction and before serving 
sentence, or during his service of the sentence. The par- 
don might be plenary or conditional. 

With respect to the pardoning power, the committee 
on executive power recommended the following provision: 

“He has the power to grant to convicted persons re- 
prieves or pardons, either plenary or partial, conditional, 
or unconditional, to suspend sentences without pardons, re- 
mit fines, and order the discharge of any convicted person 
upon parole, and subject to such conditions as he may im- 
pose, and to authorize the arrest and reincarceration of such 
person who in his judgment, shall fail to comply with the 
condition or conditions of his pardon, parole or suspension 
of a sentence. Provided, however. That the power of the 
Chief Executive to grant pardons can only be exercised af- 
ter the accused has served a part of the sentence imposed 
upon him and Provided further, That in cases where the 
convicting court should recommend executive clemency, the 
same could be exercised by the Chief Executive even prior 
to the service of the sentence by the accused.” 



436 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

Influenced by the provisions of the Jones Lciw and the 
American federal constitution and by the report of the 
committee on executive power, the sub-committee of seven 
recommended in the first draft of the Constitution the fol- 
lowing provision on the pardoning power: 

'The President shall have the power to grant reprieves, 
commutations and pardons, and remit fines and forfeitures, 
after conviction, for all offenses except in cases of impeach- 
ment, upon such conditions and with such restrictions and 
limitations as he may deem proper to impose.'' 

There was a unanimous sentiment in the Convention 
in favor of retaining in the Constitution the principle of 
the pardon. The delegates recognized the necessity of sucii 
a principle to correct a blatant error in the administration 
of justice. 

It was also generally held that, as it was under the 
Jones Law and in other countries, the pardoning power 
should be vested in the Executive, although there was a 
difference of opinion *with respect to the authority to exei'- 
cise the power to grant amnesty. There were many pro- 
posals, however, intended to limit the absolute character 
of the pardoning power of the Executive. Of them were 
the proposal in the report of the committee on executive 
power and in the first draft of the Constitution to the ef- 
fect that pardon should be gi-anted to a person only after 
nis conviction; the Galang amendment embodying a pro- 
posal in the report of the committee on executive power 
to the effect that the Chief Executive could grant pardon 
to a person only after the latter had served a part of the 
sentence imposed upon him, except in cases where the con- 
victing court should recommend executive clemency, when 
the same could be exercised even prior to the service of the 
sentence; and the Sanvictores amendment providing that 
no pardon should, without the recommendation of the Su- 
preme Court, be granted until the prisoner should have 
served at least one-half of the minimum sentence imposed. 

In the course of the debates on the pardoning power of 
the Chief Executive, it was pointed out that the part of 



THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE PRESIDENT 437 



the pi'ovision requiring previous conviction before a person 
f could be pardoned was intended to prevent the recurrence 
of the evil pi*actice sometimes X’esorted to by the Chief 
Executive under the Jones Law of pardoning persons, es- 
pecially friends and other influential individuals, even be- 
fore conviction./ The defenders of the draft said that, once 
the case was before the court, it should be allowed to go 
on until it had been terminated. The Chief Executive 
should not intervene in the case at that stage through the 
exercise of the pardoning power. It was pointed out, how- 
ever, by the defenders of the Kapunan amendment for the 
suppression of the phrase, after conviction, that the power 
of the Executive to pardon even before conviction should 
be preserved in order to do justice to innocent persons who 
would otherwise be convicted because of the technicality of 
the law. There would be cases as there had been in the 
past, they said, when by the mere technicality of the law, 
persons would surely be convicted. In oi-der not to impress 
upon them the disgrace of a conviction when they were 
really innocent, it was necessary, they contended, that these 
accused could be pardoned before conviction. When put 
to a vote on December 20, 1934, the Kapunan amendment 
was defeated. 

The Galang amendment and the Sanvictores amend- 1 
ment would go further by requii-ing that no person, even 
if already convicted, should be pardoned, unless he had 
served partially his sentence. The Galang amendment 
would permit executive clemency even before the commen- 
cement of the service of the sentence, upon the recom- 
mendation of the convicting coui't; and the Sanvictores i 
amendment, upon the recommendation of the Supreme ; 
Court. Both amendments were, however, defeated. 

In the first draft of the Constitution, there was no 
provision regarding the power of the President to grant 
amnesty. In fact, it was generally believed that, by virtue 
of the portion of the provision requiring previous convic- 
tion before a pardon could be granted, no amnesty could be 
granted by the President. In order to enable the President 



438 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

to extend amnesty under the provision of the draft, Dele- 
gate Ventura proposed an amendment empowering the 
President to grant amnesty. While there was a general 
sentiment in favor of the Ventura amendment, there was 
a divison of opinion with respect to the authority to exer- 
cise the power. Some delegates believed that it should be 
vested exclusively in the President; othez's, that it should 
reside in the President with the concui’rence of the Na- 
tional Assembly. The concurrence of the National Assembly 
was intended as a check against the possible abuse of the 
power by the President in favor of certain groups, to the 
prejudice of national interests. The pi'oposition to require 
the concurrence of the National Assembly was voiced in a 
speech by Delegate Perfecto against the Ventui’a amend- 
ment as it was, and was presented formally in an amend- 
ment proposed by Delegate Kapunan. When put to a vote, 
the Kapunan amendment was defeated. The Convention 
then voted in favor of the original amendment presented 
by Delegate Ventura for vesting the power in the President. 

In the revised draft of the Constitution of the special 
committee on style, which was finally adopted by the Con- 
vention, the power to grant amnesty was vested in the 
President with the concurrence of the National Assembly. 

On December 19, 1934, the Convention considered the 
amendment presented by Delegate Sevilla for the insertion 
in the draft of the word, sole, so that the provision of the 
draft should then read: 

“The President shall have the sole power to grant rep- 
rieves, commutations and pardons, and remit fines and for- 
feitures, after conviction, for all offenses except in cases 
iuipeachment, upon such conditions and with such res- 
trictions and limitations as he may deem proper to impose.” 

Under the Jones Law, the Chief Executive had the 
exclusive power to grant pardons and reprieves and remit 
fines and forfeitures. In defense of the amendment. Dele- 
gate Sevilla said that its purpose was to make the Pi’es- 
ident of the Philippines the only executive officer of the 
government to exercise the pardoning power. Speaking in 



THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE PRESIDENT 439 



behalf of the sub-committee of seven, Delegate Cuenco said, 
however, that the insertion of the word, sole, was unne- 
cessary Ibecause the di'aft contemplated that the Executive 
was the only officer to exercise the pardoning power. Be- 
cause of Delegate Cuenco’s explanation, the Convention de- 
feated the Sevilla amendment when it was put to a vote. 

There was no objection in the Convention against that 
part of the draft excepting from the offenses that could be 
pardoned cases of impeachment. The delegates felt that 
the exception would serve as a check upon the power of 
the Pi-esident so that he could not px'otect from punish- 
ment for political offenses the high officials for whom the 
article on impeachment of the Constitution was intended. 
Some delegates proposed to include in the exception of- 
fenses for the violation of the election law; but the proposi- 
tion was not approved by the Convention. 

^ The Diplomatic Power. — ^The Philippine Constitution 
provides : 

‘'The President shall have the power, with the concur- 
rence of a majority of all the Members of the National 
Assembly, to make treaties, and with the consent of the 
Commission on Appointments, he shall appoint ambassadors, 
other public ministers, and consuls. He shall receive am-^ 
bassadors and other ministers duly accredited to tlie Govern- 
ment of the Philippines.'' 

This provision of the Constitution was inspired by the 
American federal constitution. With the exception of the 
last part of the provision, reading “He shall receive am- 
bassadors and other ministers duly accredited to the Gov- 
ernment of the Philippines,” which was an amendment pi*e- 
sented by Delegate Navarro during the plenary session of 
the Convention, the provision was embodied in the first 
draft of the Constitution. The Convention approved with- 
out debate both the provision of the first draft on the mat- 
ter as well as the Navarro amendment. 

The power to negotiate treaties was vested in the Pres- 
ident for administrative reasons; but in order that it might 
not be perverted by his unwisdom or disloyalty, to the 



440 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



prejudice of the country, there was provided the check 
of the lawmaking body. 

The Convention left to the President and the National 
Assembly the determination of the nature or scope of the 
treaties that might be entered into, trusting in their ability 
and sound discretion. Of course, it was understood that 
their determining power was subject to the restrictions 
necessarily implied from other provisions of the Consti- 
tution. \ 



The public ministers and consuls, being the arms oi 
the executive department in foreign countries in the per- 
formance of its diplomatic functions, the Convention pro- 
vided that they should be appointed by the President, with 
the consent of the Commission on Appointments.,. 



r The Convention left to the President the power to re- 
ceive ambassadors and other ministers duly accredited to 
the Government of the Philippines. This provision of the 
Constitution was understood at the time to imply the fact 
that the President had the power to receive or to refuse 
to receive any particular person duly accredited to him by 
any foreign government. It may be added that the power 
to receive public ministers also implies the power to re- 
cognize new governments or new states ; for the reception 
a diplomatic representative is equivalent to a recognition 
by the receiving state that the government sending him is 
the government duly authorized to speak for its state, or 
I state he represents becomes an interaational per- 

[sonahty as far as the receiving state is concerned. 

The enforcement of this provision was of course un- 
erstood to be subject to the limitation that, during the 
ommonwealth period, the foreign affairs of the Philip- 
pines should be under the direct supervision and control of 
me United States. This limitation was imposed in the 
Tydmgs-McDuffie Law and included as one of the sections 
in the Ordinance appended to the Constitution. 

Information to the National Assembly. — ^The Philip- 
pine Constitution provides : 



THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE PRESIDENT 



441 



‘‘The President shall from time to time give to the 
National Assembly information of the state of the Nation, 
and recommend to its consideration such measures as he 
shall judge necessary and expedient.” 

Under the Jones Law, notwithstanding the absence of 
a provision to that effect, it was customary for the Chief 
Executive to send messages to the Legislature at the open- 
ing of its sessions, containing information of the state of 
the nation and recommending the consideration of certain 
measures. These messages were at times delivered in per- 
son by the Chief Executive; at other times they were i-ead 
for him before the lawmaking body. By virtue of the fact 
that he was the head of the executive department of the 
government, he was generally in a better position than the 
lawmaking body to be informed of the activities of the gov- 
ernment under the different departments ; of the workings 
of the laws; at times of other matters that needed imme- 
diate legislative solution. The messages of the Chief Exe- 
cutive were generally infoi-mational, serving in many cases 
as -the basis of beneficial legislation. 

The continuation of that practice under the Consti- 
tution was recommended by the committee on executive 
power in the following provision of its report: 

“He shall from time to time give to the Congress in- 
formation of the state of the Philippine Government, and 
recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall 
judge necessary and expedient.” 

The committee followed largely the phraseology of the 
corresponding provision of the American federal Constitu- 
tion on the matter. 

Following the recommendation of the committee on 
executive power, the sub-committee of seven proposed in 
the first draft of the Constitution the following provision: 

“The President shall communicate by message to the 
National Assembly at every session the state of the na- 
tion, and recommend to its consideration such measures as 
he shall judge necessary and expedient.” 

This provision of the draft was approved readily by 
the Convention, there being no amendment presented on it. 



442 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

In the special committee on style, the provision was 
revised to its present phraseology, which is largely a copy 
of the corresponding provision of the American federal 
constitution. 

The Constitution also provides that the heads of de- 
partments upon their own initiative or upon the request of 
the National Assembly may appear before and be heard 
by the National Assembly on any matter pertaining to 
their departments, unless the public interest shall require 
otherwise and the President shall so state in writing. As 
it will be seen in the following chapter, the provision was 
intended primarily to furnish to the National Assembly 
information that would help it in its work. 



CHAPTER XXX 

THE ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENT 



The Executive Departments. — ^With respect to the exe- 
cutive departments of the government, the Constitution 
provides : 

“The executive departments of the present Government 
of the Philippine Islands shall continue as now authorized 
by law until the National Assembly shall provide other- 
Nvise.” 

Under the Jones Law, the legislature was authorized 
to determine the number and the organization of the dif- 
ferent departments of the government, subject to the limi- 
tation that there must be a depai'tment of public instruc- 
tion. 

Following the principle of the Jones Law, the sub- 
committee of seven proposed in the first draft of the Con- 
stitution that the number and the organization of the de- 
partments should be left to be determined by law, with 
the executive departments of the then Philippine Goverii- 
ment to continue in the meantime. The corresponding 
provision of the fii'st draft read as follows: 

“The executive departments of the present Philippine 
Government shall continue as now authorized by law until 
the National Assembly shall provide otherwise.” 

When the Convention came to this provision of the 
draft on December 18, 1934, several delegates, most of them 
being members of the committee on health, presided by 
Delegate Villarama, proposed an amendment for the crea- 
tion of a department of health, for which amendment, long 
before that time. Delegate Villarama had secured the writ- 
ten pledges of support of more than one hundred delegates. 
Delegates Villarama, Ricohermoso, and Caram spoke in 
favor of the amendment, pointing out generally the im- 
portance of the work of a department of health. But the 
Convention disapproved the amendment, with many of the 



444 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

delegates who had pledged their support to the same chang- 
ing their minds, because of the conviction that, as Delegate 
Roxas very well pointed out in the debates, the determina- 
tion of the names, the number, and the organization of the 
executive departments should be left to the National As- 
sembly in order to make the Constitution adjustable to 
changing needs and conditions. 

The Heads of Departments.— Neither in the reports of 
the committees of the Convention nor in the first draft 
of the Constitution was there any attempt to define the 
qualifications, term of office, powers and duties, and com- 
pensation of the heads of departments. It was thought 
best to leave those matters to legislative detei*mination — a 
principle that had been followed before the regime of the 
Philippine Constitution. 

^ There were a few delegates, however, who considered 
it necessary to provide in the Constitution for the qualifi- 
cations and term of office of the department heads, as it 
had been considered necessary to provide for those of Mem- 
bers of the National Assembly, the President and the Vice- 
President, and the Justices of the Supreme Court. Amend- 
ments to this effect were presented in the Convention. An 
amendment proposed by Delegate Rafols was to the effect 
that no person could be appointed as a department secre- 
tary who was not at least 35 years of age nor had been 
at least 5 years before his appointment a Filipino citizen. 
That px-esented by Delegate Alejandrino would prohibit al- 
together the appointment to an executive department of a 
naturalized Filipino citizen; in other words, only Filipino 
citizens by birth should be eligible for the position of de- 
psrtniGiit secretary. 

The general reason for these amendments was to in- 
sure the fact that no person disloyal to the Philippines 
would ever be placed in the key position of a department 
secretary, with access to confidential papei’s of the govern- 

i ment, to the prejudice of the national interest. 






THE ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENT 445 

Commenting on the amendments, Delegate Briones said 
that, in justice to them, naturalized Filipino citizens should 
be eligible for the position of department secretary. The 
country, he added, should repose its confidence in the lo- 
yalty of that class of Filipino citizens; for they were join- 
ing the community only after they had complied with con- 
ditions intended to test that loyalty. Moreover, he argued, 
there was no fear against the possible appointment of a 
man whose presence in the Cabinet would be a source of 
danger to the security of the country because of the pre- 
sence of two checks in the appointment — that of the ap- 
pointing President and that of the confirming body. 

In view of the seriousness of the question, the Con- 
vention decided to postpone further consideration of the 
same to the closing days of the Convention. In the closing 
days, the Convention finally decided to leave to legislative 
determination the qualifications and disqualifications for the 
position of department secretary. 

Prohibitions against Administrative Officials to Prac- 
tice any Profession and to Have Financial Interest. — ^The 
Philippine Constitution provides: 

‘*The heads of departments and chiefs of bureaus or 
offices and their assistants shall not, during their continu- 
ance in office, engage in tlie practice of any profession, or 
intervene, directly or indirectly, in the management or con- 
trol of any private enterprise which in any way may be 
affected by the functions of their office; nor shall they, 
directly or indirectly, be financially interested in any con- 
tract with the Government, or any subdivision or instru- 
mentality thereof.*' 

This provision was embodied in the first draft of the 
Constitution, with the exception of the last portion read- 
ing ^‘nor shall they, directly or indirectly, be financially 
interested in any contract with the Government, or any 
subdivision or instrumentality thereof,’’ which was an 
amendment presented by Delegate Abella and others dur- 
ing the consideration of the first draft and approved read- 
ily by Convention. 



446 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

The prohibitions apparently apply to all persons con- 
nected with the executive department, with the exception 
of the President and the Vice-President, unless the lat- 
ter would be appointed as head of an executive department. 
Delegate Filemon Sotto, chairman of the sub-committee of 
seven, in the course of his explanation of the scope of the 
prohibitions said: 

“The draft already prohibits the chiefs of departments 
or their subordinates or assistants to have management or 
control of private enterprises which may have relation to 
their office, during the time that said chiefs of departments 
or chiefs of offices are discharging their functions." 

Theresas an amendment presented by Delegate Abella 
and others to include within the prohibitions the President 
and the Vice-President. The amendment was disapproved 
by the Convention because it was considered unnecessary. 
For if the Vice-President would be appointed as head of an 
executive department, he would be included any way with- 
in the prohibitions. With respect to the President, it was 
felt that the amendment was unnecessary because even 
■without it the President, impelled by a high sense of mo- 
rality and decency called by the dignity of the office that 
be occupied, would not dare do any of the things prohibited 
Ml the provision. 

The provision contains three prohibitions, namely, (1) 
a prohibition against engaging in the practice of any pro- 
fession; (2) a prohibition against intervening directly or 
mdirectly in the management or control of any private en- 
teiTirise which in any way may be affected by the func- 
tions of their office; and (3) a prohibition against being 
directly or indirectly interested in any contract with the 
Government, or any subdivision, or instrumentally thereof. 

The object of the first prohibition was to secure devo- 
tion and loyalty to public service. It was felt that those 
joining the government service were duty bound to con- 
centrate their time, energy, and thought to their work in 
the government, thereby increasing their efficiency and 
raising the tone of public service. 'Wliat was intended to 




THE ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENT 



447 



be prohibited was the practice of any profession not for 
the purposes of the government. \^' 

The object of the second prohibition was to insure their 
impartiality in the discharge of the functions of their of- 
fice, to all private enterprises that’ had something to do 
with the latter. What was intended to be prohibited 
Was direct or indirect intervention only in the vmmgenient 
or control of any private enterprise that might be affected 
by the functions of the office. Delegate Inting and others 
proposed to prohibit altogether their having any direct or 
indirect financial interest in these enterprises; but their 
proposition was disapproved by the Convention. 

The object of the third prohibition was to prevent them") 
from taking advantage of their official position to secure / 
or to help secure contracts from the Government, or any 
subdivision, or instrumentality thereof for their financial 
benefit and possibly to the detriment of public interest. It / 
was a prohibition dictated by a sense of moral decency and 
by the desire to protect public interest. 

Department Heads and the National Assembly. — ^The 
Philippine Constitution provides: 

‘‘The heads of departments upon their own initiative 
or upon the request of the National Assembly may appear 
before and be heard by the National Assembly on any mat- 
ter pertaining to their departments, unless the public in- 
terest shall require otherwise and the President shall so 
state in writing/^ 

While there was no pi’ovision in the Jones Law to the 
effect, there was a similar provision in the Administrative 
Code, which read: 

“The Secretaries may be called, and shall be entitled to 
be heard, by either of the two Houses of the Legislature, for 
the purpose of reporting on matters pertaining to their De- 
partments, unless the public interest shall require otherwise 
and the Governor-General shall so state in writing.” 

Under that statutory provision, the legislature through 
its committees on many occasions requested several secreta- 
ries of departments to appear before it to give infor- 
mation on masters pertaining to their departments. And 



448 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



on many more occasions the legislative committees request- 
ed them to furnish written information on questions ad- 
dressed to their respective departments. The information 
given to the legislative committees proved of great value 
in the work of the legislature. 

It was felt during the Convention days that there must 
be an organic connection between the legislative and the 
executive branches under the presidential system of gov- 
ernment of the Philippines. For that reason, the commit- 
tee on legislative power recommended the elevation to f he 
dignity of a constitutional provision of the law legaiding 
the appearance of department secretaries The corres^nd- 
ing portion of the report of the committee on legislative 

power read as follows: 

“The Secretaries of department upon their own initia- 
me oe ^ of either of the two Houses of the 

to be heard said Houses, on any matter pertaining to 

to be heard oy, ^^e public interest shall require 

their departments, unless t i ” 

otherwise and the President shall so state in ^vrltlng. 

According to the report of the committee on le^hve 
power, the secretaries of departments could u,»n then o™ 
initiative appear before and be entitled to be >'card by the 
lawmaking body on any matter pertaining to ‘heir depait- 
ments. Inferentially, they could Participate in the debates 
“a the same matter, but they would not have ‘he ii„ht t 
vote. They might also appear before and be entitled to 
be heard by the lawmaking body when requested to do ^ 
by the lawmaking body, unless the President refused, to 
permit them on the ground of public interest. 

This provision of the draft was considered by the Con- 
vention in the debates, on December 7, 1934, on the Ven- 
tura-Sanchez amendment for its suppression. Delegates 
Ventura and Sanchez, arguing against the provision of the 
draft, said that it should be suppressed because it attempt- 
ed to ingraft in the presidential system adopted in the 
Constitution some features of a parliamentary system of 
government. Since the Convention had d^ided to estab- 



THE ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENT 



449 



lish a presidential system of government, they said, 
it should not favor the incorporation of some fea- 
tures of parliamentary government, making of the govern- 
ment of the Philippines of a hybrid system. Besides, the 
provision was considered unnecessary insofar as it pro- 
vided for the appearance of department secretaries upon 
the request of the lawmaking body, for there was already 
an existing statutory law to that effect. But the main 
tai'get of attack was the portion authoidzing the depart- 
ment secretaries on their own initiative to appear before 
the lawmaking body, with tlie I’ight to be heard on any 
matter pertaining to their departments. For this portion 
of the provision. Delegate Ventura sti'essed emphatically, 
would in fact give a chance to the department secretaries 
to lobby for items in the appropriation bill or for provisions 
of other bills in which they had special interest, permitting 
them to bear influence and pressure upon Members of the 
lawmaking body, in violation of the principle of the separa- 
tion of powers underlying the Constitution. 

In defense of the provision of the di’aft, it was pointed 
out by Delegates Bueno and Aruego that, while it was true 
that there was already a law permitting department sec- 
retaries to appear before the lawmaking body upon its re- 
quest to report on matters pertaining to their departments, 
it was necessary that a provision to that effect should be 
included in the Constitution in order to prevent the raising 
of any question with respect to the constitutionality of the 
practice. They said that the provision would operate to 
make open and public the relations between the legislative 
and the executive departments, v/hich, under the presiden- 
tial system of government, had been usually carried on se- 
cretly and subterraneously — a practice that would easily 
conduce to confabulations and combinations to the detri- 
ment of public interest. Referring to the portion of the 
provision authorizing the department secretaries to appeal 
on their own initiative before the National Assembly and 
speak on a matter pertaining to their departments. Dele- 
gate Aruego s^lid that it would give the Executive depart- 



450 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



ment a grcatei* oppoi*tunity to expound publicly its position 
on a matter pertaining’ to it and ponding consideration in 
the lawmaking body. The participation of the depaitment 
secretaries in the debates of tho National Assembly would 
serve to focus public attention upon tne bills pending de- 
bate. Altogether, the information that would be furnished 
to the National Assembly and the fact that public attention 
would be drawn toward the bills pending debate would make 
for better legislation on any matter pertaining to the exe- 
cutive departments concerned. 

When put to a vote, the amendment for suppression 
was defeated. 



Proposed Council of State.-Before the regime of the 
Constitution, more specifically under the administration ot 
Governor-General Harrison and of Governor-Geneial S ini- 
son, there was created by executive order a council of state 
for the purpose of serving as a liaison between the office 
of the Governor-General and the Legislature. The counci 
of state under Governor-General Harrison was coniposed of 
the Governor-General, the presiding officers of both Houses 
of the Legislature, and the secretaries of the executive de- 
partments. The council of state was abolished by executive 
order under the administration of Governor Wood, who suc- 
ceeded Governor Harrison; but it was recreated during the 
administration of Governor Stimson. As it was recreated 
by executive order of Governor Stimson, the council of 
state was composed of the Governor-General, the piesiding 
officers of both houses, the heads of executive departments, 
and the majority floor leaders in both houses of the Legis- 
lature, Both the council of state as created by Governor 
Harrison and that as recreated by Governor Stimson were 
purely advisory bodies. They were created primarily for 
the purpose of bringing about a closer understanding and 
cooperation between the legislative branch and the Chief 
Executive. 



During the Convention days, there were attempts 
to provide specifically in the Constitution for a Council of 



THE ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENT 



451 



State. Several amendments were presented proposing its 
creation. An amendment presented by Delegate Ventura 
read : 

‘‘A council of state, to advise the President of the 
Philippines on matters of legislative and public policies, 
shall be established, composed of said President as chair- 
man, the Vice-President of the Philippines, the speaker and 
floor leaders of the National Assembly, Chief Justice of the 
Supreme Court, heads of executive departments, and the 
President of the state university as members. The func- 
tions of said council shall be purely advisory in character.^' 
An amendment presented by Delegate Ventenilla ^^ith re- 
spect to the council of state read as follows: 

“There shall be a council of state composed of the pre- 
siding officers of the National Assembly, the majority and 
minority floor leaders, and such member or members of 
the Cabinet as may be designated by the President. The 
President in council shall shape and prosecute the policies 
of the National government which shall be embodied into 
laws.'' 

Delegate Bueno’s amendment would make the council of 
state consist of the President and Vice-President of the 
Philippines, members of the cabinet, and three members of 
the National Assembly chosen by the majority partJ^ 
Delegate Dikit’s proposition regarding the council of state 
was embodied in the following amendment: 

“There is hereby established a council of state to be 
composed of the President of the Philippines as chairman, 
the Vice-President of the Philippines, the speaker of the 
National Assembly, members of the National Assembly who 
have rendered service as sucli for more than nine years, 
secretaries and ex-secretaries of departments, ex-members 
of the Supreme Court, the President of the University of 
the Philippines. The council of state should be convened 
only in cases of important national emergency and the mem- 
bers thereof shall render service without compensation." 
The amendments proposed respectively by Delegate Labra- 
dor and Delegate Rivera read as follows: 

“There shall be a Council of State which shall consist 
of the President, as Chairman, the Vice-President, the Heads 
of the Executive Departments, the Speaker of the National 
Assembly, and the leader of the majority party in the Na- 
tional Assembly. The President may, in his discretion, con- 



452 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

suit said Council of State on matters of legislation or public 
policy in order to obtain advice and guidance for his ac- 
tion; Provided, however, that the results of its deliberation 
shall not be binding either upon the President or upon the 
Legislature. The Council of State shall perform such other 
functions as the National Assembly may specifically assign 
thereto.” 

“There shall be a Council of State which shall consist 
of the President, as Chairman, the Vice-President, the Heads 
of the Executive Departments, tha Speaker, the Majority 
Floor Leader and the Minority Floor Leader of the National 
Assembly, as Members. The President shall consult the 
Council of State on matters of legislation or public policy 
in order to obtain advice and guidance for his subsequent 
action; Provided, however, That the results of its delibera- 
tion shall not be binding either upon the President or upon 
the Legislature." 

The proposition regarding the creation of a council of 
state was taken up in the Convention on December 17, 1934. 
Delegates Ventura and Bueno defended the piinciple of 
creating a council of state; while Delegates Inting and Bo- 
car spoke against the same. It was explained by the de- 
fenders of the principle that as in the past the council of 
state would serve as a useful agency foi bringing about 
understanding and cooperation between the legislative and 
executive branches of the government. The opponents to 
the amendment pointed out, however, that the creation of 
S’ council of state would only tend to make the machinery of 
the government more complicated; and that the proposed 
provision was unnecessary because after all the President 
could, under the Constitution, create a consultative body at 
any time that he pleased. While it was true that the coun- 
cil of state was useful in the past in view of the fact that 
the Filipino people had no means of control over the Chief 
Executive because he was then appointed by the President 
of the United States and was only responsible to him, it 
would no longer be necessary, they pointed out, under the 
Constitution because all the officials would then be Filipinos 
and there would be more cooperation in the government. 

When put to a vote, the proposition to create a council 
of state was defeated. 



. CHAPTER XXXI 

THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM 



Sources. — ^The provisions of the article on the judiciary 
were borrowed largely from the draft prepared by Del- 
egates Romualdez, Francisco, and Laurel, submitted to the 
Convention on January 16, 1935 as a basis for discussion 
on the judicial system. The draft was in turn inspired by 
the memorandum prepared by Delegate Laurel, entitled 
^‘Observations on the Proposed Creation of the Courts of 
Appeals,” submitted to the Convention on January 7, 1935; 
and by the report of the Convention committee on judicial 
power, headed by Delegate Francisco. 

The committee on judicial power prepared an elaborate 
report, submitted to the President of the Convention on 
September 29, 1934. The main provisions of the report 
were about the following: 

1. The or^^anization of the judicial system into one Su- 
preme Court, district courts, municipal courts, and other 
courts inferior to the Supreme Court, which might there- 
after be established by law, having the same jurisdiction 
which they possessed respectively under the then existing 
laws, with the proviso that the Legislature might increase 
or diminish the jurisdiction of any court inferior to the Su- 
preme Court. 

2. The extension of the judicial power of the Supreme 
Court and the district courts to the determination of the 
validity of any law or resolution, having regard to the pro- 
vision of the Constitution, as well as of acts or orders of 
any executive official, including the President, which would 
be in excess of authority, statutory or constitutional. 

3. The organization of the Supreme Court into two 
divisions, known as the Criminal division and the Civil 
divison, with their composition and functions. 

4. The requirement that the Supreme Court should give 
its decisions or resolutions in writing, including its findings 
of facts and the grounds for its decisions or resolutions, 
and a definition of the procedure followed therein. 



454 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



5. The qualifications for membership in the judiciary. 

6. The requirement that district judges should reside 
wdthin their respective districts. 

7. The prohibition against the transfer of district 
judges without their consent, subject to the power of the 
Supreme Court to transfer them in the interest of justice. 

8. The manner of appointing judges. 

9 Prohibition upon judges against private practice or 
accepting any other remunerative employment in or out 
of the government. 

10. Prohibition against reducing their salaries, except 

in case of a general reduction of salaries of the officials 
and employees in the government. . i-, 

11. Tenure of judges during good behavior until they 

reached the age of 70 years. 

12. The indemnilication of Filipino and American c.ti- 

eena lor damaeea whlih ••>*>' ,he 

. /.nmmitted by judicial officers in the 

judicial error or crime commiiit-u y 

exercise of their function, in accordance with law. 

13. The organization of a judicial council. 

The sub-committee of seven adopted substantially, in 
the first draft of the Constitution, the recommendations of 
the committee on judicial power, making changes required 
because of the proposed creation of courts of appeals, 
which courts were not provided for in the report of the 
committee on judicial power. 

The proposal to create courts of appeals in the first 
draft of the Constitution caused a division of opinion in the 
ranks of the Convention, so that when the Convention 
came to consider the article on judicial power of the 
first draft, it was decided to dispose first of the question 
of whether or not there should be provided courts of ap- 



peals in the Constitution. 

During the debates on the proposed courts of appeals, 
several memoranda, prepared by leading delegates, were 
distributed among the members. One of them was by Del- 
egate Laurel, opposing the proposed creation and at the 
same time containing a proposed article for the judicial 
power; another, by Delegate Dim, favoring the proposed 



THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM 



455 



creation ; and still another, by Delegate Fi^ancisco, explain- 
ing and defending the provisions of the report of the com- 
mittee on judicial power. 

Because of its influence in the framing of the final 
draft of the judiciary article of the Constitution, the pro- 
posed article for the judicial power, submitted by Delegate 
Laurel, is herewith reproduced in full. It was as follows: 

«*art. X— judicial department 

'‘SECTION 1. The judicial power shall be vested in one 
Supreme Court and in such inferior courts as now exist 
or may from time to time be established by law. 

"SEC. 2. The Supreme Court shall have such original 
jurisdiction as may be possessed and exercised by the pre^ 
sent Supreme Court of the Philippine Islands at the time 
of the adoption of this Constitution, which jurisdiction shall 
include all cases affecting ambassadors, other foreign mi- 
nisters and consuls. The Supreme Court shall also have 
jurisdiction to review, revise, reverse, modify or affirm, on 
appeal or writ of error as the law may provide, final judg- 
ments and decrees of the Courts of First Instance or other 
courts which may hereafter be established by the National 
Assembly. 

"SEC. 3. The National Assembly shall have the power 
to define, prescribe and apportion the jurisdiction of tlie 
various courts, but may not diminish the original jurisdic- 
tion now possessed by the Supreme Court or deprive the 
Supreme Court of its appellate jurisdiction over the follow- 
ing cases: 

"(a) All cases in which the constitutionality or 
validity of any treaty, law, ordinance, executive order 
or regulation, is in issue; 

"(b) All cases involving the legality of any tax, 
impost, assessment or toll, or any penalty imposed in 
relation thereto; 

"(c) All cases in which the jurisdiction of a court 
is in question; 

"(d) All criminal cases wherein the penalty im- 
posed is death, or imprisonment exceeding six years, 
or a fine exceeding four thousand pesos; 

"(e) AU civil cases in which the amount in con- 
troversy, to be ascertained by the oath of either party, 
exceeds four thousand pesos, excluding interests and 
costs ; 



456 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



“(f) All civil cases in which the subject of litiga- 
tion is not capable of pecuniary estimation; 

“(g) All civil cases in which the determination of 



the civil status of a person is involved; 

“(h) All cases concerning divorce or annulment of 
marriage and all questions arising in relation thereto; 

“(i) All cases involving the admiralty and mari- 
time jurisdiction; 

“(j) All cases concerning election protests which 
under the laws in force at the time of the adoption of 
this Constitution are appealable to the Supreme Court; 

“(k) All cases in which the Government of the 
Philippines, or a province or municipality thereof, is 
a party. 

‘‘SEC. 4. The Supreme Court shall be composed of the 
Chief Justice and such number of Associate Justices as 
may be determined by the National Assembly. They shall 
be appointed by the President, with the consent of the 
Committee on Appointments of the National Assembly. 

“SEC 5 Judges of inferior courts shall be appointed 
by the President, with the consent of the Committee on Ap- 
pointments of the National Assembly from a list of at least 
three qualified persons for each place to be filled, to be 
submitted by the Supreme Court. Provided, That 
of courts inferior to the Courts of First Instance shall be 
appointed by the President from a list submitted by the 
Judge of the respective province, approved by the Supreme 
Court. 



“SEC 6 No judge who has been appointed for a parti- 
cular district shall be transferred to another district with- 
out his consent: Provided, That, when the public interest 
requires it, upon the recommendation of the Supreme Court, 
the President may order such transfer subject to the con- 
firmation of the Committee on Appointments of the National 
Assembly. 

“SEC. 7. All judges of inferior courts shall reside with- 
in their respective districts. 

“SEC. 8. No person may be appointed member of the 
Supreme Court who is not a natural-bom citizen of the 
Philippines, forty years of age, and has not been a judge 
of a court of record for five years, or engaged in the prac- 
tice of law for ten years. The qualifications of judges of 
inferior courts shall be prescribed by law. 

“SEC.9. The members of the Supreme Court and all 
judges of inferior courts shall hold their offices during 
good behavior, until they reach the age of seventy years, 



THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM 



457 



and they shall receive a compensation to be fixed by the 
National Assembly, which shall not be diminished during 
their continuance in office. Until the National Assembly 
shall provide otherwise, the Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court shall receive sixteen thousand pesos and the Associate 
Justices fifteen thousand pesos, annually.” 

In view of the very evident inclination of a big major- 
ity of the Convention to reject the proposed courts of ap- 
peals, Delegate Romualdez, one of the members of the sub- 
committee of seven, primarily responsible for the judiciary 
article of the first draft, announced immediately before the 
voting that, owing to the decisive opposition, he was in favor 
of suppressing the proposed courts of appeals, having ar- 
rived at a point of contact with the leading opponents, part- 
icularly Delegates Laurel and Francisco, with respect to 
leaving the matter of their creation to legislative determi- 
nation. 

In view of the defeat of the courts of appeals proposi- 
tion in the first draft of the Constitution on January 14. 
1935, it was deemed necessary to make readjustments in 
the judiciary article before any further debates on the 
same. Consequently, the Convention suspended its sessions 
until January 16, 1935. 

A committee of three, composed of Delegates Romual- 
dez, Laurel, and Francisco, worked in the meantime on the 
judiciary article, submitting a di'aft to the Convention on 
January 16, 1935. This draft became the basis of discus- 
sions on the judiciary. 

The draft of the committee of three was as follows: 
“ART. X— JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

‘'SECTION 1. The judicial power shall be vested in one 
Supreme Court and in such inferior courts as now exist or 
may be established by law. 

“SEC. 2. The Supreme Court shall have such original 
and appellate jurisdiction as may be possessed and exercised 
by the Supreme Court of the Philippine Islands at the time 
of the adoption of this Constitution. The original jurisdic- 
tion of the Supreme Court shall include all cases affecting 
ambassadors, other foreign ministers and consuls. 



458 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



“SEC. 3. The National Assembly shall have the power 
to define, prescribe and apportion the jurisdiction of the 
various courts, but may not deprive the Supreme Court of 
its jurisdiction to review, revise, reverse, modify or affirm 
on appeal or writ of error, as the law or the rules of the 
court may provide, final judgments and decrees of inferior 
courts over the following cases : 

“(1) All cases in which the jurisdiction of the trial 
court is in issue; 

“(2) All cases in which the constitutionality or va- 
lidity of any treaty, law, ordinance, executive order or 
regulation, is in issue; 

*‘(3) All cases involving the legality of any tax, 
impost, assessment or toll, or any penalty imposed in 
relation thereto; 

'"(4) All cases in which an error or question of 
law is raised; 

‘^(5) All admiralty cases; and 

**(6) All criminal cases wherein the penalty im- 
posed is death or life imprisonment. 

‘'SEC 4 Until the National Assembly shall provide 
otherwise,' the Supreme Court shall be composed of a Chief 
Justice and ten Associate Justices, who may only sit either 
in banc or in two divisions. They shall be appointed by 
the President with the consent of the Committee on Appoint- 
ments of the National Assembly. 

“SEC 5 Judges of courts inferior to the Supreme 
Court shall 'be appointed by the President from a list of 
at least three qualified persons for each place to be filled, 
to be submitted by the Supreme Court after consultation 
with the bar associations of nation-wide oiganization. Pro- 
vided, That judges of courts inferior to the Courts of First 
Instance shall be appointed by the President from a list 
submitted by the Judge of the respective province, approved 
by the Supreme Court. 

“SEC. 6. No judge who has been appointed for a parti- 
cular district shall be designated or transferred to another 
district without the approval of the Supreme Court. 

“SEC. 7. All judges of inferior courts shall reside with- 
in their respective districts. 

“SEC. 8. No person shall be appointed member of the 
Supreme Court who is not a native-born citizen of the Phil- 
ippines, at least forty years of age, and has not been a 
judge of a court of record for at least five years, or engaged 
in the practice of law for at least ten years. 



THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM 



459 



"‘No person shall be appointed judge of a court inferior 
to the Supreme Court who is not a citizen of the Philippines, 
at least thirty-five years of age, and has not engaged in 
the practice of law in the Philippines for at least five years. 

“No persons shall be appointed judge of a court inferior 
to the Court of First Instance who is not a citizen of the 
Philippines, at least twenty-five years of age, and has not 
been admitted by the Supreme Court to the practice of law. 

“SEC. 9. The members of the Supreme Court and all 
judges of inferior courts shall hold their offices during good 
behavior, until they reach the age of seventy years, and 
they shall receive a compensation which shall not be dimi- 
nished during their continuance in office. Until the Na- 
tional Assembly shall pro\dde otherwise, the Chief Justice 
of the Supreme Court shall receive sixteen thousand pesos 
and the Associate Justices fifteen thousand pesos, annually, 
and the judges of inferior courts, the salary now fixed by 
law. 

“SEC. 10. The Supreme Court, in deciding the consti- 
tutionality of a law or an executive order, shall sit IN 
BANC, and the concurrence of at least two-thirds of all 
the members thereof shall be necessary for the pronounce- 
ment of a judgment declaring unconstitutional such law 
or executive order. 

“SEC. 11. The conclusions of the Supreme Court shall 
be reached in consultation before the case is assigned for 
writing the opinion. The decision shall be in writing, and 
signed by the justices concurring therein. Every point 
fairly arising upon the briefs shall be considered and de- 
cided, and the facts and the law upon which the decision 
or judgment is based shall be clearly stated. Any justice 
dissenting therefrom shall give the reasons of such dissent 
in writing over his signature. 

“SEC. 12. The Supreme Court shall have the power to 
promulgate rules, which shall be uniform for all courts of 
the same grade and which shall not diminish, increase, or 
modify the substantive rights of any litigant, concerning 
pleading, practice and procedure in all the courts, and the 
admission of lawyers to the practice of law in the Philip- 
pines. The existing laws on pleading, practice, and proce- 
dure are hereby repealed as statutes, and are constituted 
and declared, together with the existing rules of courts, 
to be operative as the rules of courts and of pleading, 
practice and procedure for all the courts of the Philippines 
from the time this Constitution takes effect, subject to the 
power of the Supreme Court to alter and modify the same. 



460 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



The provision of this section shall not be construed to de- 
prive the National Assembly of its power to repeal, alter, 
or supplement any rule of pleading:, practice and procedure, 
adopted as herein provided. 

''SEC. 13. The administration of justice is one of the 
primary functions of the State, and when it is conclusively 
shown that a person who is serving or has already served 
a sentence is innocent of the crime for which he had been 
found guilty, the State shall indemnify him for the damages 
and losses which he may have suffered by reason of the 
erroneous judgment. 

"SEC.14. Justices and judges shall be independent in 
the discharge of their functions and shall be subject only 
to law.*' 

Debates. The debates on the judiciary article of the 

Constitution, commencing' on January 9, 1935, fully occu- 
pied nine days of the Convention time, with the Assem- 
bly approving the judiciary article on second' reading on 
January 21, 1935, Like those on the bill of rights, the 
debates on the judiciary article drew many of the legal 
luminaries of the Convention. The great debates on the 
judiciary article were on the proposed courts of appeals, 
the manner of appointing judges of the inferior courts, the 
lule-making power of the Supreme Court, the proposed ju- 
dicial council, the provision requiring actual residence of 
judges of inferior courts in their respective districts, the 
PJ’oposal to limit to native-born Filipino citizens appoint- 
uients to the Supreme Court, and the proposed indemnifi- 
cation for damages of parties who might suffer by reason 
of a judicial error or crime committed by judicial officers 
lu the exercise of their function. 



CHAPTER XXXII 



THE ORGANIZATION OF THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM 

The Draft of the Convention Committee on Judicial 
Power. — In its report to the President of the Convention, 
the Convention committee on judicial power recommended: 

“The judicial power shall be vested in one Su- 
preme Court, in District Courts, in 'Municipal Courts, and 
in such other courts inferior to the Supreme Court which 
may hereafter be established by law. 

“Where the public interests so require, the National 
Assembly may abolish the Municipal Courts and confer their 
jurisdiction to the District Courts or establish in lieu of 
the Municipal Courts such Courts or system of Courts which 
shall exercise the jurisdiction that this Constitution hereby 
confers upon the Municipal Courts.^ 

In accordance with the report, the committee proposef], 
as constitutional courts, the Supreme Court and District 
Courts, giving the National Assembly the power to abolish 
the municipal courts and to create, if it so desired, other 
courts inferior to the Supreme Court. The portion of the 
report giving to the National Assembly the power to estab- 
lish other courts inferior to the Supreme Court was in- 
tended, among others, to make possible the establishment 
of courts of appeals when, in the judgment of the said As- 
sembly, such establishment would become an imperative 
necessity. 

The Draft of the Sub-Committee of Seven.— Although 
it adopted substantially a great portion of the report of 
the committee on judicial power, the sub-committee of 
seven recommended the establishment, as constitutional 
courts, of the Supreme Court, two Courts of Appeals, the 
Courts of first instance, the justice of the peace courts 
and municipal courts, leaving to legislative discretion the 
establishment of other inferior coimts. The first draft of 
the Constitution, prepared by the sub-committee of seven, 
provided on this matter: 



462 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

“The Judicial power shall be vested in one Supreme 
Court, two Courts of Appeals, and in such inferior courts 
as now exist or may from time to time be established by 
law. When the public interest requires it, upon the re- 
commendation of the Supreme Court, the National Assembly 
may divide the Philippines into three appellate districts and 
establish one Court of Appeals for each district.^' 

The Proposed Courts of Appeals. — The proposal in the 
first draft of the Constitution to create courts of appeals 
met with strenuous opposition on the part of many mem- 
bers of the Convention, including those of the committee 
on judicial power. From the time of the release of the 
first draft, there was gradually built up an opposition to 
the creation of courts of appeals. By the time the Conven- 
tion came to consider the judiciary article of the draft on 
Januaiy 9, 1935, the opposition was so pronounced and so 
vehement that it was decided by the Convention leaders to 
have, as the first question on the judiciary ax’ticle, thar 
of W’hether or not there should be created courts of ap- 
peals in the Constitution. 

Under the leadership of Delegates Romualdez and 
Francisco for the proponents and opponents respectively, 
the debates on the courts of appeals commenced on Jan- 
^3,iy 9, 1935, continuing on the lOy 11, and 14, with the 
voting taking place on January 14, 1935. The proposition 
v^ns defended by Delegates Romualdez, Ventura, Lim, Mon- 
cado, and Labrador; and opposed by Delegates Laurel, Vi- 
cente Nepomuceno, Albero, Perfecto, Araneta, and Fran- 
cisco. 

It was contended by the proponents that the creation 
of courts of appeals would make possible the development 
of the Supreme Court into a real court of cassation, con- 
cerned only with laying down legal doctrines ; that it would 
help greatly in the speedy administration of justice; and 
that it would insure a more thorough consideration of cases 
by the higher courts of the land. The proponents special- 
ly stressed the first reason, contending that, under the 
existing system, with the great number of cases brought 
to the Supreme Court from year to year, it would be prac- 



THE ORGANIZATION OF THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM 463 



tically impossible for the justices to have enough time even 
for the thorough study of cases bi’ought before them. It 
was repeatedly emphasized by them that, with the crea- 
tion of courts of appeals, the Supreme Court would develop 
into a court of cassation, similar to the supreme courts 
of the United States, Spain, and other countries of Europe. 

The opponents stressed the fact, however, that as the 
provisions of the draft creating the courts of appeals were, 
the Supreme Court would not develop into a real court of 
cassation, limiting itself to the detei*mination of questions 
of law; that the creation of the courts would make litiga- 
tion more costly both for the government and for the pai't- 
ies concerned; that it would not be so easy to draw a line 
between questions of facts and questions of law; and that 
it should be better to leave the matter of their creation to 
legislative determination. The most pei'suasive argument 
against the creation of the coui'ts of appeals was that 
stressed very ably by Delegate Laurel to the effect that the 
matter should be left for the National Assembly to deter- 
mine so that it could consider more thoroughly all the ques- 
tions connected with them, and so that, if found to be fail- 
ures, the courts of appeals created by it could be easily abo- 
lished without the necessity of a constitutional amendment 
to that effect. In fact, the leaving of the matter to legisla- 
tive detei’mination was the point of contact between Del- 
egate Romualdez and Delegates Francisco and Laurel, as 
explained by Delegate Romualdez on the eve of the voting 
on the courts of appeals proposition. Delegate Romualdez 
added that for that reason he was also in favor of suppress- 
ing the courts of appeals proposed in the first draft of the 
Constitution. 

When put to a vote, the proposition to create the courts 
of appeals was defeated overwhelmingly by 126 negative 
votes against 21 affirmative votes. 

The Draft of the Committee of Three — Following the 
defeat of the proposition to create courts of appeals. Del- 
egates Romualdez, Laurel, and Francisco, as it has already 
been stated in the preceding pages, undertook the pre- 



464 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



paration of a revised judiciary article. With respect to the 
organization of the judicial system, this revised draft pro- 
vided : 



“The judicial power shall be vested in one Supreme 
Court and in such inferior courts as now exist or may be 
established by law.” 

Under this provision which was copied from the Lau- 
rel draft, it was proposed to make, as constitutional courts, 
a Supreme Court and the other courts then existing— courts 
of first instance, municipal courts, and justice of the peace 
courts — leaving for national legislation the creation of 
other courts. 



During the consideration of the provision by the Con- 
vention, Delegate Grafilo presented an amendment for the 
suppression of the phrase, as now exist, which amendment 
in effect would mean the establishment of only one consti- 
tutional court — the Supreme Court. After the explanation 
by Delegate Laurel of the fact that it was the idea of the 
committee of three to create only one constitutional court 

the Supreme Court leaving the creation of all other 

courts to national legislation, the amendment was approved 
unanimously by the Convention. 

The Draft of the Article as Approved by the Conven- 
tion. — As it was approved by the Convention on January 

16, 1935, the article as amended by Delegate Grafilo 
read : 



“The judicial power shall be vested in one Supreme 
Court and in such inferior courts as may be established 
by law.” 

The Composition of the Courts — The creation and the 
internal organization of the courts inferior to the Supreme 
Court were left by the Convention to be determined by 
statutory legislation. 

With respect to the Supreme Court, it was intended 
by the Convention that its functional divisions and the num- 
ber of justices should be left to legislative determination, 
although it was provided in the Constitution that the Su- 



THE ORGANIZATION OF THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM 465 



preme Court, to begin with, should be composed of a Cliief 
Justice and ten Associate Justices and might sit either in 
hanc or in two divisions. 

The idea of leaving to the lawTiiaking body the deter- 
mination of the number of justices of the Supreme Court 
pervaded the written records of the Convention. 

The committee on judicial power, in section 4 of its 
report, provided: 

'‘Until other\visc provided for by law, the Supreme 
Court shall be composed of a Chief Justice and twelve As- 
sociate Justices and shall sit in two divisions of six justices 
each, which shall be known as the Criminal Division and 
the Civil Division.*' 

The draft on the judiciary article prepared by Delegate 
Laurel would go a little bit further by not mentioning at 
all in the Constitution the number of justices of the Su- 
preme Court. The corresponding section of the draft read: 

“The Supreme Court shall be composed of the Chief 
Justice and such number of Associate Justices as may be 
determined by the National Assembly.” 

Reasoning out this section. Delegate Laurel in his me- 
morandum said: 

“Following the American model, the number of justices 
of the Supreme Court is not fixed in this draft for the 
reason that the membership and organization of said 
Courts are deemed to be proper subjects of ordinary legis- 
lation. The danger of legislating members of the Supreme 
Court out of office, which is perhaps the main reason for 
fixing the number of justices in the draft submitted by the 
Committee {of Seven) ^ is eliminated by the provision that 
the justices of the Supreme Court shall hold their offices 
during good behavior and that their compensation shall not 
be diminished during their continuance in office.” 

With respect* to this point, the draft prepared by the 
members of the committee of three, namely. Delegates Ro- 
mualdez. Laurel, and Francisco, provided: 

“Until the National Assembly shall provide otherwise, 
the Supreme Court shall be composed of a Chief Justice 
and ten Associate Justices, who may only sit either in banc 
or in two divisions.” 



466 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

fn his prefatory remarks explaining generally the provi- 
sions of the draft prepared by the committee, Delegate 
Francisco said with respect to the matter: 

“Sec. 4 refers to the constitution and organization of 
the Supreme Court. We are maintaining the actual num- 
ber of justices; but at the same time we are leaving to 
the National Assembly the authority to modify the number 
of members of the Supreme Court.” 

It v/as with this meaning that the Convention approved 
on January 16, 1934 the article of the draft of the com- 
mittee of three, referring to the organization of the Su- 
preme Court. 

The special committee on style revised slightly the 
form of the article to make it read: 

"Until the National Assembly shall provide otherwise, 
the Supreme Court shall be composed of a Chief Justice 
and ten Associate Justices and may sit either in banc or 
in two divisions.” 

The report of the spedal committee on style on this 
portion of the Constitution was taken up by the Conven- 
tion on February 8, 1935. 

In behalf of the special committee on style. Delegate 
Francisco suggested during the consideration of the sec- 
tion a further change in form, without affecting the sub- 
stance, by placing substantially the phrase, “Until the Na- 
tional Assembly shall iprovide otherwise,” at the end of the 
paragraph. The suggested change was approved by the 
Convention. The article as approved then read: 

"The Supreme Court shall be composed of a Chief 
Justice and ten Associate Justices and may sit either 

m banc or in two divisions, unless otherwise provided by 
law,** 

A few minutes after the approval of this section, the 
following interpellations took place: 

“Delegate Quirino. — It seems that we have approved 
section 4 in the following form: 'The Supreme Court shall 

be composed of a Chief Justice and ten Associate Justices 
and may sit either in banc or in two divisions, unless other- 



THE ORGANIZATION OF THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM 467 



wise provided by law. Does the last phrase, unless other- 
wise provided by law, refer to the expression, m banc, and 
also to the composition of the Supreme Court?** 

Delegate Drayicisco . — It refers exclusively to the com- 
position of the Supreme Court, to a Chief Justice and mem- 
bers of the same court.*’ 

**Dclcgatc Quirino . — So that when the National Assembly 
believ-es it convenient, it can reduce or increase the number 
of the members of the Supreme Court ” 

^'Delegate Francisco. — Yes.” 

In view of the explanation by Delegate Francisco that 
the phrase, unless otheinvise provided by lettv, referred ex- 
clusively to the number of justices and not to its functional 
divisions, Delegate Grafilo presented another amendment 
placing the phrase, unless othemvise provided by lotv, after 
the word, justice, making the provision I'ead: 

“The Supreme Court shall be composed of a 
Chief Justice and ten Associate Justices unless otherwise 
provided by law, and may sit either in banc or in two divi- 
sions.*' 

The Grafilo amendment was approved by the Convention. 

In the afternoon session of the same day, Delegate 
Francisco came back again with another suggested change, 
that of making the phrase, unless otherwise provided by 
law, refer both to the number of justices and to the sitting 
by the Court either in banc or in two divisions. The per- 
tinent portions of the records read: 

*lDelegate Francisco. — Mr. President, in relation to ar- 
ticle 4, title 8, about the judicial department, it is suggested 
that the words, Unless othcrivise provided by law, which 
were proposed this morning to be inserted after the word 
“justice” be placed at the end of the paragraph, that is to 
say, after the word “division**; so that all that is to be done 
is a transposition of said terms or words in such a way 
that article 4 would read in the following manner: 

‘The Supreme Couif shall be composed of a Chief 
Justice and ten Associate Justices, and may sit either 
in banc or in two divisions, unless otherivise provided 
by laav* 

**Delegate Quirino . — So that the authorization which 
is given to the National Assembly to change, if it wishes, 

. the composition of the Supreme Court, applies also to its 



468 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



sitting in banc or in two divisions? Will both things be 
included in that authorization? 

** Delegate Francisco, — Yes, sir. 

**The President.— Is there any objection to the proposi- 
tion indicated by Delegate Francisco? (Silence). The table 
hears none. Approved.*' 

As it was thus finally approved, the section read: 

“The Supreme Court shall be composed of a Chief Jus- 
tice and ten Associate Justices, and may sit either in banc 
or in two divisions, unless otherwise provided by law." 

The phrase, unless otherwise provided by laiv, was 
thus intended by the Convention to apply both to the num- 
ber of justices and to the functional divisions of the Court. 



CHAPTER XXXIII 

TI-IE SELECTION, QUALIFICATIONS, TENURE, AND 
COMPENSATION FOR'THE JUDICIARY 

The Selection of Judges 

Constitutional Provision — ^The Philippine Constitution 
provides : 

“Tlie members of the Supreme Court and all judges 
o inferior courts shall be appointed by the President with 

e consent of the Conunission on Appointments of the Na- 
tional Assembly.” 

Sources. Under the Jones Law, the Justices of the 
Supreme Court of the Philippines were appointed by the 
resident of the United States with the advice and con- 
sent of the United States Senate. The judges of inferior 
courts were appointed by the Governor-General with the 
advice and consent of the Philippine Senate. 

The committee on judicial power reported in favor of 
a departuij from the practice under the Jones Law for the 
purpose of securing more capable men for the judiciary. 
The provisions of the committee report on the matter were 
as follows: 

“The members of the Supreme Court shall be appointed 
y the President of the Philippine Islands with the advice 
and consent of the National Assembly; but the vacancies 
which may occur in the said Court shall be filled by ap- 
pointment made by the Px'esident, in favor of the qualified 
person whom the former shall choose from a list submitted 
to him by the Supreme Court, which shall contain the names 
of at least three candidates for every vacancy to be filled. 

‘‘Judges of District Courts and Judges-at-large shall be 
appointed by the President from a list of qualified candi- 
dates proposed and recommended by the Supreme Court. 
For each post to be filled there shall be in the list at 
least three candidates to be indiscriminately selected from 
lawyers in active private practice and from those in the 
government service. 

“Judges of the Municipal and Circuit Courts shall be 
appointed by the President from a list, approved by the 



470 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



Supreme Court, which shall be submitted by the Judge of 
the district of the respective province. 

“In the preparation of the list of candidates provided 
for in this article, the bar should be consulted. 

Influenced lai’gely by the report of the committee on 
judicial power, the sub-committee of seven recommended 
in the first draft of the Constitution the incorporation of 
the following provisions: 

“The Chief Justice and the Associate Justices of the 
Supreme Court shall be appointed by the President, with 
the consent of the Permanent Commission of the National 

Assembly. . , , „ , 

“The members of the Courts of Appeals shall be ap- 
pointed by the President, with the consent of the Perma- 
nent Commission from a list of at least three <^a i le j^r- 
sons for each place lo be filled, to be submitted y le u 

preme Court. . ^ j • xu 

“Judges of inferior courts shall be appointed in the 

same manner as members of the Courts of Appea s . 
vided, That judges of courts inferior to the Courts of First 
Instance shall be appointed by the President from a list 
submitted by the Judge of the Court of First Instance of 
the respective province, approved by the Supreme Court.' 

As it has already been said in preceding pages, as a 
result of the debates in the Convention, it was decided not 
to create the courts of appeals recommended in the first 
draft of the Constitution. With the defeat of the courts 
of appeals proposition, there was created a committee of 
three to rewrite the draft on the judiciary. 

With respect to the selection of judges, the report 
of the committee of three provided: 

^*They {Justices of the SupTcme Court) shall be^ ap* 
pointed by the President with the consent of the Committee 
on Appointments of the National Assembly. 

‘‘Judges of courts inferior to the Supreme Court shall 
be appointed by the President from a list of at least three 
<iualified persons for each place to be filled, to be sub- 
mitted by the Supreme Court after consultation with the 
bar associations of nation-wide organization. Provided, That 
judges of courts inferior to the Courts of First Instance 
shall be appointed by the President from a list submitted 
by the Judge of the respective province, approved by the 
Supreme Court." 



THE SELECTION AND QUALIFICATIONS OF JUDGES 471 



Debates. — ^There was a unanimous opinion in the Con- 
vention in favor of the selection of members of the judi- 
ciary through a system of appointment as it was the case 
in the Philippines before the regime of the Philippine Con- 
stitution. The delegates felt that the system of appoint- 
ment by the Executive, rather than a system of election 
either by the lawmaking body or by the people, was the 
best method for constituting the judiciary. This system, 
so the Convention believed, would prevent the dragging of 
the judiciary into the quagmire of politics, resulting into 
the undermining of the respect of the people for the courts 
and the injection into the administration of justice of cer- 
tain undesirable influences which must be avoided. The 
appointment of members of the judiciary by the Chief Exe- 
cutive would mean unity of I’esponsibility, as a consequence 
of which, it was believed, the Chief Executive would be 
very careful in his selection. To temper down whatever' 
passion there would be in him to determine his nominees 
by political considerations, there was a general feeling that 
there should be some body to check him up on the matter. 

While the Convention was generally agreed on the ap- 
pointment of Justices of the Supreme Court by the Pi'es- 
ident with the consent of the Commission on Appointments, 
there were differences of opinion with respect to the check- 
ing body in the appointment of members of the courts in- 
ferior to the Supreme Court. 

There were at least four plans presented in the Con- 
vention with respect to the selection of the judges of in- 
ferior courts: — namely, the plan of the judicial committee 
of three, substantially incorporating the recommendations 
of the committee on judicial power; the plan of the sub- 
committee of seven in the first draft of the Constitution; 
the Cuenco plan; and the Grageda plan. 

The pi’inciple of having the judges of courts inferior 
to the Supreme Court appointed by the Pi*esident upon the 
recommendation or approval of the Supreme Court with- 
out the intervention of the lawmaking body or any group 
thereof was most ably defended by Delegate FYancisco in 




472 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



a memorandum in defense of the report of the committee 
on judicial power of which he was chairman. He pointed 
out in his memorandum in defense of the principle 
of the committee report and against the proposition in the 
first draft of the Constitution for the appointment of these 
judges by the President with the consent of the Permanent 
Commission of the National Assembly from a list submit- 
ted by the Supreme Court, that the principle of the com- 
mittee repoi-t would insui'e the appointment of meritorious 
men and a just and impartial administration of justice 
and would guarantee the freedom of the judiciary fi’om po- 
litics. 

The Supreme Court, he said, was the most competent 
body to consider the qualifications of a candidate. Being re- 
sponsible for the administration of justice in the Islands, it 
was but natural, he added, that the Court should feel this 
responsibility in the selection of those who would help it 
in the exercise of the judicial power, a responsibility which 
the National Assembly did not have and therefore could 
not feel. 

What would be the effect of the intervention of the 
National Assembly through one of its committees in the 
appointment, as proposed in the first draft of the Consti- 
tution? Delegate Francisco answei'ed: 

the National Assembly were to be given the power 
to confirm appointments of judges, it might, in the last 
analysis, control and even destroy the exercise of sound 
discretion by, and liberty of action of, the President on the 
matter; it might also force the Supreme Court, in the selec- 
tion of judges, to consider the recommendation of the leaders 
or prominent members of the National Assembly who may 
recommend privately their own candidates. And because 
there could be no appointment of judges without the con- 
firmation of the National Assembly, under the plan of the 
sub-committee, the Assembly may reject all the appoint- 
ments submitted by the President which have been based 
upon the recommendation of the Supreme Court, until the 
President and the Supreme Court agree to submit the names 
of candidates preferred by the National Assembly. The 
dilemma which the National Assembly can give may thus 



THE SELECTION AND QUALIFICATIONS OF JUDGES 473 



be as follows: 'Give us the men we want or there will be 

no jude^cs/ And if the Supreme Court and the President of 
the Commonwealth choose not to cater to the caprices of 
the National Assembly, the judicial machinery would be at 
a standstill. 

“Furthermore, if it occurs that the President of the 
Commonwealth does not belong to the party to which the 
majority in the Assembly belong, may it not happen that 
the latter will be blocking all the appointments of judges 
nnd justices made by the President, leaving the country 
without the judges it needs, until the political differences 
are settled?*' 

♦ ♦ ♦ # ♦ 

It is undeniable that the political affiliation of the can- 
didate and not his personal merits or the interests of the 
public will be one of the decisive factors whicli will greatly 
influence the National Assembly in the exercise of its powers 
of confirmation. Thus, a judge who belongs to tlie minority 
party or who has rendered decisions in cases concerning 
appointments of election inspectors, election protests, or 
other cases of a political character which were not to the 
^^^^^^^otion of the party in power, may well not hope for 
the confirmation of his appointment in case he is appointed 
to the Supreme Court or to the Court of First Instance of 
iVianila, the courts which all judges prefer. 

‘‘It has been said that tliere are very few politicians 
who do not feel the urge of increasing their power, who do 
not succumb to the temptation of using their influence over 
their companions in the Legislature to secure the appoint- 
ment of persons who are disposed to favor them in their 
personal ambition or to block the appointment of those who 
have displeased them. Is it possible to prevent this from 
occurring with some influential members of our National 
Assembly? Is it not possible that some of the prominent 
members of the said Assembly may oppose the confirmation 
of the appointment of a judge and ask that their charges 
be investigated, for the sole purpose of making the nominee 
approach them and promise personal loyalty ?'’ 

In answer to the argument that appointments of 
judges under the Jones Law were confirmed by the Senate, 
Delegate Francisco pointed out that there could be no 
better plan for the Filipinos at the time of the Jones Law 
because the intervention of the Senate was a means through 
which the Filipino people could control the acts of the 



474 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

Governor-General, who was appointed by the President of 
the United States. But there would be no more necessity 
for such an intervention by the representatives of the peo- 
ple in view of the fact that the President of the Philippines 
would be elected by the people, so that the latter could then 
have a hand in the appointment of judges through the 
President of the Commonwealth. With respect to the ar- 
gument that in the United States the appointment of judges 
was subject to the confirmation of the Senate, he said that 
the main reason was to have a check against appointments 
founded not on the merits of the nominees but on other 
considerations. But that could be secured under the plan 
of the committee on judicial power through the interven- 
tion of the Supreme Coui% which would be in a better po- 
sition to pass upon the qualifications of candidates for the 
judiciary. 

The same principle was defended on the floor of the 
Convention on January 16 and 21 , 1935 by Delegates 
Orense, Perfecto, Vicente Lopez, Lim, Santos, and Go- 
dofredo Reyes in the debates on the report of the 
judiciary committee of three and on the Cuenco amend- 
ment for the appointment of all judges of inferior courts 
by the President with the confirmation of the Commis- 
sion on Appointments. It was stressed by them that the 
system proposed in the Cuenco amendment would destroy 
the independence of the judiciary. To require the ap- 
pointment of judges to be confirmed by the lawmaking 
body or a group thereof, they stated, would be in effect to 
give it a hand in determining who the judges should be. 
Because of their past compromises and because of their 
desire to maintain themselves in power, the legislators would 
find themselves obliged to I’ecommend men for appoint- 
ment not exclusively on the basis of their merits for the 
bench, as it should be the case. And in return for the 
favor thus received, it would not be unusual if these men, 
when already appointed to the bench, would be influenced 
in the determination of their decisions by a feeling of 
gratitude to the legislators to whom they owed their ap- 



THE SELECTION AND QUALIFICATIONS OF JUDGES 475 

pointment rather tlian by the merits of the case. That 
would not be the case, they said, when the appointment 
would be by the President upon the I'ecommendation of 
the Supreme Court, as proposed in the report; for, being 
at the head of the judicial system of the country, the mem- 
bers of the Supreme Court would naturally be intex*ested 
in seeing to it that those who would help them in the ad- 
ministi'ation of justice were men highly qualified both by 
training and by their morals. And in answer to the ques- 
tion regarding the reason for making the appointment of 
Justices of the Supreme Court subject to the confii'mation 
of the Commission on Appointments, they said that the 
main reason was the fact that, once appointed to the Su- 
preme Coin-t, with a guarantee for tenure during good be- 
havior until they reached the age of seventy years or until 
they became incapacitated to discharge the duties of their 
office, there was no more i-eason for them to fear the poli- 
ticians. 

When it was submitted to a vote in the Santos-Lopez 
amendment, the principle of the committee of three report 
was defeated by the Convention. 

Likewise was defeated without debate the Gx'ageda 
amendment for the appointment of judges by the Pres- 
ident without the confirmation of any other agency of the 
government. 

The Cuenco amendment, as it has already been said, 
was to the effect that judges should be appointed by the 
President with the confirmation of the Commission on Ap- 
pointments. It was defended on the floor of the Conven- 
tion by Delegates Cuaderno, Buslon, Briones, Roxas, and 
Cuenco. It was pointed out that the plan of subjecting the 
appointments of the President to the confirmation of the 
Commission on Appointments would compel the Pi'esident 
to make a judicious selection of his nominees, proposing the 
names only of those who, by their qualifications, could stand 
the test of a rigid searching investigation and criticism by 
the representatives of the people. Moreover, in the words 
of Delegate Cuenco, main proponent of the amendment: 



476 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

the other hand, Mr. President, if he who is going 
to be appointed judge has to be necessarily taken from the 
list furnished by the Supreme Court, then it is not the head 
of the executive power but the Supreme Court who appoints. 
And in this case, supposing that the Supreme Court is ar- 
bitrary and partial and proposes men who ought not to be 
appointed judges, either the head of the executive depart- 
ment would see himself necessarily obliged to accept those 
men or there would be no judges; and in that case, it could 
happen that in a district there would be no judge called 
upon to discharge the duty. If the head of the executive 
power abuses his power in the appointment of judges, that 
chief of the executive power stays only for six years, and, 
moreover, he will be within the reach of the rnalditions and 
anathema of the electorate and of public opinion. But if 
the Supreme Court errs or abuses the power which the draft 
gives to it, what remedy is left to us for correcting whatever 
abuse or error is committed by the Supreme Court, with 
the judges occupying their office throughout their life or at 
least until they have completed 70 years of age? 
Primarily because of the foregoing reasons and be- 
cause of the influence of the political tradition of the people 
to the effect that the appointment of judges was subject 
to the confirmation of the lawmaking body, the Convention 
approved the Cuenco amendment when it was submitted to 
a vote on January 19, 1935. 

Draft as Finally Approved by the Convention.— As it 
was revised by the special committee on style and as it was 
finally approved by the Convention, the provision on the 
appointment of members of the judiciary read as follows! 

‘'The members of the Supreme Court and all judges of 
inferior courts shall be appointed by the President with the 
consent of the Commission cn Appointments of the National 
Assembly.” 

Qualifications for the Judiciary 
Constitutional Provisions. — Regarding the qualifica- 
tions for the judiciary, the Philippine Constitution pro- 
vides : 

“No person may be appointed member of the Supreme 
Court unless he has been five years a citizen of the Philip- 
pines, is at least forty years of age, and has for ten years 



THE SELECTION AND QUALIFICATIONS OF JUDGES 477 

or more been a judge of a court of record or engaged in the 
practice of law in the Philippines.” 

“The National Assembly shall prescribe the qualifica- 
tions of judg:cs of inferior courts, but no person may be 
appointed judge of any such courts unless he is a citizen 
of the l^hilippines and has been admitted to the practice of 
law in the Philippines.” 

Sources. — Under the Jones Law, the qualifications for 
the judiciary were left to legislative determination. The 
following were the statutory provisions on the matter at 
the time of the drafting of the Philippine Constitution: 

“To be eligible to the office of judge of tlie Supreme 
Court, a person must (a) be more than thirty years of age, 
(b) be a citizen of the United States or of the Philippine 
Islands, (c) have practiced law, or have been a judge of a 
court of record in the United States or the Philippine Is- 
lands or in Spain, or, previous to the ratification of the 
Treaty of Paris, in any Spanish territory, for a period of 
five years, or must for a like period have filled any office 
which requires a legal degree as an indispensable qualifica- 
tion in the Philippine Islands or, previous to the date of the 
ratification of the Treaty of Paris, in any Spanish territory. 

<¥ j|t ♦ ♦ ♦ 

“No person shall be appointed judge of first instance 
or auxiliary judge unless he has practiced law in the Philip- 
pine Islands or in the United States for a period of not less 
than five years or has held during a like period, within the 
Philippine Islands or wthin the United States, an office 
requiring a lawyer^s diploma as an indispensable requisite; 
and before assuming such judicial office he shall qualify as 
a member of the bar of the Supreme Court of the Philippine 
Islands if he has not already done so.” 

m >Jc ♦ ♦ * * 

“No person shall be eligible to appointment as justice 
of the peace or auxiliary justice of the peace unless he shall 
be (1) at least twenty-three years of age; (2) citizen of the 
Philippines or of the United States; (3) of good moral char- 
acter and not convicted of any felony; and (4) admitted by 
thd Supreme Court to practice law, if there be any available; 
if not, he shall be a person who has at least finished the 
courses of legal study in a recognized school, or shall have 
passed the civil service examination for clerk of court, or 
an examination to be held in each province before a board 
composed of the judge of the Court of First Instance^ the 
provincial fiscal, and a practising lawyer appointed by the 



478 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

judge, under rules and regulations to be prescribed by the 
Secretary of Justice. • * • 

“No person shall be appointed judge of the Municipal 
Court of the City of Manila and of the provincial capitals 
unless he shall have practiced law in the Philippine Islands 
for a period of four years or being a qualified la\\'yer shall 
during a like period have held in the Philippine Islands the 
position of clerk or deputy clerk of a court of first instance, 
or any office for which a lawyer’s diploma is an indispensa- 
ble requisite, and no person shall be appointed justice of 
the peace of any first-class municipality unless he has been 
admitted to the bar by the Supreme Court of the Philip- 
pine Islands.” 

The Convention committee on judicial power recom- 
mended the following provisions for the qualifications of 
members of the judiciary: 

“To be eligible to the office of Justice of the Supreme 
Court, a person must be a citizen of the Philippine Islands 
by birth, at least forty years of age, of good moral character, 
and have engaged in the practice of law for a period of at 
least ten years or have been a judge of a court of record for 
a period of at least five years, in the Philippine Islands. 

“No person shall ba appointed Judge of a District Court 
or Judge-at-large, who is not at least thirty-five years of 
age, a citizen of the Philippine Islands by birth, of good 
moral character, and has not engaged in the practice of law 
in the Philippine Islands for a period of at least five years. 

“No person shall be appointed judge of a municipal or 
circuit court who is not a citizen of the Philippine Islands 
by birth, of at least twenty-five years of age, of good moral 
character, and has not been admitted by the Supreme Court 
to the practice of law/' 

In the first draft of the Constitution, the sub-commit- 
tee of seven embodied substantially the recommendation of 
the committee for the Supreme Court, but it proposed that 
the qualifications for judges of inferior courts should be 
prescribed by law. The corresponding provision of the first 
draft read: 

“No person may be appointed member of the Supreme 
Court or of the Courts of Appeals who is not a natural- 
bom citizen of the Philippines, forty years of age, and has 
not been a judge of a court of record for five years, or en- 
gaged in the practice of law for ten years. The qualifica- 



THE SELECTION AND QUALIFICATIONS OF JUDGES 479 



tions of judges of inferior courts shall be pirescribed by 
law." 

The members of the committee on judicial power were 
opposed to the idea of leaving to legislative detennination 
the qualifications of judges of inferior courts. Defending 
the report of the committee on judicial power on the matter, 
the chairman of the committee, Delegate Francisco, in his 
memorandum said in part: 

"The qualifications of a judge of court of first instance 
and of the justice of the peace have not also been embodied 
in the draft prepared by the sub-committee of seven. We 
insist that the qualifications of these officials should be spe- 
cified in the Constitution, otherwise, if they are left to the 
legislature for determination, there would be the danger of 
making the qualification of said judges subject to the whims 
and caprice of politics. It might happen that if a candidate 
does not possess the qualifications prescribed by law but who 
counts on the support of the leadei*s of the legislature, the 
law on the subject of qualifications of judges will be amended 
just to bring about the successful appointment of said can- 
didate. Moreover, if the qualifications of an elector are not 
entrusted to the legislature, but are fixed in the Constitution, 
as also are the qualifications of the members of the Na- 
tional Assembly, we cannot understand why the qualifica- 
tions of those persons who are to administer justice should 
be left in the hands of the members of the National Assem- 
bly and not be defined by this Convention, since the judicial 
power is one of the three coordinate powers of the state in 
the system of check and balance, having its own purpose, to 
wit, to act as the guardian of the popular vdll as expressed 
in the Constitution." 

Through the influence of Delegate Francisco, the re- 
commendations of the Convention committee on judicial 
power were substantially included in the i*eport of the ju- 
diciary committee of three of which he was a member. The 
only amendments inti'oduced by the committee of three 
were the elimination of the good moral character require- 
ment and the substitution of the requirement of being 
native-born for that of merely being a citizen of the Phil- 
ippines by birth. 

Debates. — ^The Convention debated on the qualifications 
for membership in the judiciary on January 18, 1935. 



480 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

Delegate Abordo and several others proposed an 
amendment to the committee report to the effect that the 
requirement of being native-born should be suppressed in 
order that any citizen of the Philippines, otherwise quali- 
fied, would be eligible for appointment to the Supreme 
Court. In other words, they were for the restoration of 
the report of the committee on judicial power on the 
matter. 

In defense of the provision of the report of the ju- 
diciary committee of three. Delegates Locsin and Lim said 
that such a qualification would secure the appointment of 
men who could hand down decisions in accordance with 
the traditions and civilization of the counti-y and interpret 
the provisions of the Constitution according to the usages 
and idiosyncracies of the people. The Abordo amendment 
was defended by Delegates Abordo, Buslon, Briones, Lo- 
pez, E., and Orense, who said that, in fairness to them, 
the naturalized citizens of the country should be permitted 
to enjoy the privilege to become members of the highest 
court of the land. It was necessary, they said, that, owing 
to the small population of the Philippines every encourage- 
ment should be given to attract outsiders to amalga- 
mate themselves with the Filipino people, including the 
extension of the privilege to aspire for the highest posi- 
tions in the land. If the fear of appointing them to offices 
was due to the possibility that they might be disloyal to the 
country, what should be done, they added, was to make 
rigid our naturalization laws; but, once they were admit- 
ted, they should be entitled to all privileges of native-boni 
citizens. 

When submitted to a vote on January 18, 1935, the 
Abordo amendment was carried by 84 affirmative votes 
against 31 negative votes. 

An amendment presented by Delegate Gullas provid- 
ing that the practice of law for at least 10 years must be 
in the Philippines was readily approved by the Con- 
vention. 



THE SELECTION AND QUALIFICATIONS OF JUDGES 481 



In view of the previous agreement to establish only 
one constitutional court, namely, the Supreme Court, the 
Convention approved without debate the amendment pre- 
sented by Delegate Grafilo, accepted by the committee of 
three, for the suppression of the provisions of the draft of 
the committee of three regarding the qualifications of the 
judges of courts inferior to tha Supreme Court and for 
leaving them to be determined by legislation. 

Primarily for the purpose of improving the adminis- 
tration of justice by the justice of the peace courts of the 
Philippines, Delegates Gullas and Grafilo presented an 
amendment for the incorporation in the judicial article of 
the following provision: 

“The National Assembly shall prescribe the qualifica- 
tions of judges of courts infei'ior to the Supreme Court, u 
no person shall be appointed a judge of any inferior 
who has not been admitted by the Supreme Court to e 
practice of law.” 

Delegates Cuenco, Buslon, Inting, Guzman, Mumar, and 
Toribio Perez, by way of amendment, proposed that those 
persons, not lawyers, who had already been serving as 
justices of the peace at the time of the adoption of the 
Constitution, could be reappointed. In defense ot tne 
amendment, it was said that in justice to the many jus ices 
of the peace of the Philippines who, although they weie no 
lawyers, had been performing their functions meritoriously, 
the President should be permitted to reappoint t ^ 
wished to. When put to a vote, the Cuenco ameMment 
was, however, defeated. After the defeat of the Cuenco 
amendment, the Gullas-Grafilo amendment was submitted 
to a vote. It was approved readily by the Convention. 

The Draft of the Special Committee on Style on the 
Qualifications for the Judiciary — As they were revised by 
the special committee on style and as they were finally ap- 
proved by the Convention, the provisions on the qualifica- 
tions for members of the judiciary read as follows. 

“No person may be appointed member of the Supreme 
Court unless he has been five years a citizen of the Philip- 




482 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



pines, is at least forty years of age, and has for ten years 
or more been a judge of a court of record or engaged in the 
practice of law in the Philippines/' 

‘'The National Assembly shall prescribe the qualifica- 
tions of judges of inferior courts, but no person may be 
appointed judge of any such courts unless he is a citizen 
of the Philippines and has been admitted to the practice 
of law in the Philippines." 

In the drafting of the article on transitoiy provisions, 
however, the Cuenco amendment was practically embodied 
in the section which read: 

“All officers and employees in the existing Government 
of the Philippine Islands shall continue in office until the 
National Assembly shall provide otherwise, but all officers 
whose appointments are by this Constitution vested in the 
President shall vacate their respective offices upon the ap- 
pointment and qualification of their successors, if such ap- 
pointment is made within a period of one year from the date 
of the inauguration of the Commonwealth of the Philip- 
pines." 

Tenure of Office 

Constitutional Provision. — ^\Vith respect to the tenure 
of members of the judiciary, the Philippine Constitution 
provides : 

‘‘The members of the Supreme Court and all judges of 
inferior courts shall hold office during good behavior, \mtil 
they reach the age of seventy years, or become incapacitated 
to discharge the duties of their office." 

Sources. — Under the Jones Law, although the Justices 
of the Supreme Court who were appointed by the Pres- 
ident of the United States with the consent of the Senate 
held their office during good behavior, by statutory pro- 
vision the judges of the inferior courts should hold their 
office during good behavior until they reached the age of 
SiXty-five years. No age limit could be applied by the 
Philippine Legislature to the Justices of the Supreme 
Court because they were appointed by the President of 
the United States with the consent of the Senate thereof. 



THE SELECTION AND QUALIFICATIONS OF JUDGES 483 



In its report, the committee on judicial power recom- 
mended the following provisions regarding the tenure of 
members of the judiciai'y: 

“The members of the Supreme Court, and the judges of 
the District Courts and of the municipal or circuit courts 
shall hold their offices during good behavior, until they reach 
the age of seventy years: Provided however, That they shall 
have the option to retire upon reaching tlie age of sixty- 
five years. In either case, the Justices and Judges who 
have rendered services for ten consecutive years, shall re- 
ceive a gratuity whose amount and manner of payment shall 
be prescribed by law. • * * 

“Once the courts are organized by virtue of the present 
Constitution, any justice or judge whose office is abolished 
by a subsequent reorganization of the Supreme Court, of 
the District Courts, or of the judicial districts, shall continue 
to receive during a period of two years from his separation, 
the same amount of compensation which he was receiving 
at the time of his separation from office. Courts inferior 
to the Supreme Court shall not be reorganized except upon 
recommendation of the latter.” 

The judicial committee of three embodied partially the 
report of the convention committee on judicial power on 
the matter. The corresponding portion of its report read: 
“The members of the Supreme Court and all judges of 
inferior courts shall hold their offices during good behavior, 
until they reach the age of seventy years.” 

Debates. — ^There was a unanimous sentiment in the 
Convention in favor of the idea that by all means the in- 
dependence of the judiciary should be maintained. And 
one of the means for securing the independence of the 
judiciary would be a long tenure of office. There were, 
however, differences of opinion with respect to the de- 
tails of the proposition for a long f enure for judges. 

Delegate Araneta proposed an amendment to the ef- 
fect that the constitutional provision about the “good be- 
havior until they reach the age of seventy years” tenure 
should be applied only to the members of the Supreme 
Court, with the tenure of office of the judges of inferior 
courts to be determined by legislation; but the Convention 



L 



484 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

disapproved the amendment primarily because it believed 
that the best way to ^arantee thc^ independence of the 
judiciaiT- would be by constitutional provisions. 

Delegate Lapak proposed that the members of the ju- 
diciary should hold their office during good behavior, as 
long as they were mentally capable to discharge the du- 
ties of the office. The amendment, he said, would keep in 
office judges and justices who, notwithstanding old age, 
could still perform their duties well; and keep out those 
who, notwithstanding young age, had become mentally un- 
fit for the work. The amendment was defeated by the 
Convention. 

Likewise the Convention disapproved the Orense 
amendment which would keep the justices and judges in 
office during good behavior without any specific age limit. 

With the defeat of these amendments was consequent- 
ly approved the provision' of the report of the judiciary 
committee of three on the tenure of office of members of 
the judiciary. 

The Draft of the Special Committee on Style on the 
Tenure of Judges and Justices — As it was approved on sec- 
ond reading with the approval of the entire article on the 
judicial power, the provision on the tenure of members of 
the judiciary read: 

“The members of the Supreme Court ajid all judges of 
inferior courts shall hold their offices dui’ing good behaviox’, 
until they reach the age of seventy years/^ 

In view of the fact brought out in the course of the 
debates that there might be some who v/ould be already 
physically incapacitated by the time they had reached the 
age of seventy, although the others might still be physi- 
cally and mentally virile, the special committee inserted 
the phrase, “or become incaipacitated to discJmrge the du- 
ties of their office”, so that the provision should then read: 

'‘The members of the Supreme Court and all judges of 
inferior courts shall hold office during good behavior, until 



r 

THE SELECTION AND QUALIFICATIONS OF JUDGES 485 

they reach the age of seventy years, or become incapacitated 

to discharge the duties of their office.’* I 

The draft of the special committee on style was ap- ' 

proved by the Convention with the adoption of the Consti- 
tution. 

Conipe^isation 

Constitutional Provision. — ^\Vith respect to the compen- 
sation of memljers of the judiciary, the Philippine Consti- 
tution provides: 

“They shall receive such compensation as may be fixed 
by jaw, which shall not be diminished during their con- 
tinuance in office. Until the National Assembly shall pro- ^ 

vide otherwise, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court shall 
receive an annual compensation of sixteen thousand pesos, 
and each Associate Justice, fifteen thousand pesos.” ' 

Sources. — This provision of the Constitution was in- 
spired by the American federal constitution and by state 
constitutions. 

The principle of leaving to legislative determination 
the compensation of members of the judiciary and the fur- 
ther principle of prohibiting the diminution of that salary 
during their continuance in office pervaded the written rec- 
ords of the Convention. The report of the committee on 
judicial power provided with respect to this matter: j* 

“All Justices, judges of District or municipal courts of 
the Philippine Islands shall receive such compensation as 
may be fixed by law, which shall not be reduced during j 

their term of office except in case of a general reduction of 
salaries of the officials and employees of the Government. , 

“Once the coui-ts are organized by virtue of the present 
Constitution, any justice or judge whose office is abolished j, 

by a subsequent reorganization of the Supreme Court, of ^ 

the District Courts, or of the judicial districts, shall continue •, 

to receive during a period of two years from his separation, 
the same amount of compensation which he was receiving at 'i 

the time of his separation from office.” ‘ 

In the first draft of the Constitution, the sub-committee of 

seven recommended the following provision: 'i 

“(A)nd they shall receive a compensation to be fixed 
by the National Assembly, which shall not be diminished 




L 



486 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

during their continuance in office. Until the National As- 
sembly shall provide otherwise, the Chief Justice of the 
Supreme Court shall receive sixteen thousand pesos, and 
the Associate Justices, fifteen thousand pesos, annually; the 
Presiding Justices of the Courts of Appeals, thirteen thou- 
sand pesos, and the Associate Justices of said Courts, twelve 
thousand pesos; and the judges of inferior courts, the salary 
now fixed by Jaw.'' 

The judiciary committee of three recommended a provision 
on the same matter inspired by the two reports, the provi- 
sion reading; 

“(A)nd they shall receive a compensation which shall 
not be diminished during their continuance in office. Until 
the National Assembly shall provide otherwise, the Chief 
Justice of the Supreme Court shall receive sixteen thousand 
pesos and the Associate Justices fifteen thousand pesos, an- 
nually, and the judges of inferior courts, the salary now 
fixed by law.” 

Debates. — ^The principle of leaving to the National As- 
sembly the determination of salaries was generally accepted 
by the delegates to the Convention. As it has already been 
said in preceding pages, in the early days there was a move- 
ment in the Convention to fix in the Constitution the sala- 
ries not only of members of the judiciary but also those 
of the other officials of the government. But it was finally 
resolved to leave the matter to be governed by ordinary leg- 
islation. It was felt that the matter of salaries was one that 
depended upon changing circumstances. It was; agreed, 
however, that to begin with, until the National Assembly 
should provide otherwise, the Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court should receive an annual compensation of sixteen 
thousand pesos, and each Associate Justice, fifteen thou- 
sand pesos. 

The principle that the compensation of members of the 
judiciary, although fixed by law, should not be diminished 
during their continuance in office was likewise readily ap- 
proved by the Convention. It was a principle intended to 
be one of the constitutional guarantees for the independence 
of the judiciary. 



THE SELECTION AND QUALIFICATIONS OF JUDGES 



487 



The Draft on Compensation for the Judiciaiy as Ap- 
proved by the Convention. — As it was revised by the special 
committee on style and as it was finally approved by the 
Convention, the provision on the compensation of members 
of the judiciary read: 

“They shall receive such compensation as may be fixed 
by law, which shall not be diminished during their contin- 
uance in office. Until the National Assembly shall provide 
otherwise, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court shall re- 
ceive an annual compensation of sixteen thousand pesos, and 
each Associate Justice, fifteen thousand pesos.” 



CHAPTER XXXIV 

THE POWERS AND JURISDICTION OF THE COURTS 



Introduction. — The provisions of the Constitution on 
the powers and j ui'isdiction of the courts were borrowed 
largely from the report of the judiciary committee of three. 
The report of the latter in turn was inspired by the Amer- 
ican federal constitution and state constitutions, the Jones 
Law, and Philippine laws existing at the time of the draft- 
ing of the Constitution. 

The report of the judiciary committee of three fol- 
lowed the general principle of leaving to the National As- 
sembly “the power to define, prescribe and apportion the 
jurisdiction of the various courts,” subject to the limita- 
tion that it might not diminish the original jurisdiction of 
the Supreme Court over all cases affecting ambassadors, 
other ministers, and consuls; and its appellate jurisdiction 
over certain cases. It provided that until the National 
Assembly should provide otherwise, the Supreme Court 
should have such original and appellate jurisdiction as 
might be possessed and exercised by the Supreme Court of 
the Philippine Islands at the time of the adoption of this 
Constitution; and that, included in the original jurisdiction 
of the Supreme Court, should be all cases affecting ambas- 
sadoi's, other foreign ministers, and consuls. 

The Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court — With respect 
to the j urisdiction of the Supreme Court, the report of the 
judiciary committee of three read: 

“The Supreme Court shall have such original and ap- 
pellate jurisdiction as may be possessed and exercised by 
the Supreme Court of the Philippine Islands at the time 
of the adoption of this Constitution. The original jurisdic- 
tion of the Supreme Court shall include all cases affecting 
ambassadors, other foreign ministers and consuls. 

“The National Assembly shall have the power to define, 
jirescribe and apportion the jurisdiction of the various 
courts, but may not deprive the Supreme Court of its juris- 



490 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



diction to review, revise, reverse, modify or affirm on appeal 
or writ of error, as the law or the rules of the court may 
provide, final judgments and decrees of inferior courts over 
the following cases: 

“(1) All cases in which the jurisdiction of the trial 
court is in issue; 

“(2) All cases in which the constitutionality or 
validity of any treaty, law, ordinance, executive order 
or regulation, is in issue; 

“(3) All cases involving the legality of any tax, 
impost, assessment or toll, or any penalty imposed in 
relation thereto; 

“(4) All cases in which an error or question of 
law is raised; 

“(5) All admiralty cases; 

“(6) All criminal cases wherein the penalty im- 
posed is death or life imprisonment.” 

The foregoing portion of the report of the judiciary 
committee of three was considered by the Convention on 
January 16, 1935. 

The first point of discussion was with respect to the 
meaning of the phrase, “all cases affecting ambassadors, 
other foreign ministers and consuls.” Did this phrase re- 
fer to ambassadors, other foreign ministers and consuls of 
the Philippines abroad or of foreign countries duly accre- 
dited to the Philippine Government or of both ? According 
to the Spanish text of the revised judiciary article, the 
phrase referred to ambassadors, other foreign ministers 
and consuls of the Philippines in foreign counti-ies. It was 
explained in the course of the deliberations that the phrase 
was borrowed from the American federal constitution. It 
was accordingly resolved by the Convention that this pro- 
vision of the Philippine Constitution should be given the 
same interpretation as the corresponding provision of the 
American federal constitution. 

Delegate Araneta proposed to withdraw from the con- 
stitutional appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court “all 
cases in which an error or question of law is raised.” In 
defense of his proposition. Delegate Araneta contended that 
such a provision would in effect limit the freedom of the 



THE POWERS AND JURISDICTION OF THE COURTS 491 



National Assembly to deteraiine the character of the courts 
of appeals to be created later on asf contemplated in the 
report of the judiciary committee of three. For under this 
provision, he said, the National Assembly could not give to 
the coming courts of appeals the power to decide finally 
certain cases, tiiei'eby accordingly relieving the Supreme 
Court of the congestion in its work, because all cases would 
then be appealable to the Supreme Court from or thiough 
the courts of appeals owing to the fact that there cou 
always be raised a question of law on any judicial decision. 
In defense of the retention of the provision, Delegate Fian- 
cisco in behalf of the judiciary committee of three said that 
the aim was to make of the Supi'eme Court a court of cas- 
sation, with the pow'er mainly to lay down doctrines o 3^- 
risprudence. It was the plan, he added, to have a qu^ 
tions of law reach the Supreme Court for lesolution. e 
was opposed to the idea of having some questions ® ^ 

decided finally by the lower courts and of having 
on other questions of law appealable to the Supieme oui , 
because that would bring about conflicting jurispiu ence. 
For the sake of a better administration of justice, he saia 
that there must be a uniformity of legal doctrines. 

When put to a vote, the Araneta amendment was de- 
f ©3.t/0cl 

Delegate Rafols proposed that all criminal cases not 
“only those wherein the penalty impose ^ ea p , . 
imprisonment,” should be appealable to e upieme , 

but his amendment was defeated. 

With the defeat of all the amendments introduced, the 
report of the judiciary committee of thiee on the juiis ic 
tion of the courts was left intact. 



The special committee on style made, however, several 
changes in the provision on the jurisdiction of the courts 
as approved by the Convention on second reading It in- 
cluded the remedy of certioran for cases brought to the 
Supreme Court. It also excluded from the constitutional 
cases appealable to the Supreme Court all admiralty cases. 



492 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



As they were revised by the special committee on style and 
as they were approved by the Convention with the adoption 
of the Constitution, the provisions on the jurisdiction of the 
courts read: 

'"The National Assembly shall have the power to define, 
prescribe, and apportion the jurisdiction of the various 
courts, but may not deprive the Supreme Court of its ori- 
ginal jurisdiction over cases affecting ambassadors, other 
public ministers, and consuls, nor of its jurisdiction to re- 
view, revise, reverse, modify, or affirm on appeal, certiorari, 
or writ of error, as the law or the rules of court may pro- 
vide, final judgments and decrees of inferior courts in — 

‘‘(1) All cases in which the constitutionality or 
validity of any treaty, law, ordinance, or executive or- 
der or regulation is in question. 

**( 2 ) All cases involving the legality of any tax, 
imposts, assessment, or toll, or any penalty imposed in 
relation thereto. 

*'(3) All cases in which the jurisdiction of any 
trial court is in issue. 

(4) All criminal cases in which the penalty im- 
posed is death or life imprisonment. 

‘‘(5) All cases in which an error or question of 
law is involved.’^ 

‘^Until the National Assembly shall provide otherwise, 
the Supreme Court shall have such original and appellate 
jurisdiction as may be possessed and exercised by the Su- 
preme Court of the Philippine Islands at the time of the 
adoption of this Constitution. The original jurisdiction of 
the Supreme Court shall include all cases affecting ambas- 
sadors, other public ministers, and consuls.'' 

The Jurisdiction of the Inferior Courts. — With respect 
to the jurisdiction of the inferior courts, the Philippine 
Constitution provides: 

''The National Assembly shall have the power to define, 
prescribe, and apportion the jurisdiction of the various 
courts " 

And in the Article on Transitory Provisions, it is provided. 

"All courts existing at the time of the adoption of this 
Constitution shall continue and exercise their jurisdiction, 
until otherwise provided by law in accordance with this 



J 



THE POWERS AND JURISDICTION OF THE COURTS 493 



Constitution, and all cases, civil and criminal, pending in 
said courts, shall be heard, tried, and determined under the 
laws then in force.” 

Accordingly, the National Assembly has the authority 
to determine the ixiwers of the infei'ior coui'ts, subject to 
the limitation that the constitutional powers of the Supreme 
Court should not be impaired. In the exercise of that 
power, the National Assembly might increase or decrease 
the powers already conferred upon the inferior courts at 
the time of the drafting of the Philippine Constitution, 
The Power of Judicial Review. — With respect to the 
power of judicial review by the courts, the Philippine Con- 
stitution pi'ovides : 



“The National Assembly shall have the power to define, 
prescribe, and apportion the jurisdiction of the various 
courts, but may not deprive the Supreme Court of its 
original jurisdiction over cases affecting ambassadors, other 
public ministers, and consuls, nor of its jurisdiction to re 
view, revise, reverse, modify, or affirm on appeal, certiorari, 
or wu'it of error, as the law or the rules of court may pio- 
vide, final judgments and decrees of inferior courts in 



“(1) All cases in ivhich the constitutionalitij or 
validity of any treaty, law, ordinance, or executive or- 
der or regulation is in question. 



‘‘All cases involving the constitutionality of a treaty 
or law shall be heard and decided by the Supreme Court 
in banc, and no treaty or law may be declared unconstitu- 
tional without the concurrence of two-thirds of all the mem- 
bers of the court.” 



Under the Jones Laio . — Under the Jones Law and un- 
der the organic acts of the Philippines before tne I'egime of 
the Jones Law, the power of judicial review by the courts 
was generally recognized, notwithstanding the lack of a 
specific provision in those acts to the effect. It was deemed 
extended, along with other principles of American political 
law, upon the implantation of American sovereignty in the 
Philippines. Under American political law, the power of 
judicial review had been generally recognized to be implied 
from the power of the courts to interpret the constitution. 



494 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



The Draft of the Convention Committee on Judicial 
Power. — The Convention committee on judicial power re- 
commended in its report the express recognition of the 
power of judicial review. The corresponding provisions of 
the report read: 

*‘(T)he concurrent jurisdiction of the Supreme Court 
and of the District Courts shall extend to all cases involving 
the consi;itutionality or validity of any treaty, law, ordi- 
nance, executive order or ruling, and to all cases involving 
the legality of any tax, impost, assessment or toll or any 
penalty imposed in relation thereto."' 

''The Supreme Court, in deciding the constitutionality 
of a law or resolution or the nullity of an executive order, 
shall sit IN BANC, and the concurrence of at least two- 
thirds of all the members thereof shall be necessary for 
the pronouncement of a judgment declaring unconstitutional 
such law or resolution, or illegal such executive order." 

The Draft of the Sub-Committee of Seven. — Following 
the recommendation of the committee on judicial power, the 
sub-committee of seven likewise proposed in the first draft 
of the Constitution the power of judicial review by the 
courts. The corresponding provisions of the first draft 
read as follows: 

"The Supreme Court shall also have jurisdiction to 
review, revise, reverse, modify or affirm, on appeal or writ 
of error as the law may provide, final judgments and de- 
crees of the Courts of First Instance or other courts imme- 
diately infenor to the Courts of Appeals, which may here- 
after be established by the National Assembly. This ap- 
pellate jurisdiction shall include: 

"(a) All cases in which the constitutionality or va- 
lidity of any treaty, law, ordinance, executive order or 
regulation, is in issue.** 

*“ * * ♦ ♦ * ♦ 

"The Supreme Court shall be composed of the Chief 
Justice and six Associate Justices. The presence of five 
justices is necessary to constitute a quorum. At least four 
justices must concur in any decision, except" when the con- 
sti^tionality of a law or executive order is in issue, in 
which case the concurrence of at least five justices is needed 
to declare said law or order unconstitutional." 




THE POWERS AND JURISDICTION OF THE COURTS 495 

The Draft of the Judiciary Committee of Three. — In 
the revised judiciary article, the committee of three like- 
wise recommended the incorporation in the Constitution of 
the powder of judicial review. The corresponding provisions 
read as follow^s: 

“The National Assembly shall have the power to define, 
prescribe and apportion the jurisdiction of the various courts, 
but may not deprive the Supreme Court of its jurisdiiction 
to re\de\v, revise, reverse, modify or affirm on appeal or 
writ of error, as the law or the rul5s of the court may pro- 
vide, final judgments and decrees of inferior courts over the 
following cases: 



“The Supreme Court, in deciding the constitutionality 
of a law or an executive order, shall sit IN BANC, and the 
concurrence of at least two-thirds of all the members theieof 
shall be necessary for the pronouncement of a judgment de- 
claring unconstitutional such law or executive order. 



Debates. — There was a general sentiment in the Con- 
vention in favor of the power of judicial review by the 1 

courts. The corresponding provisions of the revised judi- 
ciary article were readily approved by the Convention aftei 1 

the defeat of the* Sotto amendment which would require . 

three-fourths, not only two-thirds, of all the membeis of ^ 

the Supreme Court to concur in a declaration of the uncon- 
stitutionality of a law. f 

The Revised Draft of the Special Committee on Style. j 

In the revised draft of the special committee on style, the i 

special committee introduced some substantial changes with ^ 

the insertion of treaties and regulations among the cases i 

the constitutionality of which should be heard and decided i 

by the Supreme Court in banc and which could not be de- ^ 

dared unconstitutional or invalid without the concurrence 
of two-thirds of all the members of the court. The cor- ] 

responding' portion of the revised draft read as follows: 



♦ 



♦ 



“(2) All cases in which the constitutionality or 
validity of any treaty, law, ordinance, executive order 
or regulation, is in issue.” 



♦ 




L 



496 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



^'The National Assembly shall have the power to define, 
prescribe, and apportion the jurisdiction of the various 
courts, but may not deprive the Supreme Court of its ori- 
^nal jurisdiction over cases affecting ambassadors, other 
public ministers, and consuls, nor of its jurisdiction to re- 
view, revise, reverse, modify, or affirm on appeal, certiorari, 
or writ of error, as the law or the rules of court may pro- 
vide, final judgments and decrees of inferior courts in — 

‘‘(1) All cases in which the constitutionality or 
validity of any treaty, law, ordinance, or executive order 
or regulation is in question. 

‘‘All cases involving the constitutionality or validity of 
a treaty, law, or executive order or regulation shall be heard 
and decided by the Supreme Court in banc, and no treaty, 
law, or executive order or regulation may be declared un- 
constitutional or invalid without the concurrence of two- 
thirds of all the members of the Court.'' 

The Draft in the Constitution Adopted by the Conveth- 
tion. — During the consideration of the amendments pro- 
posed by the special committee on style on February 8, 
1935, Delegate Francisco, in behalf of the committee, pi*o- 
posed the elimination of the words, executive order, and 
regulation, so that the requirement of the concurrence of 
two-thirds of all the members of the Supreme Court should 
apply only to treaties and laws. The proposition was ap- 
proved by the Convention. 

As they were finally approved by the Convention with 
the adoption of the Constitution, the provisions on the 
power of judicial review read: 

‘'The National Assembly shall have the power to de- 
fine, prescribe, and apportion the jurisdiction of the various 
courts, but may not deprive the Supreme Court of its ori- 
ginal jurisdiction over cases affecting ambassadors, other 
public ministers, and consuls, nor of its jurisdiction to re- 
view, revise, reverse, modify, or affirm on appeal, certiorari, 
or writ of error, as the law or the rules of court may pro- 
vide, final judgments and decrees of inferior courts in — 

“(1) All cases in which the constitutionality or 
validity of any treaty, law, ordinance, or executive order 
or regulation is in question." 



THE POWERS AND JURISDICTION OF THE COURTS 



497 



“All cases involving the constitutionality of a treaty 
or law shall be heard and decided by the Supreme Court 
iti banc, and no treaty or law may be declared unconstitu- 
tional without the concurrence of two-thirds of all the mem- 
bers of the court." 

Under this provision, inferior courts would have the 
power to decide upon the constitutionality or validity of any 
treaty, law, ordinance, or executive order or regulation; 
but their decisions are appealable to the Supreme Court. 
All cases involving the constitutionality of a treaty or law 
shall be heard and decided by the Supreme Court in banc, 
and no treaty or law may be declared unconstitutional with- 
out the concurrence of two-thirds of all the members of the 
Court. Inferentially, all cases involving the constitutional- 
ity of an ordinance, or executive order, or regulation shall 
be heard and decided not m banc, and ordinances, or exe- 
cutive orders, or regulations may be declared unconstitu- 
tional by a vote of the majority of the members of the 
Court. 

The Rule-Making Power of the Supreme Court. ^The 
Philippine Constitution provides: 

“The Supreme Court shall have the power to promul- 
gate rules concerning pleading, practice, and procedure in 
all courts, and the admission to the practice of law. Said 
rules shall be uniform for all courts of the same grade and 
shall not diminish, increase, or modify substantive rights. 
The existing laws on pleading, practice, and procedure are 
hereby repealed as statutes, and are declared Rules of 
Courts, subject to the power of the Supreme Court to alter 
and modify the same. The National Assembly shall have 
the power to repeal, alter, or supplement the rules con- 
cerning pleading, practice, and procedure, and the admission 
to the practice of law in the Philippines.” 

Sources . — The provision on the rule-making pov/er of 
the Supreme Court is one of the new provisions in the fun- 
damental law. Under the organic laws of the Philippines 
before the drafting bi the Philippine Constitution, matters 
concerning pleading, practice, and procedure in all courts 
were governed by statutory legislation, although there were 



498 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



also many rules of procedure adopted by the Supreme Court 
in the absence of specific provisions of law applicable to the 
cases. 

Influenced by the movement of leading jurists in the 
United States, resulting in the adoption not only by the 
American federal government but also by several state gov- 
ernments of the principle of the rule-making power of the 
courts, the committee on judicial power recommended in 
its report the incorporation in the Constitution of the fol- 
lowing provision: 

^‘The Supreme Court shall have the power to promul- 
gate rules, which shall be uniform for all courts of the same 
grade and which shall not diminish, increase, or modify the 
substantive rights of any litigant, concerning pleading and 
tlie form, manner, and order of conducting cases, actions and 
proceedings in all the courts and the admission of la^vyers 
to the practice of law in the Philippine Islands. The exist- 
ing laws on pleadings and practice are hereby repealed as 
statutes, but such laws, together with the existing rules of 
courts, shall constitute the rules which shall be followed in 
the courts for pleadings and practice from the time this 
Constitution takes effect, subject to the power of the Supreme 
Court to alter and modify the same. The provisions of this 
article shall not be construed in the sense of depriving the 
National Assembly of its power to repeal, alter, or supple- 
ment any rule, adopted as herein provided, concerning plead- 
ings and judicial procedure.'^ 

Following the recommendation of the committee on ju- 
dicial power, the sub-committee of seven incorporated in 
the first draft of the Constitution the principle of the rule- 
making power of the Supreme Court. The corresponding 
provision read: 

‘‘The Supreme Court shall have the power to make rules 
relating to pleading, practice and the orderly conduct of 
business in all courts, which rules shall be uniform for 
all the courts of the same grade, and for the admis- 
sion of lawyers to the practice of law. The existing laws 
on pleading and practice are hereby repealed as statutes and 
are constituted and declared, together with the existing rules 
of courts, to be operative as the Rules of Courts and of 
pleadings and practice at the time this Constitution takes 
effect, subject to the power of the Supreme Court to alter 



THE POWERS AND JURISDICTION OF THE COURTS 499 



or modify the same. The provisions of this section shall 
not be construed to deprive the National Assembly of its 
power to repeal, alter, or supplement any rule of pleading, 
practice or procedui-e adopted as herein provided.” 

The judiciary committee of three likewise recommended 
tlie adoption of the principle of the rule-making power of 
the Supreme Court in the following provision of its report: 

‘The Supreme Coui*t shall have the power to promulgate 
rules, whicli shall be uniform for all courts of the same 
grade and which shall not diminish, increase, or modify the 
<^nbstantive rights of any litigant, concerning pleading, prac- 
tice and procedure in all the courts, and the admission of 
la^vyers to the practice of law in the Philippines. The 
existing laws on pleading, practice, and procedure are hereby 
repealed as statutes, and are constituted and declared, to- 
gether with the existing rules of courts, to be operative as 
the rules of courts and of pleading, practice and procedure 
for all the courts of the Philippines from the time this Con- 
stitution takes effect, subject to the power of the Supreme 
Court to alter and modify the same. The provision of this 
section shall not be construed to deprive the National As- 
sembly of its power to repeal, alter, or supplement any rule 
of pleading, practice and procedure, adopted as herein pro- 
vided.” 

Debates . — The provision of the report of the judiciary 
committee of three on the rule-making power of the Su- 
preme Court was considered by the Convention on January 
18 and 19, 1935. Some delegates, led by Delegate Cuenco, 
were for the suppression of the entire provision; others, led 
by Delegate Joven, for the suppression of the portion which 
would repeal as statutes existing laws on pleading, practice, 
and procedure, and constitute and declare them as rules of 
court, and which would also authorize the National Assem- 
bly to repeal, alter, or supplement any rule of pleading, 
practice, and procedure promulgated by the Supreme Court. 
And still others, led by Delegate Orense, would deny to the 
National Assembly the power to repeal or alter the rules 
promulgated by the Supreme Court. 

In defense of his amendment, Delegate Joven said that 
the provision of the draft as it was would lead to the absurd 
situation in which the National Assembly and the Supreme 



500 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



Court would find themselves at odds with each other; and 
in defense of his. Delegate Orense said that if it would re- 
cognize the rule-making power of the Supreme Court, the 
Convention should not nullify that power by giving to the 
National Assembly the power to repeal or alter the rules 
promulgated by such Court. It should give to the National 
Assembly the power only to supplement such rules. 

In answei’. Delegate Francisco said that the existing 
laws on pleading, practice, and procedure should be repealed 
as statutes and constituted and declared as rules of court 
in order that by judicial action the Supreme Court could 
alter or modify them; and that the portion of the provision 
authorizing the National Assembly to repeal, alter, or sup- 
plement the rules promulgated by the Supi'eme Court was 
intended to provide a check to the Supreme Court in the 
exercise of its rule-making power. 

The principle of the rule-making power of the Supreme 
Court was most ably defended by Delegate Francisco in his 
memorandum in defense of the report of the Convention 
committee on judicial power and also on the floor of the 
Convention. His arguments could be summarized as fol- 
lows: 

1. The regulation of court procedure by the legislature 
was a clear encroachment on the judicial branch by the 
legislative power. If the promulgation by the Supreme 
Court of parliamentary rules to be followed by the legisla- 
ture in conducting its sessions was considered an undue in- 
terference by the judicial power in the interior government 
of legislative bodies, the regulation by the legislature of 
court procedure should also be considered an undue inter- 
ference in the domain of the courts. 

2. The power to regulate the conduct of cases submitted 
for decision by the courts was a necessary sequel to judicial 
responsibility. Upon the courts was committed the respon- 
sibility to administer justice. Consequently, the rules of 
pleading, practice, and procedure should be worked out by 
the courts and not by the lawmaking branch of the govern- 
ment; for in no other way could the courts be held truly 
responsible for the performance of their duties. If courts 
could be trusted with the power to declare an act void be- 



THE POWERS AND JURISDICTION OF THE COURTS 501 



cause it was in conflict with the Constitution, with greater 
reason they should be trusted with the power to enact the 
mere details of procedure by which their decisions should be 
made. 

3. With the rules of procedure promulgated by the courts 
and interpreted by themselves, there would be brought about 
a condition favorable for the administration of justice. 
There would thus be avoided the disadvantages arising from 
a situation where the rules were compiled by a body and in- 
terpreted and applied by anotlier which did not sympathize 
with it. The relatively rapid development of a modern pro- 
cedure in England was largely due to the circumstance that 
those who made the rules interpreted and applied them. 

4. The rules of procedure could be changed when neces- 
sary because they did not have the rigidity of law, and they 
might be modified gradually in the course of time in ac- 
cordance with practice and experience. The procedure that 
the courts would establish would always be simple, adopted 
to their ends, and adaptable by the simple process of judi- 
oial amendment, to new situations and practical necessities. 

6. The lawmaking body, by the manner of selection of its 
members, its organization, its personnel, and its political in- 
cidence, was not in a better position than the courts to de- 
termine the rules of procedure of the judiciary. 

When put to a vote, the Joven amendment, the Cuenco 
amendment, and the Orense amendment were easily de- 
feated. With the defeat of these amendments, the provi- 
sion of the report of the judiciary committee of three was 
overwhelmingly approved by the Convention. 

The Revised Draft of the Special Committee on Style 
on the Rule-Making Poiver of the Supreme Com t.— As it 
was revised in the special committee on style and as it was 
in the Constitution finally adopted by the Convention, the 
provision on the rule-making power of the Supieme Court 
read: 

‘^The Supreme Court shall have the power to promul- 
gate rules concerning pleading, practice, and piocedure in 
all courts, and the admission to the practice of law. Said 
rules shall be uniform for all courts of the same grade and 
shall not diminish, increase, or modify substantive rights. 
The existing laws on pleading, practice, and procedure are 
hereby repealed as statutes, and are declared Rules of 
Courts, subject to the power of the Supreme Coui't to alter 



502 



framing of the PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



and modify the same. The National Assembly shall have 
the power to repeal, alter, or supplement the rules concern- 
ing pleading, practice, and procedure, and the admission to 
the practice of law in the Philippines.*' 

The Proposed Judicial Council. — Following the lead of 
other countries, including the United States and England, 
which had provided by law or by constitutional provision 
for judicial councils, the Convention committee on judicial 
power recommended the creation of such an institution in 
the following provisions of its report: 

‘'There shall be a Judicial Council to be composed of 
the Chief Justice of the Supreme Coui^t as Chairman, a 
Justice, two judges of the District Courts, the Solicitor Gen- 
eral, the fiscal of the City of Manila, and a representative 
of each of the bar associations of nation-wide organization. 

“It shall be the duty of the Judicial Council to recom- 
mend to the National Assembly the enactment of laws and 
to the Supreme Court, the adoption of rules and regula- 
tions, for the proper administration of justice." 

The Judicial Council was intended by the committee 
''to be the official organ whose recommendations concern- 
ing pleadings, practice, and evidence will be considered by 
the Supreme Court, so that the intervention of the bar in 
the preparation of the rules would not be a mere courtesy 
accorded by the Supreme Court to the bar.’' Moreover, 

“If the Supreme Court should have the power to pro- 
mulgate rules of procedure, the creation of a Judicial Coun- 
cil is indispensable, for otherwise the points of view of the 
bar would not be known by the Supreme Court and the rules 
of procedure that the latter would promulgate \vill reflect 
only its own views. It cannot be denied that in order to 
have good procedural rules, there should be an intelligent 
and harmonious cooperation between the bar and the judi- 
ciary." 

The recommendation of the committee was incor- 
porated substantially in the first draft of the Constitution 
in the following provisions: 

“There shall be a Judicial Council to be composed of 
the Chief Justice, of the Supreme Court, as chairman, the 
head of the Department of Justice, one Justice of a Court 
of Appeals, designated by the Chief Justice of the Supreme 



THE POWERS AND JURISDICTION OF THE COURTS 503 



Court, one judce of an inferior court, designated by the Head 
of the Department of Justice, and one representative of eacn 
of the bar associations of nation-wide organization. 

“It shall be the duty of the Judicial Council to recom- 
mend to the Supreme Court from time to time rules and 
regulations for the proper administration of justice.” 

Howevei', the judiciary committee of three did not re- 
commend in its I'eport the creation of a judicial council pri- 
marily because it believed that the matter should be left to 
legislation. 

During the consideration of the judiciary article by 
the Convention, Delegate Lim presented an amendment for 
the creation of a judicial council in the Constitution. Del- 
egate Dim’s amendment, which was considered by the Con- 
vention on January 19, 1935, read as follows: 

“There shall be a Judicial Council to be composed of the 
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court as chairman, the Head 
of the Department of Justice, two judges of the inferioi 
courts designated by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Couit, 
and one representative of each of the Bar Associations ot 
nation-wide organization . 

‘‘It shall be the duty of the Judicial Council to recom- 
mend to the Supreme Court from time to time rules and 
regulations for the proper administration of justice. 

In defense of his amendment. Delegate Lim said that 
the purpose was to provide the Supreme Court with a body 
of men who, by their training and experience, could abl 3 r 
recommend from time to time rules and regulations which 
would bring about a speedy administration of justice. 

When put to a vote, the amendment was overwhelm- 
ingly defeated. 




.I-.' • ' 't* 

- ..V' *■ ' 

W*''; 




j 

¥ 



,:#S-V4;;.'. ^..., 

- 'i-:. '^li K^..,, 



0,. ^ i - 

^ * ^j[‘ '4 

:":;^'i*^v<f4^ 1. '.t‘‘/ --t 

'SlL>!^du-V ' , -*»‘lJv^'«i?5^ f*t •’» «iftilir-l 



•’ r.f'-i, .Y- 



*4 y 



I''' 









11 



\>i 

'4 j 

. ja’T . ^ 



V *^'*'*' -V' '■ ' ' f 

*^r,i', ■„/• ,\ ..,i, . „,^, 

m ,t!iv .; ^ ,. _ ■ * '• r *.:“>»M 



a 







'I4!' 






■ '-.I.:; 






\, 



>^-V- 









VV'M.' 









f4i* 






6*^>l 




CHAPTER XXXV 

THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 

Introduction. — ^The honest, impai'tial, just, and efficient 
administration of justice was one of the great objectives 
of the Convention in the framing of the Philippine Con- 
stitution. It was an objective born of the conviction that 
peace and order was based primarily on the respect foi 
law, and that that respect could only be inspired by a sound 
and impai’tial administration of justice. 

From the opening days of the Convention, the dele- 
gates manifested an unusually serious concern for the es- 
tablishment of an excellent judicial system. Many of the 
ably prepared speeches delivered by the delegates in the 
exercise of the one-half hour parliamentary privilege were 
wholly or partly on the judiciary— the defects of the exist- 
ing judicial system and remedies proposed for them, and 
plans for a better judiciary. Many of the precepts pro- 
posed for the Constitution during the period set for the 
presentation of constitutional precepts dealt with the judi- 
ciary. The article on the judicial system was studied with 
the utmost care, occasioning some of the greatest debates 
on the Constitution. The main objective was to insure an 
honest, impartial, just, and efficient administration of jus- 
tice through the establishment of an excellent judicial 
system. 

The Convention proposed to secure the establishment 
of an excellent judicial system through a careful selection 
of judges, through the institution of methods for securing 
the faithful performance of their duties, and through the 
adoption of guarantees for their independence. 

The Selection of Judges.— For the pui-pose of insuring 
the selection of meritorious men for the judiciary, the Con- 
vention unanimously preferred the system of appointment 
to that of election as prevailed in Switzerland and in some 



506 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

states of the United States. It was of the conviction that 
a wise appointing pov/er — the Chief Executive under the 
Constitution — was better qualified than the mass of voters, 
many of whom were either uninstructed or misinformed, to 
deterariine the qualities which would go into the making of 
a good judge. To furnish a check against the E.xecutive, 
the Convention provided that the appointments should be 
with the consent of the Commission on Appointments of 
the National Assembly. The decision to have the check 
come from the Commission on Appointments rather than 
from the Supreme Court as proposed by a great number 
of delegates was due to a desire to keep the Supreme Court 
away from the cross-cunrents of politics, thereby preserv- 
ing its prestige and integrity, and to the belief that better 
qualified men would be chosen because the intervention of 
the lawmaking body would subject to the searchlight of 
public discussion the qualifications of candidates, particu- 
larly those for honesty, probity, and integrity. Such an 
intervention would compel the Executive to be more judi- 
cious in his selection, for he would naturally wish to see 
his appointments stand the test of investigation and cri- 
ticism. 

In order to strengthen the base of the judicial pyramid, 
the Convention provided in the Constitution that all mem- 
bers of the judiciary must have been admitted to the prac- 
tice of law in the Philippines. Before the regime of the 
Philippine Constitution, there was no such qualification for 
appointment to the justice of the peace courts. Conse- 
quently, there were many justices of the peace who were 
not lawyei’s. And it was said that many of these j'ustices 
of the peace were incompetent in the discharge of their 
duties because of the inadequacy of their information. The 
provision of the Constitution requiring membership in the 
bar as a qualification was intended to be a remedy for the 
situation. 

The Constitution enumerates the qualifications for 
membership in the Supi’eme Court. With respect to judges 
of inferior courts, it provides that the National Assembly 



THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 



507 



shall prescribe the qualifications; provided that no person 
may be appointed judge of any such courts unless he is a 
citizen of the Philippines and has been admitted to the 
practice of law in the Philippines. In addition to the qual- 
ifications enumerated in the Constitution, from the discus- 
sions on the judiciary article one could glean the intention 
of the Convention to so control the discretion of the ap- 
pointing power that only persons of honesty, probity, and 
integrity should be chosen for the iudiciary so that they 
could discharge well their function as the protectors of the 
rights and liberties of the people. 

Residence of Judges.— Before the regime of the Philip- 
pine Constitution, there wei'e repeated complaints against 
the practice of some judges of courts of fii'st instance of 
disposing of their cases hurriedly during the week days m 
order to be able to return to their homes in the afternoon 
or in the evening; and against others for hurriedly dispos- 
ing of them, working from the early part of the morning 
to the late hours of the evening during the first four or 
five days of the week in order to get home during the week 
end. This practice, it was said, was detrimental to the ad- 
ministration of justicG. 

For this reason there were propositions in the Con- 
vention for the incorporation in the Constitution of a pro- 
vision requiring judges to reside within their respective 
districts. On this matter, the Convention committee on 
judicial power recommended the approval of the following 
provision. 

“All judges of District courts shall reside within their 
respective districts/^ 

The principle of the committee report was incorporated in 
the first draft of the Constitution and later on also in the 
revised judiciary article in the following provision: 

“All judges of inferior courts shall reside within their 
respective districts/^ 

This provision of the revised judiciary article was most 
enthusiastically considered by the Convention on January 
17, 1935. 



508 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



A group of delegates, under the leadership of Araneta 
and Oi'ense, proposed to suppress it on the ground that it 
was unnecessary and impractical, with the matter dealt 
with being more proper for legislation than for the Con- 
stitution. After a brief defense by Delegates Orense and 
Encamacion, the Orense amendment for suppressing the 
provision was carried by 59 affirmative votes against 37 
negative votes. 

Immediately after the voting. Delegate Francisco pres- 
ented a motion for reconsideration. After a brief speech by 
Delegate Francisco wherein he explained the philosophy to 
be that of correcting the undesirable practice of some 
judges of residing in places other than their districts to the 
detriment of the administration of justice, the motion for 
reconsideration v/as approved by 59 affirmative votes 
against 58 negative votes. 

When it v/as put to a vote after the approval of the 
Franci.sco motion for reconsideration, the Orense amend- 
ment was defeated, the voting being a tie, with the presid- 
ing officer. Delegate Briones, casting the deciding vote. 

The proponents for suppression made another rally in 
the voting on the provision; but the Convention voted in 
its favor by 57 affirmative votes against 58 negative votes. 
Thus was approved by a very close margin the provision 
requiring judges to reside within their respective districts. 

However, the special committee on style revised the 
provision as thus approved by giving to the National As- 
sembly the power to determine by law the residence of 
judges of inferior courts. It was felt that the Convention 
should repose its confidence in the ability of the members 
of the National Assembly to so determine the residence of 
the judges that the evil pointed out in the debates would be 
remedied in the interest of a better administration of jus- 
tice. The change made by the committee was approved by 
the Convention with the adoption of the Constitution. 

Rendition of Decisions. — ^The Convention committee on 
judicial power recommended in section 5 of its report the 



THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 



509 



incorporation in the Constitution of the following provi- 
sions i 

“At least two justices shall read each record, and the 
conclusions of the court shall be reached in consultation 
before the case is assigned for writing the opinion. 

“The decisions shall be in writing, and signed by the 
justices concurring therein. Evei-y point fairly arising upon 
the briefs shall be considered and decided, and the facts and 
the law upon which the decision or judgment is based shal 
be clearly stated. Any justice dissenting therefrom sha.l 
give the reasons of sucli dissent in writing over his sig- 
nature. , . ,f. 

“When the court shall deem a decision to be ot suin- 
cient importance it will order its publication and it shal 
be the duty of the court to prepare a syllabus of the points 
adjudicated, which shall be concurred in by the majority 
of the justices thereof, and it shall be prefixed to the pub- 
lished reports of the case. 

“Every cause shall be decided wthm three months after 

the argument or submission of the same. 

“Application for rehearings or motion for reconsidera- 
tion shall be considered by a division other than the one 
which rendered the judgment, and if granted shall be de- 
cided IN BANC. 

‘'In deciding said motions the court shall squarely pass 
upon the grounds thereof and set forth the reasons for its 

decision.” 

The judiciary committee of three incorporated partially 
the recommendations of the committee on judicial power m 

the ft, s„p„„e Court shall be joacted 

in consultation before the case is assigned vn-itmg the 
opinion. The decision shall be in ^vriting, and signed by the 
justices concurring therein. Every point fairly arising upon 
the briefs shall be considered and decided, and the fact^ 
and the law upon which the decision or judgment is basca 
shall be clearly stated. Any justice dissenting therefrom 
shall give the reasons of such dissent in writing over his 

signature.” ... 

This provision of the revised judiciary article 

taken up by the Convention on January 17, 1935, and it 
was approved readily after the defeat of the Orense 
amendment for its suppression on the ground that the mat- 
ter dealt with was more appropriate for legislation. 



510 



FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



In the special committee on style, this provision was, 
however, revised so that it should read: 

“The conclusions of the Supreme Court in any case 
submitted to it for decision shall be reached in consultation 
before the case is assigrned to a Justice for the writing of 
the opinion of the Court. Any Justice dissenting from a 
decision shall state the reasons for his dissent. 

“No decision shall be rendered by any court of record 
wthout expressing therein clearly and distinctly the facts 
and the law on which it is based.’’ 

The revised draft of the special committee was ap- 
proved readily by the Convention, 

The first part of the provision was intended to oblige 
all the Justices of the Supreme Court to study every case 
before that body. At the time of the drafting of the Con- 
stitution, there was the general belief that a majority of 
the decisions of the Supz'eme Court were decisions of only 
one Justice, the penning Justice. Under the Constitution, 
so the Convention intended, the Justices should study the 
case. They should then come into consultation with respect 
to the conclusions. With the conclusions already arrived 
at, the case would then be assigned to a Justice for the 
writing of the opinion of the Court. Thus the decision in 
any case would be really the decision of the Supreme Court, 
not a one-man decision. The part of the provision requir- 
ing a dissenting J ustice to state the reasons for his dissent 
was intended to insure a study of the case; for it was ob- 
seiwed in many cases that the mere words, “I dissent,” 
without giving the reasons, was in the words of Delegate 
Francisco, “only intended to make the parties or the public 
believe that the case has been studied and discussed 
thoroughly by the Court when in fact and in truth it 
is just the contrary. Moreover, there have been cases in 
this jurisdiction where a well-reasoned dissenting opinion 
has been adopted as the decision of the majority in a sub- 
sequent case.” 

The second part of the provision was intended to make 
the decision in accordance with the facts and the law of the 



THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 



511 



case. Tlii’ough it, the Convention wanted to put to an 
end the practice of the Supreme Court in some cases of 
merely saying “The judgment of the lower court is affirmed 
(or reversed) without prejudice to rendeidng later an ex- 
tended opinion,” “case dismissed for lack of merits, and 
some other similar ways of disposing of cases. 



Any wilful failure to comply with these provisions was 
intended to constitute a culpable violation of the Constitu- 
tion, one of the grounds for impeaching Justices of the 
Supreme Court. 

Removal of Judges. — Justices of the Supreme Court 
shall be removed from office on impeachment for, and con- 
viction of, culpable violation of the Constitution, treasons^ 
bribery, or other high cidmes. The Convention left to 
National Assembly the power to pi'ovide for the lemova \ 
of judges of inferior courts for misbehavior. 

The Independence of the Judiciary.— -In order that the 
judicial system might be excellent it was consideied no 
enough that the men appointed to the bench should be o 
high learning and ability. It was necessary that they should r 
be independent, so that they could administer the law f®^^“ 
lessly without favor and without bias among enemies an 
fi-iends alike. 

The principle of the independence of the jjidiciary 
found itself reaffirmed in the written records of the Con-j. 
vention. It was a principle unanimously considered a me 
qua non to the honest and impartial administration of jus- 
tice. 

The Convention committee on judicial power recom- 
mended in its report the incorporation in the Constitution 

of a pi'o vision reading: 

"Justices and judges shall be independent in the dis- 
charge of their functions and shall be subject only to law.” 

This provision was incorporated in the lepoit of the judi- 
ciary committee of three. It was readily approved unani- 
mously in the Convention when it was put to a vote on 
Januai'y 21, 1935. In the special committee on style, how- 



512 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

ever, this provision was struck out because it was believed 
to be unnecessary; for the judiciary article had been drafted 
and approved by the Convention on the unmistakable un- 
derstanding that the judiciary should be independent. 

The Convention sought to secure the independence of 
the judiciary through the provisions to the effect (1) that 
the “members of the Supreme Court and all judges of in- 
ferior courts shall hold office during good behavior, until 
they reach the age of seventy years, or become incapaci- 
tated to discharge the duties of their office (2) that they 
“shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by law, 
which shall not be diminished during their continuance in 
office;" and (3) that no “judge appointed for a particular 
district shall be designated or transferred to another dis- 
trict without the approval of the Supreme Court." 

Before the regime of the Philippine Constitution, the 
principle was sustained that no judge of a court of first in- 
stance appointed for a particular district should be desig- 
nated or transferred to another district without his con- 
sent. It was a principle considered to be a concomitant 
of the doctrine of the separation of powei's. 

The Convention committee on judicial power recom- 
mended in its report the reaffirmation in the Constitution 
of such a principle with some modifications. The corres;- 
ponding provision of the report read: 

“No judge who has been appointed for a particular dis- 
trict shall be transferred to another district without his 
consent; but when the public interest requires it, the Su- 
preme Court may order such transfer.” 

In the first draft of the Constitution, the sub-committee 
of seven recommended the adoption of a similar principle 
but with further modifications. The corresponding provi- 
sion read : 

“No judge who has been appointed for a pai'ticular dis- 
trict shall be transferred to another district without his 
consent: Provided, That, when the public interest requires 
it, upon the recommendation of the Supreme Co\irt, the 
President may order such transfer, subject to the confirma- 
tion of the Permanent Commission.” 



THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 



513 



The judiciary committee of three practically endorsed 
the recommendation of the Convention committee on judi- 
cial power on the matter, in the following provision: 

“No judge who has been appointed for a particular dis- 
trict shall be designated or transferred to another district 
without the approval of the Supreme Court.” 

This provision of the revised judiciary article was con- 
sidered by the Convention on January 17, 1935. 

Delegate Bernabe de Guzman proposed an amendment 
to the effect that this provision should not be applicable to 
a reorganization of tribunals of justice or of districts; but 
the amendment was defeated easily without debate. Dele- 
gate Orense likewise proposed an amendment to the effect 
that “no judge who has been appointed for a particular dis- 
trict shall be designated or transfeiTed to another distric 
without the consent of the party concerned. 



In defense of his amendment, Delegate Orense ex 
plained that he was opposed to the provision of the levise 
judiciary article because in effect that would also wea en 
the spirit of independence of judges, just as it ® 

Aveakened by the intervention of the political branc ox le 
government. What should be done, he said, ^ ^ 

a judge feel so independent in the discharge o is u le 
that he would never entertain the fear that he 
transferred to another district either by t le po i ica r 
of the government or by the Supreme Coui as a resi 
any decision that he might render. 

The provision of the revised judiciary article was mos 
ably defended on the floor against the Orense amendmen 
by Delegate Ricardo Nepomuceno. In part, he said: 

“I fully agree with the gentleman from Batangas that 
it is a wise policy to protect the independence of the judi- 
ciary But I might submit most respectfully that the best 
way to undermine the independence of the judiciary and to 
weaken the administration of justice would be to approve 
the amendment, such as has been proposed by the distin- 



guished gentleman from Batangas. 

“According to the amendment, a judge may be trans- 
ferred or designated from one district to another, provided 



514 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 

that he consents to such transfer or designation. To my 
mind, it is easy to imagine a case wherein such designation 
or transfer with the consent of the judge would be the best 
way to defeat the interest of justice. When those who con- 
trol the Government or when the Department is interested 
in the decision in one way or another of a particular case 
in any judicial district, it would be easy for the Department 
to enter into a combination with some judge who would 
readily consent to his transfer from his own district to 
another in order particularly to decide the particular case 
in which the Department or those who are in power are 
interested. In this way, with the consent of the judge, the 
Department or those who are in power may easily obtain the 
decision which they v/ant to be made of a case pending *n 
any courts of the Philippines. On the other hand, Mr. Pres- 
ident, the interest of justice may require that even without 
the consent of the interested party, his transfer or his de- 
signation may be made in the interest of justice. 

‘'And I think, Mr. President, that the Supreme Court, 
as the highest tribunal of our land, which has the full knowl- 
edge of the character and integrity of our judges and who 
knows more or less of the intimate relations the judges may 
have in their particular districts after their stay there for 
a time more or less long, should be given the privilege of 
granting its approval to the transfer or designation of a 
judge from one district to another not necessarily because 
there is some complaint against the judge but for other 
reasons. A judge, for example, although of good character 
and moral conduct and although his behavior may have 
been very good in his district, during his long stay in that 
district may have established relations — intimate relations 
— with so many persons of his district that it is to the in- 
terest of justice that he should be transferred from that 
district to another. 

“In this case, Mr. President, I submit that even with- 
out the consent of the judge of that district, provided we 
have the approval of the Supreme Court, that judge may be 
transferred or designated from that district to another.*' 

When submitted to a vote, the Orense amendment was 
defeated. 

With the defeat of the Orense amendment, the provi- 
sion of the revised judiciary article was overwhelmingly 
approved by the Convention. 



THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 



515 



As it was revised by the special committee on style 
and as it was finally appi'oved by the Convention, the pro- 
vision read: 

“No judge appointed for a particular district shall be 
designated or transferred to another district without the 
approval of the Supreme Court.” 

State Responsibility and Indemnification for Innocent 
Convicts — During the Convention time, there were at- 
tempts by influential delegates to introduce into the Philip- 
pines through the Constitution the principle of requiring 
the State to indemnify persons erroneously convicted for 
damages and losses that they might have suffered. Lead- 
ing in the movement we)*e the members of the Convention 
committee on judicial power, who recommended in their 
report the incorporation in the Constitution of the follow- 
ing pi’ovision: 

“When it is shown that a person who is serving or has 
already served completely a sentence is innocent of the 
crime for which he has been found guilty, the State shall 
indemnify him for the damages and losses which he may 
have suffered by reason of the erroneous judgment.” 

The recommendation of the committee was inspired by 
the Constitution of Spain and by existing laws in the 
United States and in some countries of Europe. 

Following the recommendation of the Convention com- 
mittee on judicial power, the judiciary committee of three 
included the following provision in the revised judiciary 
article : 

“The administration of justice is one of the primary 
functions of the State, and when it is conclusively shown 
that a person who is serving or has already served a sen- 
tence is innocent of the crime for which he had been found 
guilty, the State shall indemnify him for the damages and 
losses which he may have suffered by reason of the erro- 
neous judgment.” 

This provision of the revised judiciary article was 
taken up by the Convention on January 19, 1935. Famous 
lawyer members participated in the debates on the Buslon- 
Grageda-Sevilla amendment for suppression. The provision 



516 FRAMING OF THE PHILIPPINE CONSTITUTION 



was defended by Delegates Kapunan, Gullas, and Fi’ancisco ; 
and opposed by Delegates Orense, Filemon Sotto, and 
Palma. 

It was pointed out in its defense that the provision 
would operate to do justice to persons who, although in- 
nocent, would find themselves convicted because of the con- 
spiracy of circumstances. Moreover, it would oblige the 
courts and the prosecuting officials to be more cautious 
in forming their conclusions to the end that the State might 
not be made to pay for the mistakes that they committed in 
their decisions. The opponents to the provision contended 
that it would destroy the sanctity of decisions and would 
eventually work to undermine the respect of the people for 
the judiciary and for the law itself ; that it would work an 
injustice to the State, for it would induce some people to 
confabulate with one another in an attempt to make the 
State pay for damages and losses; and that, if ever the 
principle should be adopted, it should be left to be defined 
in all its details in statutes rather than in the Constitu- 
tion. 

When it was put to a vote after the thrilling debates, 
the amendment for suppression was carried by 62 affirma- 
tive votes against 38 negative votes. 

Postscript. — While it reposed its hope mainly in the 
judiciary for the honest, impartial, just, and efficient ad- 
ministration of justice, the Convention did not intend that 
the judges should shoulder entirely that great responsi- 
bility. One who peruses the history of the framing of the 
Constitution, written through the pages of the press of the 
time and of the records of the Convention, would not fail to 
perceive the decided intention of the Convention to se- 
cure a just and sound administration of justice in the 
Philippines and its hope for the attainment of such an 
objective in the cooperation of the judiciary, of the bar, 
of the legislature, of executive officials, and of the public: 
of the bar, through its intervention in the equitable adjust- 
ment of legal relations of persons, in the careful selection 



THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 



517 



of the members of the bench, in the maintenance of respect 
for law and the constituted authorities and in defense of 
the independence of the judiciary, and in the speedy set- 
tlement of cases, with justice to all concerned; of the legis- 
lature, thi’ough the passage of just and simplj'^-phrased laws, 
clear and understandable to the average man, and through 
a careful organization of the courts, especially those closest 
to the people — the justice of the peace coui'ts; of the exe- 
cutive officials, tlu'bugh the enforcement of the law equally 
among the people, regardless of their station in life ; of the 
courts, through the making of just and simple rules and 
the rendition of decisions in close conformity to the facts 
and the law, regardless of the persons affected; of the 
public, through the building up of a tradition having 
almost the force of law for the selection by the appointing 
power only of men qualified for the bench by theii train 
ing, their experience, and their character, foi the rn^|J^ 
tenance and protection of the independence of the ju i 
ciary, for the speedy and just settlement of cases, 
the enforcement of the law and the execution of decisions 
of the courts equally upon all the people of the country. 



APPENDIX 







W'l 



- a 

■i: - '. -1 ,-> .v^« 

♦ 






‘V u-' 






|c ,. , jlM® fiferw* , 

r ,^v W-y' 



w>' '»• 



• - ,. V* , :* • 5t: i. 



.y^4,?/.. -o. 



4 '. 



■iC^ 







ypU f/t 

\^ ^ Tr "- 






iJ?^ 



, M'*' ^Y 









> 



t .T * . 



!^-.1 






^,. ■.-• ■ '-■ vi ^ 'W 

■ %.!&■ ,'• - Jfeit ’>■ &. -■ ■'• 




m r; > 







»'5l!S'J^ 








,. -.4 






■ ■ ‘W,^ 










APPENDIX 



CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 

The Filii>ino people, imploi*ing the aid of Divine Prov- 
idence, in order to establish a government that shall em- 
body their ideals, conserve and develop the patrimony of 
the nation, jjromote the general welfare, and secure to 
themselves and their ijosterity the blessings of indepen - 
ence under a regime of justice, liberty, and demociacy, o 
ordain and promulgate this Constitution. 

Article I.— THE NATIONAL TERRITORY 

Section l. The Philipipnes comprises all the terri- 
tory ceded to the United States by the treaty of Pans con- 
cluded between the United States and Spain on 
day of December, eighteen hundred and 
limits of which are set forth in Article III of sai i » 
together with all the islands embraced in the tiea y 
eluded at Washington, between the United S a ‘ , 
Spain on the seventh day of November, nineteen lo 
and in the treaty concluded between the United S 
Great Britain on the second day of 

dred and thirty, and all territory over whic ,-,„.;sdic- 

Government of the Philippine Islands exercise 

tion. 

article ii.-declaration of 

SECTION 1. The Philippines is a P^ e,.„ment 
Sovereignty resides in the people ana 
authority emanates from them. j x nf 

Sec. 2. The defense of the citizens 

government, and in the fulfillment of this d y 
may be required by law to render person 
service. 

(1) Adopted by the Philippine Constitutional Conv^^^ in th^ 

City of Manila, Philippines, on Fel^uary , _ . approved by 

President of the United States on March 18, neople in a 

him on March 23, 1935; and ratified by the Fihpino p P 
plebiscite held on May 14, 1935. 



522 



CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 



Sec. 3. The Philippines renounces war as an instru- 
ment of national policy, and adopts the generally accepted 
principles of international law as a part of the law of the 
Nation. 

Sec. 4. The natural right and duty of pai-ents in the 
rearing of the youth for civic efficiency should receive the 
aid and support of the Government. 

Sec. 5. The promotion of social justice to insure the 
well-being and economic security of all the people should 
be the concern of the State. 

ARTICLE III.— BILL OF PJGHTS 

Section l. (l) No person shall be deprived of life, 
liberty, or property without due process of law, nor shall 
any person be denied the equal protection of the laws. 

(2) Private property shall not be taken for public use 
without just compensation. 

(3) The right of the people to be secure in their per- 
sons, houses, papers, and effects against unreasonable 
searches and seizures shall not be violated, and no war- 
rants shall issue but upon probable cause, to be determined 
by the judge after examination under oath or affirmation 
of the complainant and the witnesses he may produce, and 
particularly describing the place to be searched, and the 
persons or things to be seized. 

(4) The liberty of abode and of changing the same 
Within the limits prescribed by law shall not be impaired. 

(5) The privacy of communication and correspondence 
shall be inviolable except upon lawful order of the court 
or when public safety and order require otherwise. 

(6) The right to form associations or societies for 
purposes not contrary to law shall not be abridged. 

(7) No law shall be made respecting an establishment 
of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof, and the 
free exercise and enjoyment of religious profession and 
worship, without discrimination or preference, shall forever 



APPENDIX 



523 



be allowed. No religious test shall be required for the exer- 
cise of civil or political rights. 

(8) No law shall be passed abridging the fi'eedom of 
speech, or of the press, or the right of the people peaceably 
to assemble and petition the Govei*nment for redress of 
grievances. 

(9) No law granting a title of nobility shall be enacted, 
and no person holding any office of profit or trust shall, 
without the consent of the National Assembly, accept any 
present, emolument, office, or title of any kind whatever 
from any foreign state. 

(10) No law impairing the obligation of contracts shall 
be passed. 

(11) No cx post facto law or bill of attainder shall be 
enacted. 

(12) No person shall be imprisoned for debt or non- 
payment of a poll tax. 

(13) No involuntary servitude in any form shall exist 
except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall 
have been duly convicted. 

(14) The privilege of the writ of habeas coi'piis shall 
not be suspended except in cases of invasion, insuriection, 
or rebellion, when the public safety requires it, in any of 
which events the same may be suspended wherever duiing 
such period the necessity for such suspension shall exist. 

(15) No person shall be held to answer for a criminal 
offense without due process of law. 

(16) All persons shall before conviction be bailable by 
sufficient sureties, except those charged with capital of- 
fenses when evidence of guilt is strong. Excessive bail 
shall not be required. 

(17) In all criminal prosecutions the accused shall be 
presumed to be innocent until the contrary is proved, and 
shall enjoy the right to be heard by himself and counsel, 
to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation 
against him, to have a speedy and public trial, to meet the 



524 



CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 



witnesses face to face, and to have compulsory process to 
secure the attendance of witnesses in his behalf. 

(18) No person shall be compelled to be a witness 
against himself. 

(19) Excessive fines shall not be imposed, nor cruel 
and unusual punishment inflicted. 

(20) No person shall be twice put in jeopardy of 
punishment for the same offense. If an act is punished by 
a law and an ordinance, conviction or acquittal under either 
shall constitute a bar to another prosecution for the same 
act. 

(21) Free access to the courts shall not be denied to 
any person by reason of poverty. 

Article IV.— CITIZENSHIP 

Section l. The following are citizens of the Philip- 
pines : 

(1) Those who are citizens of the Philippine Islands 
at the time of the adoption of this Constitution. 

(2) Those bom in the Philippine Islands of foreign 
parents who, before the adoption of this Constitution, had 
been elected to public office in the Philippine Islands. 

(3) Those whose fathers are citizens of the Philip- 
pines. 

(4) Those whose mothers are citizens of the Philip- 
pines and, upon reaching the age of majority, elect Philip- 
pine citizenship. 

(5) Those who are naturalized in accordance with law. 

Philippine citizenship may be lost or reacquired 
in the manner provided by law. 

Article V.— SUFFRAGE 

Suffrage may be exercised by male citizens 
of the Philippines not otherwise disqualified by law, who 
are twenty-one years of age or over and are able to read 
and write, and who shall have resided in the Philippines 
for one year and in the municipality wherein they propose 



APPENDIX 



525 



to vote for at least six months preceding the election. The 
National Assembly shall extend the right of suffrage to 
women, if in a plebiscite which shall be held foi* that pur- 
pose within two yeai'S after the adoption of this Constitu- 
tion, not less than three hundred thousand women posses- 
sing the necessai'y qualifications shall vote affirmatively on 
the question. 

Article VI. — LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 
Section l. The Legislative power shall be vested in a 
National Assembly. The Members of the National Assem- 
bly shall not exceed one hundred and twenty, shall be chosen 
every three years, and shall be apportioned among the sev- 
eral provinces as nearly as may be according to the nunibei 
of their respective inhabitants, but each province shall have 
at least one Member. The National Assembly shall by law 
make an apix>rtionment within three yeai's aftei the leturn 
of every enumeration, and not othei'wise. Until such appoi 
tionment shall have been made, the National Assembly 
consist of ninety-eight Members, of whom eighty-seven sha.l 
be elected by the representative districts as now provided 
by law; and three by the Mountain Province, and one by 
each of the other eight existing special provinces. The 
Members of the National Assembly in the provinces ot 
Sulu, Lanao, and Cotabato shall bs chosen as may be detci- 
mined by law; in all other provinces they shall be elected 
by the qualified voters therein. 

Sec. 2. No person shall be a Member of the National 
Assembly unless he has been five years a citizen of the 
Philippines, is at least thirty yeai's of age, and, at the time 
of his election, a qualified elector, and a resident of the 
province in which he is chosen for not less than one year 
immediately prior to his election. 

Sec. 3. (1) In case of vacancy in the National Assem- 
bly a special election may be called in the corresponding 
district, in the manner prescribed by law, but the Member 
thus elected shall serve only for the unexpired term. 



526 



CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 



(2) Elections for the National Assembly shall be held 
on the dates fixed by law. 

(3) The National Assembly shall convene in regular 
session once every year, on the second Monday of the month 
immediately following that on which the election of its 
Members was held, unless a different date is fixed by law. 
The National Assembly may be called in special session at 
any time by the President to consider general legislation 
or only such subjects as he may designate. No special 
session shall continue longer than thirty days and no reg- 
ular session longer than one hundred days, exclusive of 
Sundays. 



(4) The National Assembly shall choose its Speaker 
a secretary, a sergeant-at-arms, and such other officers as 
may be required. A majority of all the Members shall 
constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number 
may adjourn from day to day, and may compel the attend- 
ance of absent Members, in such manner and under such 
penalties as the National Assembly may provide. 

(5) The National Assembly may determine the rules 
of Its proceedings, punish its Members for disorderly be- 
havior, and with the concurrence of hvo-thirds, expel a 
Member. It shall keep a Journal of its proceedings, and 

rom ime o ime publish the same, excepting such parts 
as may in its judgment require secrecy; and the yeas and 

the request of one-fifth of 
Its Members present, be entered in the Journal. 

tu shall be an Electoral Commission com- 

designated 

by the Chief Justice, and of six Members chosen by the 
National Assembly, three of whom shall be nominated by 
the party having the largest number of votes, and three 
by e P^rty having the second largest number of votes 
therein. The senior Justice in the Commission shall be its 
Chairman. The Electoral Commission shall be the sole 
judge of all contests relating to the election, retunis, and 
qualifications of the Members of the National Assembly. 



APPENDIX 



527 



Sec. 5. The Members of the National Assembly shall, 
unless otherwise provided by law, receive an annual com- 
pensation of five thousand pesos each including per diems 
and other emoluments or allowances and exclusive only of 
travelling expenses to and from their respective districts 
when attending sessions of the National Assembly. No 
increase in said compensation shall take effect until 
the expiration of the full tei'm of the !Members of the a 
tional Assembly elected subsequent to the appi'oval 
increase. The Speaker of the National Assembly shall re- 
ceive an annual compensation of sixteen thousand pesos 
until otherwise provided by law. 

Sec. 6. The Members of the National Assembly shall 
in all cases except treason, felony, and breach of the 
be privileged from arrest duiing thefr attendance a i 
sessions of the National Assemblss and in 
returning from the same; and for any speec oi 
therein, they shall not be questioned in any o lei p a 

Sec. 7. The National Assembly shall elect from 
its Members, on the basis of proportional represents i 
of the political parties therein, a Commission on PP®^ 
ments and a Commission on Impeachment, ° 

of twenty-one members. These Commi^ions s it , , 

stituted within thirty days after the J 

shall have been organized with the e ec , . • g’ 

and shall meet only while the National Assembly ^es 
Sion, at the call of their respective Chau men ^ ^ J ^ 
of. their members, to discharge such powers and functions 
as are herein conferred upon them. 

Sec 8 m No Member of the National Assembly may 
hold any other office or employment in the Government 
without forfeiting his seat, nor shall any such Member dui- 
ing the time for which he was elected, be appomted to any 
civil office which may have been creaM or the emoluments 
whereof shall have been increased while he was a Member 

of the National Assembly. , „ j- 

(2) No Member of the National Assembly shall di- 
rectly or indirectly be financially interested in any contract 



528 



CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 



v/ith the Government or any subdivision or instrumentality 
thereof, or in any franchise or special privilege granted by 
the National Assembly during his term of office; nor shall 
any such Member appear as counsel before the Electoral 
Commission or any court in any civil case wherein the Gov- 
ernment or any sub-division or instrumentality thereof is the 
adverse party , or collect any fee for his appearance in any 
administrative proceedings or in any criminal case wherein 
an officer or employee of the Govemment is accused of an 
offense committed in relation to his office. No Llember 
of the Commission on Appointments of the National As- 
sembly shall appear as counsel before any court inferior 
to the Supreme Court. 



j President shall submit within fifteen 

days of the opening of each regular session of the Nation- 
^ budget of receipts and expenditures, which 
shall be the basis of the general appropriation bill. The 
National Assembly may not increase the appropriations re- 
commended by the President for the operation of the Gov- 
ernment as specified in the Budget, except the appropria- 
tions for the National Assembly and the Judicial Depart- 
ment. The form of the Budget and the information that 
it should contain shall be prescribed by law. 



(2) No provision or enactment shall be embraced in 
the general appropriation, unless it relates specifically to 
some particular appropriation in the bill; and any such 
provision or enactment shall be limited in its operation to 
such appropriation. 



SEC. 10. The heads of departments upon their own ini- 
tiative or upon the request of the National Assembly may 
appear before and be heard by the National Assembly on 
any matter pertaining to their departments, unless the pub- 
lic interest shall require otherwise and the President shall 
so state in writing. 



Sec. 11. (1) Every bill which shall have passed the Na- 
tional Assembly shall, before it becomes a law, be presented 
to the President. If he approve the same, he shall sign 



APPENDIX 



529 



it; but if not, he shall return it with his objections to 
the National Assembly, which shall enter the objections 
at lai'ge on its Joui'nal and proceed to reconsider it. If, 
after such reconsideration, two-thirds of all the Members 
of the National Assembly shall agree to pass the bill, it 
shall become a law. In all such cases the votes of the Na- 
tional Assembly shall be determined by yeas and mys, and 
the names of the Members voting for and against shall 
he entered on the Journal. If any bill shall not be re- 
turned by the President as herein provided within twenty 
days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented 
to him. the same shall become a law in like mannei- as if 
he had signed it, unless the National Assembly by adjourn- 
ment prevent its return, in which case it shall become a 
law unless vetoed by the President within thirty days af- 
ter adjournment. 



(2) The President shall have the power to veto any 
particular item or items of an appropriation bill, but the 
veto shall not affect the item or items to which he does 
not object. When a provision of an appropriation bill af- 
fects one or more items of the same, the President can- 
not veto the provision without at the same time vetoing 
the particular item or items to which it relates. The item 
or items objected to shall not take effect except in the 
manner heretofore provided as to bills le nine o le a 
tional Assembly without the approval of the president. If 
the veto refers to a bill or any item of an appropriation 
bill' which appropriates a sum in excess of ten per centum 
of the total amount voted in the appropriation bill for the 
.general expenses of the Government for the preceding 
year, or if it should refer to a bill authorizing an increase 
of the public debt, the same shall not become a law unless 
approved by thre^fourths of all the Members of the Na- 



tional Assembly. 

(3) The President shall have the power to veto any 
separate item or items in a revenue or tariff bill, and the 
item or items vetoed shall not take effect except in the 
manner provided as to bills vetoed by the President. 



530 



CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 



Sec. 12. (1) No bill which may be enacted into law 
shall embrace more than one subject which shall be ex- 
pressed in the title of the bill. 

(2) No bill shall be passed or become a law unless 
it shall have been printed and copies thereof in its final 
fonn furnished the Members at least three calendar days 
prior to its passage by the National Assembly, except when 
the President shall have certified to the necessity of its 
immediate enactment. Upon the last reading of a bill no 
amendment thereof shall be allowed, and the question upon 
its final passage shall be taken immediately thereafter, and 
the yeas and nays entered on the .Journal 

Sec. 13. (1) All money collected on any tax levied for 
a special purpose shall be treated as a special fund and 
paid out for such purpose -only. If the purpose for which 
a special fund was created has been fulfilled or abandoned, 
the balance, if any, shall be transferred to the general funds 
of the Government. 

(2) No money shall be paid out of the Treasury ex- 
cept in pursuance of an appropriation made by law. 

(3) No public money or property shall ever be ap- 
propriated, applied, or used, directly or indirectly, for the 
use, benefit, or support of any sect, church, denomination, 

, sectarian institution, or system of religion, or for the use, 
benefit, or support of any priest, preacher, minister, or 
other religious teacher or dignitary as such, except when 
such priest, preacher, minister, or dignitary is assigned to 
the armed forces or to any penal institution, orphanage, 
or leprosarium. 

Sec. 14. (1) The rule of taxation shall be uniform. 

(2) The National Assembly may be law authorize the 
President, subject to such limitations and restrictions as 
it may impose, to fix within specified limits, tariff rates, 
import or export quotas, and tonnage and wharfage dues. 

(3) Cemeteries, churches, and parsonages or convents 
appurtenant thereto, and all lands, buildings, and improve- 



APPENDIX 



531 



merits used exclusively for religious, charitable, or educa- 
tional purixises shall be exempt from taxation. 

Sec. 15. The National Assembly shall, with the con- 
currence of two-thirds of all its Members, have the sole 
power to declare war. 

Sec. 16. In times of war or other national emergency, 
the National Assembly may by law authorize the Pi'esident, 
for a limited period and subject to such restrictions as it 
may prescribe, to promulgate rules and regulations to 
carry out a declaimed national policy. 



Article VIL— EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT 
Section l. The Executive power shall be vested in a 



President of the Philippines. 

Sec. 2. The President shall hold his office during a 
term of six years, and together with the Vice-Piesident 
chosen for the same term, shall be elected by diiect vote 
of the people. The election returns for President and Vice- 
President, duly certified by the board of canvassers of each 
province, shall be transmitted to the National Assembly. 
Upon receipt of such returns the National Assembly shall 
forthwith, in public session, count the votes, and proclaim 
the persons elected President and Vice-President The 
persons respectively having the highest number of votes 
for President and Vice-President shall be declared elected, 
but in case two or more shall have an equal and the high- 
est number of votes for either office, the National Assem- 
bly shall, by a majority vote of all its Members, elect one 
of said persons as President or Vice-President. 



Sec. 3. No person may be elected to the office of Pres- 
ident or Vice-President, unless he be a natural-born citizen 
of the Philippines, a qualified- voter, forty pars of age or 
over, and has been a resident of the Philippines for at least 
ten years immediately preceding the election. 

Sec. 4. No person elected President may be reelected 
for the following term, nor shall the Vice-President or any 



532 



CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 



other person who may have succeeded to the office of Pres- 
ident as herein provided at least one year before the elec- 
tion, be eligible to the office of President at such election. 

Sec. 5. Elections for President and Vice-President shall 
be held once every six years on a date to be fixed by the 
National Assembly. 

Sec. 6. The terms of the President and Vice-President 
shall end at noon on the thirtieth day of December follow- 
ing the expiration of six years after their election, and 
the terms of their successors shall begin from such time. 

Sec. 7. If, at the time fixed for the beginning of the 
term of the President, the Pi'esident-elect shall have died, 
the Vice-President-elect shall become President. If a Pres- 
ident shall not have been chosen before the time fixed for 
the beginning of his term, or if the President-elect shall 
have failed to qualify, then the Vice-President shall act as 
President until a President shall have qualified, and the 
National Assembly may by law provide for the case where- 
in neither a President-elect nor a Vice-President-elect shall 
have qualified, declaring who shall then act as President, 
or the manner in which one who is to act shall be selected, 
and such person shall act accordingly until a President 
or Vice-President shall have qualified. 

Sec. 8. Before he enter on the execution of his office, 
the President shall take the following oath or affirmation: 
“I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will 
faithfully and conscientiously fufill my duties as 
President of the Philippines, preserve and defend 
its Constitution, execute its laws, do justice to every 
man, and consecrate myself to the service of the 
Nation. So help me God.” (In case of affirmation, 
last sentence will be omitted.) 

Sec. 9. In the event of the removal of the President 
from office or of his death, resignation, or inability to dis- 
charge the powers and duties of the said office, the same 
shall devolve on the Vice-President, and the National As- 
sembly shall by law provide for the case of removal, death, 
resignation, or inability, both of the President and Vice- 



APPENDIX 



533 



President, declaring what officer shall then act as Pres- 
ident, and such officer shall act accordinglj% until the dis- 
ability be removed, or a President shall be elected. 

Sec. 10. The President shall have an official residence 
and receive a compensation to be ascertained by law which 
shall be neither increased nor diminished during the pe- 
riod for which he shall have been elected, and he shall 
not receive within that period any other emolument from 
the Government or any of its subdivisions or instrument- 
alities. Until the National Assembly shall provide other- 
wise, the President shall receive an annual salary of thii'ty 
thousand pesos. The Vice-President, when not acting as 
President, shall receive an annual compensation of fifteen 
thousand pesos until othei'wise provided by law. 

Sec. 11. (1) The President shall have control of all 
the executive departments, bureaus, or offices, exercise gen- 
eral supervision over all local governments as may be pro- 
vided by law, and take care that the laws be faithfully 
executed. 

(2) The President shall be commander-in-chief of all 
armed forces of the Philippines and, whenever it becomes 
necessary, he may call out such armed forces to prevent 
or suppx’ess lawless violence, invasion, insurrection, or re- 
bellion. In case of invasion, insurrection, oi lebellion, oi 
imminent danger* thereof, when the public safety requires 
it, he may suspend the privileges of the writ of Jiabeas 
corjms, or place the Philippines or any part thereof under 
martial law. 

(3) The President shall nominate and with the con- 
sent of the Commission on Appointments of the National 
Assembly, shall appoint the heads of the executive depart- 
ments and bureaus, officers of the Army from the rank 
of colonel, of the Navy and air forces from the rank of 
captain or commander, and all other officers of the Gov- 
ernment whose appointments ai*e not herein otherwise pro- 
vided for, and those whom he may be authorized by law 
to appoint; but the National Assembly may by law vest 



534 



CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 



the appointment of inferior officers, in the President alone, 
in the courts, or in the heads of departments. 

(4) The President shall have the power to make ap- 
pointments during the recess of the National Assembly, but 
such appointments shall be effective only until disapproval 
by the Commission on Appointments or until the next ad- 
journment of the National Assembly, 

(5) The President shall from time to time give to the 
National Assembly information of the state of the Nation, 
and recommend to its consideration such measures as he 
shall judge necessary and expedient. 

(6) The President shall have the power to grant re- 
prieves, commutations, and pardons, and remit fines and 
forfeitures, after conviction, for all offenses, except in 
cases of impeachment, upon such conditions and with such 
restrictions and limitations as he may deem proper to im- 
pose. He shall have the power to grant amnesty with the 
concurrence of the National Assembly. 

(7) The President shall have the power, with the con- 
currence of a majority of all the Members of the National 
Assembly, to make treaties, and with the consent of the 
Commission on Appointments, he shall appoint ambassa- 
dors, other public ministers, and consuls. lie shall receive 
ambassadors and other ministei-s duly accredited to the 
Government of the Philippines. 

Sec. 12. (1) The executive departments of the pres- 
ent Government of the Philippine Islands shall continue 
as now authorized by law until the National Assembly shall 
provide otherwise. 

(2) The heads of departments and chiefs of bureaus 
or offices and their assistants shall not, during their con- 
tinuance in office, engage in the practice of any profession^ 
or intervene, directly or indirectly, in the management or 
control of any private enterprise which in any way may be 
affected by the functions of their office; nor shall they, 
directly or indirectly, be financially interested in any con- 



APPENDIX 



535 



tract with the Government, or any subdivision or instru- 
mentality thereof. 

(3) The President may appoint the Vice-Pi*esident as 
a member of his cabinet and also as head of an executive 
department. 

ARTICLE VIII.— JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 

Section l. The Judicial power shall be vested in one 
Supreme Court and in such inferior com-ts as may be es- 
tablished by law. 

Sec. 2. The National Assembly shall have the power 
to define, prescribe, and apportion the jurisdiction of the 
various courts, but may not deprive the Supreme Court 
of its original jurisdiction over cases affecting ambassa- 
dors, other public ministers, and consuls, nor of its juris- 
diction to review, revise, reverse, modify, or affirm on ap- 
peal, certiorari, or writ of error, as the law or the rules 
of court way provide, final judgments and decrees of in- 
ferior courts in — 

(1) All cases in which the constitutionality or valid- 
ity of any treaty, law, ordinance, or executive ordei or re- 
gulation is in question. 

(2) All cases involving the legality of any tax, impose, 
assessment, or toll, or any penalty imposed in i elation 

thereto. , 

(3) All cases in which the jurisdiction of any trial 

court is in issue. 

(4) All criminal cases in which the penalty imposed 
is death or life imprisonment. 

(5) All cases in which an error or question of law 

is involved. 

Sec. 3. Until the National Assembly shall provide 
otherwise, the Supreme Court shall have such original and 
appellate jurisdiction as may be possessed and exercised 
by the Supreme Court of the Philippine Islands at the time 
of the adoption of this Constitution. The original juiisdic- 
tion of the Supreme Court shall include all cases affecting 
ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls. 



536 



CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 



Sec. 4. The Supreme Court shall be composed of a 
Chief Justice and ten Associate Justices and may sit either 
in banc or in two divisions unless otherwise provided by 
law. 

Sec. 5. The members of the Supreme Court and all 
judges of inferior courts shall be appointed by the Pres- 
ident with the consent of the Commission on Appointments 
of the National Assembly. 

Sec. 6. No person may be appointed member of the 
Supreme Court unless he has been five years a citizen of 
the Philippines, is at least forty years of age, and has for 
ten years or more been a judge of a court of record or 
engaged in the practice of law in the Philippines. 

Sec. 7. No judge appointed for a particular district 
shall be designated or transferred to another district with- 
out the approval of the Supreme Court. The National As- 
sembly shall by law determine the residence of judges of 
inferior courts. 

Sec. 8. The National Assembly shall presci'ibe the 
qualifications of judges of inferior coux’ts, but no person 
may be appointed judge of any such courts unless he is 
a citizen of the Philippines and has been admitted to the 
practice of law in the Philippines. 

Sec. 9. The members of the Supreme Court and all 
judges of inferior courts shall hold office during good be- 
havior, until they reach the age of seventy years, or be- 
come incapacitated to discharge the duties of their office. 
They shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by 
law, which shall not be diminished during their continu- 
ance in office. Until the National Assembly shall provide 
otherwise, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court shall 
receive an annual compensation of sixteen thousand pesos, 
and each Associate Justice, fifteen thousand pesos. 

Sec. 10. All cases involving the constitutionality of a 
treaty or law shall be heard and decided by the Supreme 
Court in banc, and no treaty or law may be declared uncon- 



APPENDIX 



537 



stitutional without the concurrence of two-thirds of all the 
membei*s of the Court. 

Sec. 1 1 . The conclusions of the Supreme Court in any 
case submitted to it for decision shall be reached in con- 
sultation before the case is assigned to a Justice for the 
wi'iting of the opinion of the Court. Any Justice dissent- 
ing from a decision shall state the reasons for his dissent. 

Sec. 12. No decision shall be rendered by any court 
of record without expressing therein clearly and distinctly 
the facts and the law on which it is based. 

Sec. 13. The Supreme Court shall have the power to 
pi'omulgate rules concerning pleading, practice, and proce- 
dure in all courts, and the admission to the practice of law. 
Said rules shall be uniform for all courts of the same grade 
and shall not diminish, increase, or modify substantive 
rights. The existing laws on pleading, practice, and pro- 
cedure are hereby repealed as statutes, and are declaied 
Rules of Courts, subject to the power of the Supreme Couit 
to alter and modify the same. The National Assembly 
shall have the powei* to repeal, alter, oi* supplement the 
rules concerning pleading, practice, and procedure, and the 
admission to the pi'actice of law in the Philippines. 

ARTICLE IX.— IMPEACHMENT 

Section l. The President, the Vice-President, the Jus- 
tices of the Supreme Court, and the Auditoi Geneial, shall 
be removed from office on impeachment for, and convic- 
tion of, culpable violation of the Constitution, tieason, bii- 
bery, or other high crimes. 

Sec. 2 The Commission on Impeachment of the Na- 
tional Assembly, by a vote of two-thirds of its Members 
shall have the sole power of impeachment. 

Sec. 3. The National Assembly shall have the sole 
power to try all impeachments. When sitting for that 
purpose the Members shall be on oath or affirmation. When 
the President of the Philippines is on trial, the Chief Jus- 
tice of the Supreme Court shall preside. No person shall 



538 



CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 



be convicted without the concurrence of three-fourths of 
all the Members who do not belong to the Commission on 
Impeachment. 

Sec. 4. Judgment in cases of impeachment shall not 
extend further than to removal from office and disqualifi- 
cation to hold and enjoy any office of honor, trust, o* P*"o- 
fit under the Government of the Philippines, but the partj' 
convicted shall nevertheless be liable and subject to prose- 
cution, trial, and punishment, according to law. 



Article X.— GENERAL AUDITING OFFICE 



Section l. There shall be a General Auditing Office 
under the direction and control of an Auditor General, who 
shall hold office for a tem of ten years and may not be 
reappointed. The Auditor General shall be appointed by 
the President with the consent of the Commission on Ap- 
pointments, and shall receive an annual compensation to be 
fixed by law which shall not be diminished during his con- 
tinuance in office. Until the National Assembly shall pi’o- 
vide otherwise, the Auditor General shall receive an annual 
compensation of twelve thousand pesos. 



Sec. 2. The Auditor General shall examine, audit, and 
settle all accounts pertaining to the revenues and receipts 
from whatever som'ce, including trust funds derived from 
bond issues; and audit, in accordance with law and admi- 
nistrative regulations, all expenditures of funds or prop- 
erty pertaining to or held in trust by the Government or 
the provinces or municipalities thereof. He shall keep the 
general accounts of the Government and preserve the 
vouchers pertaining thereto. It shall be the duty of the 
Auditor General to bring to the attention of the proper 
administrative officer expenditures of funds or property 
which, in his opinion, are irregular, unnecessary, excessive, 
or extravagant. He shall also perform such other func- 
tions as may be prescribed by law. 



Sec. 3. The decisions of the Auditor General shall be 
rendered within the time fixed by law, and the same may 
be appealed to the President w’hose action shall be final. 



APPENDIX 



539 



When the aggrieved party is a private person or entity, 
an aijpeal from the decision of the Auditor General may 
be taken directly to a court of record in the manner pro- 
vided by law. 

Sec. 4. The Auditor General shall submit to the Pres- 
ident and the National Assembly an annual report covei- 
ing the financial condition and operations of the Govern- 
ment, and such other I'eports as may be requiied. 

Articel XI. — CIVIL SERVICE 

Section l. A civil Service embracing all branches and 
subdivisions of the Government shall be provided by law. 
Appointments in the Civil Service, except as to those which 
are policy-determining, primarily confidential or highly 
technical in nature, shall be made only according to mem 
and fitness, to be determined as far as practicable y 
petitive examination. 

Sec. 2. Officers and employees in the Civil Service, m- 
cluding members of the armed forces, shall not engage d - 
rectly or indirectly in partisan political activities oi tav 
part in any election except to vote. 

Sec 3 No officer or employee of the Government shall 
recewraddittn^l ord^ compensation unless specifically 

authorized by law. 

SEC 4 No oWcei- or employee in the Civil Service shall 
be removed or suspended except for cause as provided by 
law. 

article XII.-CONSERVATION and 

OF NATURAL RESOURCES 

Section 1. All agricultural,, ttaber, and mineral lands 
^ of the public domain, waters, minerals, coal, petroleum 
and othm- mineral oils, all forces of potential energy, and 

, , , , „„eonrces of the Philippines belong to the 

other natural resouices uo. u ^ 

state, and their disposition, exploitation developme^^^ or 

utilization shall be limited to citizens of the Philippines, 

or Ito corporations or association at least sixty per centum 

of the capital of which is owned by such citizens, subject 



540 CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 

to any existing right, grant, lease, or concession at the 
time of the inauguration of the Goveniment established 
under this Constitution. Natural resources, with the ex- 
ception of public agricultural land, shall not be alienated, 
and no license, concession, or lease for the exploitation, 
development, or utilization of any of the natural resources 
shall be granted for a period exceeding twenty-five years, 
renewable for another twenty-five yeai’s, except as to water 
rights for irrigation, water supply, fisheries, or industrial 
uses other than the development of water power, in which 
cases beneficial use may be the measure and the limit of 
the grant. 

Sec. 2. No private corporation or association may ac- 
quire, lease, or hold public agricultural lands in excess of 
one thousand and twenty-four hectares, nor may any in- 
dividual acquire such lands by purchase in excess of one 
hundred and forty-four hectares, or by lease in excess of 
one thousand and twenty-four hectares, or by homestead 
in excess of twenty-four hectares. Lands adapted to graz- 
ing, not exceeding two thousand hectares, may be leased 
to an individual, private corporation, or association. 

Sec. 3. The National Assembly may determine by law 
the size of private agricultural land which individuals, cor- 
porations, or associations may acquire and hold, subject 
to rights existing prior to the enactment of such law. 

Sec. 4. The National Assembly may authorize, upon 
payment of just compensation, the expropriation of lands 
to be subdivided into small lots and conveyed at cost to 
individuals. 

Sec. 5. Save in cases of hereditary succession, no pri- 
vate agricultural land shall be transferred or assigned ex- 
cept to individuals, corporations, or associations qualified 
to acquire or hold lands of the public domain in the Philip- 
pines. 

Sec. 6. The State may, in the interest of national wel- 
fare and defense, establish and operate industries and 
means of transportation and communication, and, upon 



appendix 



541 



payment of just compensation, transfer to public ownei- 
ship utilities and other private enterprises to be operated 
by the Government. 

Article XIII. — GENERAL PROVISIONS 

SECTION 1. The Hag of the Philippines shall be red, 
white, and blue, with a sun and three stars, as consecrate 
and honored by the people and i*ecognized by law. 

Sec. 2. All public officers and members of the armed 
forces shall take an oath to support and defend the Con- 
stitution. 

Sec. 3. The National Assembly shall take steps toward 
the development and adoption of a common national lan- 
guage based on one of the existing native languages. Until 
otherwise provided by law, English and Spanish shall con 
tinue as official languages. 

Sec. 4. The State shall promote scientific research and 
invention. Arts and letters shall be under its pationage. 
The exclusive right to writings and inventions shall be 
secured to authors and inventor's for a limited period. 

Sec. 5. All educational institutions shall be under the 
supervision of and subject to regulation by the State. The 
Government shall establish and maintain a complete and 
adequate system of public education, and shall provide at 
least free public primary instruction, and citizenship train- 
ing to adult citizens. All schools shall aim to develop mo- 
ral character, personal discipline, civic conscience, and vo- 
cational efficiency, and to teach the duties of citizenship. 
Optional religious instruction shall be maintained in the 
public schools as now authorized by law. Universities es- 
tablished by the State shall enjoy acadeinic freedom. The 
State shall create scholarships in arts, science, and letters 
for specially gifted citizens. 

Sec. 6. The State shall afford protection to labor, es- 
pecially to working women and minors, and shall regulate 
the relations between landowner and tenant, and between 
labor and capital in industry and in agriculture. The State 
may provide for compulsory arbitration. 



542 



CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 



Sec. 7. The National Assembly shall not, e.xcept by 
general law, provide for the formation, organization, or 
regulation of private corporations, unless such corporations 
are owned or controlled by the Govemment or any subdi- 
vision or instrumentality thereof. 

Sec. 8. No franchise, certificate, or any other form 
or authorization for the operation of a public utility shall 
be granted except to citizens of the Philippines or to cor- 
porations or other entities organized under the laws of the 
Philippines, sixty per centum of the capital of which is 
owned by citizens of the Philippines, nor shall such fi’an- 
chise, certificate, or authorization be exclusive in chax’acter 
or for a longer period than fifty years. No franchise or 
right shall be granted to any individual, firm, or corpora- 
tion, except under the condition that it shall be subject to 
amendment, alteration, or repeal by the National Assembly 
when the public interest so requires. 

Sec. 9. The Government shall organize and maintain 
a national police force to preserve public order and enforce 
the law. 

Sec. 10. This Constitution shall be officially promul- 
gated in English and Spanish, but in case of conflict the 
English text shall prevail. 

Article XIV.— AMENDMENTS 

Section l. The National Assembly, by a vote of three-: 
fourths of all its Members, may propose amendments to 
this Constitution or call a convention for that purpose. 
Such amendments shall be valid as part of this Constitu- 
tion when approved by a majority of the votes cast at an 
election at which the amendments are submitted to the 
people for their ratification. 

Article XV.— TRANSITORY PROVISIONS 

Section l. The first election of the officers provided 
in this Constitution and the inauguration of the Govern- 
ment of the Commonwealth of the Philippines shall take 
place as provided in Public Act Numbered One hundred 



APPENDIX 



543 



and twenty-seven of the Congress of the United States, 
approved March twenty-four, nineteen hundred and thirty- 
four. 

Sec. 2. All laws of the Philippine Islands shall con- 
tinue in force until the inauguration of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines; thereafter, such laws shall remain ope- 
rative, unless inconsistent with this Constitution, unti 
amended, altered, modified, or repealed by the Nationa 
Assembly, -and all references in such laws to the Govern- 
ment or officials of the Philippine Islands shall be con- 
strued, in so far as applicable, to refer to the Government 
and co)-responding officials under this Constitution. 

Sec 3. All courts existing at the time of the adoption 
of this Constitution shall continue and exercise their juris- 
diction, until otherwise provided by law m ^ 

this Constitution, and all oases, c.y.l and, 
ing in said courts, shall be heard, tried, and deteimined un 

der tlxe laws then in force. 

SEC. 4 All officers and employees' in the existing Gov- 
ernment of the Philippine Islands 
until the National 

V sted n the President shall 

upon the appointment and dual— 

Lm tteT“o" nmigurat^^^ of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines. ,, o 

SEC. 5. The Member ^ofthe^Na^nay 

“ded“” ?he voters of municipalities and municipal 
distrlets^ormmd^^^^^^^^^^^^^ 

ttoTfor Mahers of the National Assembly in such dis- 

tricts as may be provide y 

QTPrx r The provisions of this Constitution, except 
those contained in this article and in Article V, and those 
which refer to the election and qualifications of officers 



544 



CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 



to be elected under this Constitution, shall not take effect 
until the inauguration of the Commonwealth of the Phil- 
ippines. 

Article XVL— SPECIAL PROVISIONS EFFECTIVE 

UPON THE PROCLAMATION OF THE INDE- 
^ PENDENCE OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Section l. Upon the proclamation of the President of 
the United States recognizing the independence of the 
Philippines — 

(1) The property rights of the United States and the 
Philippines shall be promptly adjusted and settled, and all 
existing property rights of citizens or corporations of the 
United States shall be acknowledged, respected, and safe- 
guarded to the same extent as property rights of citizens 
of the Philippines. 

(2) The officials elected and serving under this Con- 
stitution shall be constitutional officers of the free and 
independent government of the Philippines and qualified 
to function in all respects as if elected directly under such 
Government, and shall serve their full terms of office as 
prescribed in this Constitution. 

(3) The debts and liabilities of the Philippines, its 
provinces, cities, municipalities, and instrumentalities, 
which shall be valid and subsisting at the time of the final 
and complete withdrawal of the sovereignty of the United 
States, shall be assumed by the free and independent gov- 
ernment of the Philippines; and where bonds have been is- 
sued under authority of an Act of Congress of the United 
States by the Philippine Islands, or any province, city, or 
m.unicipality therein, the Government of the Philippines 
will make adequate provision for the necessary funds for 
the payment of interest and principal, and such obligations 
shall be a first lien on all taxes collected. 

(4) The Government of the Philippines will assume 
all continuing obligations of the United States under the 
Treaty of Peace with Spain ceding the Philippine Islands 
to the United States. 



APPENDIX 



545 



(5) The Government of the Philippines will embody 
the foregoing' provisions of this article (except subsection 

(2)) in a treaty with the United States. 

Article XVII.— THE COMMONWEALTH AND 

the republic 

Section l. The government established by this Con- 
stitution shall be known as the Commonwealth of the Phtl- 
iljpines. Upon the final and complete withdrawal of the 
sovereignty of the United States and the proclamation of 
I’hilippine independence, the Commonwealth of the Phil- 
ippines shall thenceforth be known as the Republic of the 
Philippines. 

ORDINANCE APPENDED TO THE CONSTITUTION 

Section 1. Notwithstanding the provisions of the 
foregoing Constitution, pending the final and complete with- 
drawal of the sovereignty of the United States over the 
Philippines — 

(1) All citizens of the Philippines shall owe allegiance 
to the United States. 

(2) Every officer of the Government of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines shall, before entering upon the 
discharge of his duties, take and subscribe an oath of of- 
fice, declaring, among other things, that he recognizes and 
accepts the supreme authority of and will maintain true 
faith and allegiance to the United States. 

(3) Absolute toleration of religious sentiment shall be 
secured and no inhabitant or religious organization shall 
be molested in person or property on account of religious 
belief or mode of worship. • 

(4) Property owned by the United States, cemeteries, 

churches, and parsonages or convents appurtenant thereto, 
and all lands, buildings, and improvements used exclusively 
for religious, charitable, or educational purposes shall be 
exempt from taxation. ' 

(5) Trade relations between the Philippines and the 
United States shall be upon the basis prescribed in section 
six of Public Act Numbered One hundred and twenty-seven 



546 



CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 



of the Congress of the United States approved March 
twenty-four, nineteen hundred and thirty-four. 

(6) The public debt of the Philippines and its sub- 
ordinate branches shall not exceed limits now or hereafter 
fixed by the Congress of the United States, and no loans 
shall be contracted in foreign countries without the ap- 
proval of the President of the United States. 

(7) The debts, liabilities, and obligations of the pres- 
ent Government of the Philippine Islands, its provinces, 
municipalities, and instrumentalities, valid and subsisting 
at the time of the adoption of the Constitution, shall be 
assumed and paid by the Government of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines. 

(8) The Government of the Commonwealth of • the 
Philippines shall establish and maintain an adequate sys- 
tem of public schools, primarily conducted in the English 
language. 

(9) Acts affecting currency, coinage, imports, exports, 
and immigration shall not become law until approved by 
the President of the United States. 

(10) Foreign affairs shall be under the direct super- 
vision and control of the United States. 

(11) All acts passed by the National Assembly of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines shall be reported to the 
Congress of the United States. 

(12) The Philippines recognizes the right of the 
United States to expropriate property for public uses, to 
maintain military and other reservations and armed forces 
in the Philippines, and, upon order of the President of the 
United States, to call into the service of such armed forces 
all military forces organized by the Government of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines. 

(13) The decisions of the courts of the Philippines 
shall also extend to all cases involving the Constitution 
of the Philippines. 

(14) Appeals from decisions of the Auditor General 
may be taken to the President of the United States. 



appendix 



547 



(15) The United States may, by Presidential procla- 
mation, exercise the right to intervene for the preserva- 
tion of the Government of the Commonwealth of the Phil- 
ippines and for the maintenance of the Government as pro- 
vided in the Constitution thereof, and for the protection 
of life, proi>erty, and individual liberty and for the dis- 
chai'ge of Government obligations under and in accordance 
with the provisions of the Constitution. 

(16) The authority of the United States High Com- 
missioner to the Government of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines as provided in Public Act Numbered One hun- 
dred and twenty-seven of the Congress of the United States 
apiiroved March twenty-four, nineteen hundred and thirty- 
four, is hereby recognized. 

(17) Citizens and corporations of the United States 
shall enjoy in the Commonwealth of the Pinhppmes all the 
civil rights of the citizens and corporations, lespectively, 
thereof. 

(18) Every duly adopted amendment to the Cmsti- 
tution of the Philippines shall be submitted to tie Pres- 
ident of the United States for approval If the Presuient 
approve the amendment or if the President fail to disap- 
Piwe such amendment within six mon hs from the time 
of its submission, the amendment shall take effect as a 

part of such Constitution. , oi. i. i „ , 

(19) The President of the United States shall have 
authority to suspend the taking effect of or the operation 
of any law. contract, or executive order of the Government 
of the Commonweaith of the Philippines, which in h.s judg- 
ment will result in a failure of he Government of the Com- 
monwealth of the Philippines to fiilfll its contracts, or to 
meet its bonded indebtedness and interest thereon or to 
provide for its sinking funds, or which seems likely to im- 
pair the reserves for the protection of the currency of the 
Philippines, or which in his judgment will vioUate interna- 
tional obligations of the United States. 



548 



CONSTITUTION OF THE PHILIPPINES 



(20) The President of the Commonwealth of the Phil- 
ippines shall make an annual report to the President and 
Congress of the United States of the proceedings and ope- 
rations of the Government of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines and shall make such other reports as the Pres- 
ident or Congress may request. 

Sec. 2. Pending the final and complete withdrawal of 
the sovereignty of the United States over the Philippines, 
there shall be a Resident Commissioner of the Philippines 
to the United States who shall be appointed by the Pres- 
ident of the Commonwealth of the Philippines with the 
consent of the Commission on Appointments, The powers 
and duties of the Resident Commissioner shall be as pro- 
vided in section seven, paragraph five of Public Act Num- 
bered One hundred and twenty-seven of the Congress of 
the United States, approved March twenty-four, nineteen 
hundred and thirty-four, together with such other duties 
as the National Assembly may determine. The qualifica- 
tions, compensation, and expenses of the Resident Commis- 
sioner shall be fixed by law. 

Sec. 3, All other provisions of Public Act Numbered 
One hundred and twenty-seven of the Congress of the 
United States, approved March twenty-four, nineteen hun- 
dred and thirty-four, applicable to the Government of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines are hereby made a part 
of this Ordinance as if such provisions were expressly in- 
serted herein. 

I HEREBY CERTIFY that this Constitution was 
adopted by the Constitutional Convention on February 8. 
1935. 

(Sgd.) CLARO M. RECTO 
President, Constitutional Conventiori 

Attest : 

(Sgd.) N. PIMENTEL 
Secretary, Constitutional Convention 



INDEX TO VOLUME ONE 



INDEX 



Administrative department, 443 
Ag^uilar, death of, 90 
Hicameralism — 

debates on, 235 
defeat of, 237 

nicameralists, division among, 
237 

Hill of Rights — 
debates on, 150 
sources of, 149 
Blocs in the Convention, 73 
Budget — 

as a basis of appropriation 
bill, 385 

constitutional provision on, 
372 

debates on provision on, 374 
sources of provision on, 372 
Citizens under the Constitution, 
200 

Citizenship — 

debates on, 198, 200, 203, 
205, 208, 209, 210 
loss of, 212 
reacquisition of, 212 
sources of article on, 197 
Commission on Appointments — 
debates on, 281 
meetings of, 283 
povvei-s of, 286 

Commission on Impeachments — 
meetings of, 283 
powei's of, 286 
Committee of Accounts — 
debates on, 288 
defeat of, 289 
proposed, 287 
Committee system, 71 
Committees of Convention, 57 
Constitution — 

administration of justice un- 
der, 505 



bill of rights of, 149 
citizenship under, 197 
declaration of principles of, 
129 

executive department under, 
393 

genesis of, 93 
historical basis of, 93 
influence of foreign consti- 
tutions on, 94 

institutions and philosophies 
of, 93 

judicial power under. 453 
legislative department un- 
der, 229 
paternity of, 95 
preamble of, 111 
scope of, 97 
suffrage under, 215 
text of, 521 

Constitutional Convention — 
adoption of rules of, 57 
at work, 77 
authority to call, 9 
blocs in the, 73 
calling of, 9 
committee system of, ’71 
committees of, 57 
cross-section of, 23 
delegates to, 17 
election for, 13 
Guinto plan for, 9 
officers of, 53, 55 
opening ceremonies of, 51 
opening of, 47 
organization of, 57 
presiding officers of, 90 
Quezon non-partisan pl^^^ 
for, 12 

sessions of, 90 
size of, 10 
Zulueta plan, 13 



552 



INDEX 



Convention law, provisions of, 
Council of State, proposed, 450 
Courts — 

composition of, 4G4 
jurisdiction of, 489 
rendition of decisions, 506 
Courts of Appeals, proposed, 402 
Declaration of principles — 

debates on, 130, 131, 135, 
142, 145, 146 
in the Constitution, 131 
sources of, 129 
Delegates — 

biographical notes on, 24 
election of, 13, 14 
names of, 17 
protested, 73 

Delegation of legislative power 
to the President — 
constitutional provisions on, 
387 

debates on, 389 
sources of provisions on, 387 
Departments — 

and' National Assembly, 447 
executive, 443 
heads of, 444 

Draft of the Constitution — 
debates on first, 83 
first, 82 

Electoral Commission — 
approval of, 271 
compromise on, 267 
debates on, 261 
in the governmental system, 
273 

recommendations on, 258 
Executive department — 
debates on, 393 
position of, 394 
sources of article on, 393 
First Philippine Assembly, 3 
Guinto plan, 9 
Jones Law, 5 
Judiciary — 

Convention committee draft 



on, 453 

draft of the committee of 
three on, 457 
independence of, 511 
jurisdiction of, 489 
Laurel draft on, 455 
organization of, 4G1 
power of judicial review of, 
493 

qualifications for, 47G 
sources of articles on, 453 
Judges — 

compensation of, 485 
qualifications of, 47G 
residence of, 507 
selection of, 4G9, 505 
tenure of, 482 
Lawmaking — 

drafting of bills, 354 
process of, 35G 
Legislative department — 
debates on, 229 
name of, 243 
position of, 230. 

Liberal forces in the Convention, 
85 

Lim-Guzman resolution, 103 
Members of the National Assem- 
bly- 

compensation of, 296 
disqualifications of, 302 
qualifications of, 250 
selection of, 247 

National Assembly — ' 

commissions in, 257 
composition of, 245 
privileges of, 292 
officers of, 255 
power of, 327 
qualifications for, 250 
selection of members of, 247 
sessions of, 353 
. size of, 244 

vacancies in, 255 
National Territory 
debates on, 121 



INDEX 



553 



under the Constitution, 127 

Osias resolution— 
debates on, 98 
issues on, 98 
voting on, 10(> 

Permanent Commissions — 
debates on, 276 
defeat of, 280 
in the first draft of the Con- 
stitution, 275 
Preamble — 

of Constitution, 114 
Tiocto draft on, 112 
President McKinley’s Instruc- 
tions, 1 

President of the Philippines — 
compensation of, 413 
duties of, 427 
election contests for, 409 
election of, 407 
oath of, 410 
office of, 399 
powers of, 427 
qualifications for, 400 
succession to office of, 413 
term of, 411 
veto power of 359 
presidential succession — 
debates on, 414 
constitutional provisions on, 
418 

Press, representatives of, 91 
Quezon non-partisan plan, 12 
Recto — 

draft on the preamble, 112 
elected as President, 53 
inaugural address of, 54 



I in the Convention, 75 

I in the debates, 89 

j Roxas in the Convention, 75 
^ Scope of Constitution 
I as drafted, 106 

i Lim-Guzinan resolution on, 



103 

Osias resolution on, 97 
Si)ccial Committee on style, 72 



Suffrage — 

debates on, 215 
woman, 215, 216, 219, 220 
Supreme Court — 

composition of, 464 
jurisdiction of, 489 
rule-making power of, 497 
Tydings-McDuffie Law, 7 
Veto- 

constitutional provisions on, 
359 

debates on, 361 
of President, 359 
reasons for, 364 
reconsideration of, 364 
Vice-President of the Philip- 
pines — 

compensation of, 424 
duties of, 425 
office of, 421 
qualifications for, 424 
term of, 424 
Voting, compulsory, 222 
Woman suffrage — 

compromise on, 220 
fight for, 216 
Zulueta plan, 13 



f 







■ 



r-, < ^ * 



i 






\ 



' i 

•4. y 



r <.i 



•4S 

t 



. K‘ 

'r 



I 



H 



A < ‘ 

V._ ’ 







■I 












4 



vV, 



i 



I 

r 



I 

! 



■s 



» 



i 342,02:Ar8 

j Amego, Jose M, 

I The ft*aming of "the Philippine 
constitiifcion. 1936, 

1001 





MALACANANG 



LIBItAKY 



f 




















96 



