CONSISTENCY 

OF THE 

NORMAL METES AND BOUNDS 
OF OUR REPUBLIC 

COMPTON 


Our Republic 

|| : ip : ^ ^lewel 

ffotti Which the People SI 
Loathe to Part, 


By i fioHc* A. torn p ton, 



* 'Think well. One good thought, 

Known to be thine own, 
Is better than a thousand gleaned 

From fields by others sown." 

Selected. 


ttiitTS? for the sake of P art y merely. God forbid 
er if ° nld : 1 write for the s ^ke of principle. Howev- 

^lot^l^^ itSelf tQ priGCip1 ^ then 1 


ana 


habits TV acts oft repeated form habits; 
destiny ETJ mUed ^ Uild ^aracter; character shapes 
destiny'" wv? at eVen the Creater himself ever changes 
w nat is our nation's will? 


is* 

CONSISTENCY 

OF THE 

Normal lietes and Bounds 

OF 

Our GlepoMc. 


A Jewel 

Prom Which the People Should be 
Loathe to Part. 


Copyright 1899 by Charles A^Compton. 

Have you an expansionist friend? If so, present him this book 
the name of the Lord and convert him. 


AOM-B PRESS. MOROANTCm-Jf, W« "VIA.. 


PREFACE, 


sJf ?? AR Observer:— In the name of God and for the 
wn 1 L°/ humanit y> Iask y° u to likewise consider this little 
orir from beginning to end, and give it the public en- 
w 5 -? 0 ? 61 ^ which it deserves. It may have weaknesses, 
D «t it ls laden with truth. 

a t> ! am ° nly a man of ordinary chxmmstances, teaching 
pf^ ary school in tbe woods, on a hillside, in the Eastern 
panhandle of the "Little Mountain State" of West Vir- 
lift ? am c °ntented with my present attainments in 
izi^ Ttt an numble submission of my future to fate, real- 
wh JL iT at the P° et Po^ayed a certain measure of truth 
wnen he said: 

"The rust shall find the sword of fame, 

The dust shall hide the crown, 
No man shall nail so high his name, 

Time will not tear it down. " 

to rpLt h . i ^ WOrk ' 1 must sa y that 1 am strongly inclined 
Divmo " as . an inspiration wrought through a chain of 
the hn^S! r ea %& and P ene trating the veil which separates 
people m the su Perhuman without, to our 

plvS w confident that in less than one month, by ap- 
Kwf s P ar e moments while teaching school, I have 
ty v!o»LZ V ™ hat W ! H b6 S ° ld ^ its ^Hions, and read 
ahonSd Jt wiU be thought of in field, 

Sona^ n. ^ V™ 11 be T S uoted fl ™ the pulpit andim- 
tance to thfE th ? St * g6 ' Xt gradually gain actoit- 

£e an d thp? o ea - tS ,S f & V&St peo P le > and be found woven, 
s£S?w£ ^ ' n ^ 6 7 a n rp and woof of the garment that 
snail clothe the weal of all good government!. 

"Truth crushed to earth, shall rise again, 

i he eternal years of God are hers; 
W A dG i error, wounded, writhes in pain 

Ana dies among her worshipers " 


CHAPTER I. 

This little work will give a partial vent to the fiery feel- 
ings which have been kindling within me for some time 
past. The friction, caused by the political cunning ana 
treachery of the times, coming in contact with my regaia 
for our beloved country, has created within ■ my sou* aj 
ardent heat, which can only be abated by the soothing 
cognizance that the principles and doctrines which i so 
much cherish, and deem essential to ^V&f^jS?. 
longevity of our free institutions, have culminated in law, 
proven worthy in fair probation, and found a sale ioa 0 - 
ment in the hearts of the American people. 

I have never taken any very active part m pohtocs iw- 
thor than to remonstrate or approve in a convex sataonal 
way when opportunities were presented. 1 nave a I~JZl 
motives in view more than to ground deeper and deepei 
in the public mind those cardinal principles upoa w™«" 
the very foundation of our republic rests. I am stemmmg 
the current of existence by the aid of no P olltlc ^ "^ h £ 
clique, and far less do I help to control any; or ' ^6 otner 
hand, as is the case with many an innocent voter today 
there are local organizations rife about me which ,have 
certainly been trying to tempt my stability, by ^ oia ™» 
out allurements to lead me away from high ideals ^and vir- 
tuous Democratic principles. But in battling the 8V*P™ 
with the weapon of patriotism, thanks to Protecting um- 
nipotence, I have become stronger, and am very proua 01 
the fact that I have an unfettered and unrestricted rignt 
of suffrage which none can dispute; an 
the complement of a free will, which is m full accord 
with the principles of Democracy, and in complete aDiior- 
rance with aristocracies and monarchies, especially wnen 
they are found lurking deceitfully under the cloak oi_tve- 
publicanism and charging stealthily against our freedom 

My anxiety is very much alert over other great victories 
which our people must win or suffer ignominy m ™***> 
but, in my humble and unselfish opinion, a great ^™°*f 
than any of these lies in the Solution, of the Entablements 
into which our recent war with Spain has place d us m 
such a manner as to rebuke once and for all time, any idea, 
of adopting a policy of domineering colonial expansion 
and to be very wary of any other. 

If these questions are not settled m opposition to a colo- 
nial policy, any sensible person, by taking a glance atthe 
pages of history and the present geographical and social 
conditions of the civilized world, will agree that our great 
republic, which we proudly call "The Colossus of The 


Americas " has reached the zenith of its -lory and that 
sooner or later will be heard such expressions 5 as "Vesti 

mTxal^fn^fth' 6mpir ? tak6S itS W/' wtth the tr?e 
Wrahs " ' aUd amid Mentations instead of 

hirtS^^n^*^^ 00 ^^ expansion policy is 
theater I J^\r V T°^ to a11 oth * r issues > because 
asLmed s U orh^r e \° dealwith editions which have 
fn theS a^5^f a 5lJ >r0portions and such arrogancy 
attention anri ?ltv i ^ th f Y Cannot re P ulse ^ requisite 
theh effects Jp^T ° f ° Ur peo P le; because so dh 'ect in 
Sthout cuS»nfr,^ v? G to See their s P eed y settlement 
stoon " neonlp ™ft n* 6 ° f the re P«blic. We are now a 
of dSf<SroSi ^St" ally ai ? d intellectually, and the giant 
deal B Wlth which other is sues have to 

fofn?to^onttJf gained strength too vast 
iudiSatio? excitin S a ^d creating within us 
his fow£l Rn?^ US °° ntem Pt sufficient to result in 
SansioTof onr?^ 6 " 1 ^ 6111 ^ 11 * 0 ** 116 abnormal ex- 
pfency causes tftl'T £ e P ublic > though yet in his inci- 
oTSecherK safety of 

a^a renubhc m d = Pe ~ that the lon S life of our nation, 
lfthe^Tth '£^ln^ SSth&tot a11 the °ther nations 

ernments do d!Sve t£ll '° *V W< 5 ld that ^ St gOV " 
governed. powers from the consent of the 

^^ites!ar el,1Ij if ifc is suc - 

lurking, chronic d^£ e %f? h T*t™ * Z 1 ?^ sueakin ?> 
of direful consequences tl0 . n ' W , blch is certain 

wrought instantly S m As great re forms are not 
from one condition to ,n£J£ £?, *he gradual shifting 
ion, decay and downfal S hei " whlcb le ads to the corrupt- 
progress; and to be sensihlp t? 9 ? 8 ■+ USUaUy slow in its 
man mind has to somewW Seems that the hu- 

yet, not so, as witnS a i m t ^ n <f y u 1 . t /. conce Ptions. And 
of nations is likely to becEfV.t s t ^ lftin S" towards decay 
are not vigilant. Broad*™* So* 7 m f ^ ben the P eo P le 
grand and noble and unS?filt P mUSt be ° Ur minds ' and 
comprehend what i ■% } ? °™ P^poses would we 
clear of it. It is s ^ gllf l steer the old Shi P of State 
tice the growing of thV* .A™ P r °gress that could one no- 
observe this shif ting teathers on a duck he might not 

So, why not pardon the tvt^tt- i -, ■ ■ 
lowing it to begin this sh SK y admi ^stration for al- 
government, his ''taxatioS 2 \T ado Ptmg a colonial 
ippines? But theretre SS^* tyranny" in the Phil- 
eye and understand a HVteL We , C T,P erCeive with the 
* wlXltx the ear, and there are things we 


7 


can be conscious of; therefore, as we have reason to be- 
lieve that the McKinley administration, in trying to rule 
conscious beings should have conscious men at its helm, 
we must place the responsibility where it belongs. Shall 
we graft this bud of a colonial policy upon our national 
institutions? If so, it shall certainly grow, blossom some- 
time, and sooner or later ripen into its ultimate fruit — the 
ruins of the republic. The bud which puts forth the blos- 
som is wonderfully, yet attentively nurtured by mother 
nature, and the blossom develops into fruit which some- 
times ripens in early summer, sometimes in late October. 
Ah! what future generation is it that, by our vote and 
voice, we shall cause to utter the lamentable wail, "Had 
we not had the bud we should not have the fruit!" 

A certain class of politicians may preach that a colonial 
policy on such a small scale can not hurt us, and that it 
will bring vast revenues into our treasury* and the like; 
but, my friends, I exhort you, with all candor, that you be 
not misled. To adopt their colonizing schemes, would be 
setting a dangerous example, which may or may not be 
followed for a generation, an emample lurking and dire- 
ful in its consequences, an example which would be re- 
ferred to as a precedent in making future decisions. 

If we should adopt a colonial policy, the better we should 
get along with our colonies, the worse it would ultimately 
be for us, and the worse we should get along with them 
the better it would ultimately be for us. A burnt child 
dreads the lire, if he is not burnt up in it, and will learn 
to keep away from, it, but if he continues to play about it 
without receiving little burns, he is liable at some time in 
the future to be consumed in one great conflagration. The 
McKinley administration might get children to play with 
colonial lire, but they will surely have a task to get Uncle 
Sam into it. . 

Suppose we should recognize the giant of expansion and 
adopt a colonial policy and get it in charming good work- 
ing order. Greed is never satisfied. The shifting changes 
of time would, sooner or later, make it possible for us to 
fasten our grip upon something more, and we not 
withstand the temptation. We would say look at the glo- 
rious colonial policy of President McKinley, And we 
might continue various forms of expansion, when slight- 
est opportunities were presented, and reach out farther 
and farther until we had absorbed the whole American 
Continent and the islands of the sea. All this might be 
accomplished in a few decades, and again, it may require 
centuries. Who can tell by looking at the blossom wheth- 
er the apple shall ripen in June or October? And yet 


. • 8 

who would not agree that it is a sign of fruit? Patriots 
of America, have you brains? I am loath to believe oth- 
erwise than that you have, and of a superior quality, too. 
inen use them in exercising a little practical love for 
your country. 

Imagine we should reach the colossal development I 
have just described. What glory would there be in it? 
J>or then, and long before that time, would we see cor- 
ruption, which would be sustained by low designing states- 
men, and sectional jealousy, as a natural consequence of 
various social, climatic and geographical differences, 
gnawing at our very vitals and calling down the doom of 
empires old. Our great Civil War was chiefly the result 
ot natural sectional differences, as everybody will agree; 
and if it was a result of natural sectional differences in 
our home country, who can imagine the extent of the lia- 
bilities we would incur, by extending our national wings, 
and brooding over all races, and all the various sectional 
differences and conditions from the North Pole to the 
H. P .° le, through all the zones and amid all climes? 
wf Q V IV • was more of an acute disease than this co- 
Sl 6 ? 3 ? 81011 ^ alad y is like] y to be. We could tell 
htlttl I ! remedies to apply to it, and how. We could 
J S nd ? re a doz en such civil strifes at different inter- 
K5 S?*S? Plagued with this chronic expansion trouble. 
£K,S g *> do with it is to "nip it in the bud," be- 
Sn« J tt *? W m «' or ft wil1 attack all the vital or- 
death I?' & T 8 b ? in ^' and then no remedy, save 
death only, can relieve the grand old victim 

luaeAhpTal^T 6 the Potions to which I have al- 
*L and - P erha P s wl "le insatiate greed is planning 
JlJlfitaffirSSr 1 ^ ^ tralia fOT a potato patch 7 great 
downfall S 1 ? 16 to loo ?7P and result « the nation's 
So^S^'&l.^ lt . ,ro,,1 ^ bef0^, * l6 Southern states 
camtal ou™iPr^ enCan + Re P ublic s and remove our 
and what ISl&ll n Rome > to a modern Constantinople; 
and what facilities there would be for the North P rti states 
to join Canada and do the same thing. Shall we^taS SS 

e°r art° t fT a ; tMs VaiQ W ^111 weTaS- 
ferve thP^t ^the patriotisjn of our forefathers, and pre- 
tS? f ' wbicb th ey conceived for us, in sacred 
loudly! Iamo PP° sedto expansion, and I would say it 

*J b + e , lieve i l was ^ver intended that one nation should 
rule the earth; and history corroborates the assertion. 
Nabons, as well as human beings, were intended to 
JKJ a nor ? al s !? e a nd a social spirit, and the greater the 
departure from these natural conditions, the greater will 


be dame nature's punishment, for she is impartial. (But 
we should remember, though, that nations are, naturally, 
only convenient dummies which have people to do their 
thinking for them.) Verily, the normal size and the so- 
cial spirit of nations is a sublime thought. What man of 
150 pounds of usefulness is it that would desire to take on 
75 pounds more of corpulency and corruption, thus jeo- 
pardizing his health and pleasure? So we should think 
for our Grand Dummy. I believe the normal metes and 
bounds of our country are fairly established; and I mean 
without Hawaii, without Cuba, without Porto Rico, with- 
out the Philippines. Upon the map of the world our 
country presents an appearance of neatness and a location 
of which I am proud. I give my hand and my heart, to 
the cause of anti-expansion, and in the language of Henry 
H. Harrison's poetic prayer, I exclaim 4 "O Prince ot 
Peace, make us content!" 

"Very well," perhaps some expansionist may say, "but 
you should not pull down your barn before you can build a 
better one. What about the Philippines?" To this I would 
reply we can build a better one; and we are going to em- 
ploy a master workman from the West to superintend the 
work. It seems to me that no reasonable person would 
suppose that we should suddenly withdraw our army trom 
the Philippines. But we can quit ourselves like men, 
high-minded men, and go to that Aguinaldo band ot pat- 
riots, with honest confessions, and tell them that, while a 
few of us, chiefly the McKinley administration regime, 
had intended to compel you to become a colonial depen- 
dency of the United States, a majority of us after careful 
deliberation had decided that it was neither best tor you 
nor for ourselves to do so. We are duty bound, though, 
to see that a government is adopted for you which shaii 
secure life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness to ail, 
and we mean that that government shall be entirely inde- 
pendent of the United States. Now, while we have naa 
such regard for you as to deliver you from the bonus 01 
colonizing conspiracies, and while we are yet obliged to 
see that you adopt a just government, equally adminis- 
tered, and modeled after that of the United States, a gov- 
ernment of yourselves, for yourselves, and by yourselves, 
we shall ask that government to pay our future expenses 
incurred in the pursuance of this course, and when this 
government shall have been put in perfect working order, 
we shall leave you an independent nation. Will you con- 
sent to these propositions and lay down your arms. 

Methinks, 1 hear the assenting voice of the Agumaldo 
constituency thundering in grateful tones across the Pa- 


10 


cific, that sea of peace which only divides us, over the 
mountain barriers to the uttermost parts of our country, 
and echo wafting back to the Philippines our right good 
will, instead of a deceitful lust for blood and gold. ' We 
should make such a treaty as I have suggested very spe- 
cific, and the Filipinos will assent to it. If they should 
not, then we would be justified in shooting. But we shall 
not have to shoot. We shall need to restrict ourselves 
very conscientiously in the treaty, though, in order to 
guarantee to the Filipinos that we are not trying to mis- 
lead them. The kind of government which we would put 
in operation; the maximum limit of expenses, and the 
length, of time required to do the work sbould be stipu- 
lated m the treaty. This can all be done. I believe we 
would be justified in shooting if the Filippinos would not 
consent to such a treaty, because our position is such that 
we are morally bound to secure protection to the foreign 
residents of those islands, and the natives which want en- 
du -" n f P ea ce a°d freedom. There is no reason why we 
cannot graft upon them a better government than Spain 
™L^ P Up , on them ' and there is no reason why they 
SKfiffi ? ? T lt ? Ut 0f their resources. We would be 
wfwnnn ad °P tm S this course toward the Filippinos, and 
SSSSSS?*! 1 * 8 justification at the hands of any ra- 
de5~»i» Unal i te n n ' estrialorcel estial, which we should 
desire always to do in all our actions as a Christian na- 

aifr n D ^ b ^tv ifie . d in P ur suing such a course and ex- 
coursP fZ ^..^^{PPinos payment of our expenses in that 
SnSi 8 right ami it is the only way I see we can 
Such a cnn ,ll S ° f in our relations with them. 

bondalS rh^S d , G ^ 6r them from darkness and 
would nV v ., ^ ? f - llber ^ and eivilization. But we 

justified in asking them to pay our expens- 
Satast thZ ^ C r u ff d ln + .eonducting this iniquitous war 
»gamst them, up to the time we proposed to them their 

?atln n h a e vfh ; ',° r the diCtat ° rS ° f the McKinley Idmfnis- 
S of tfc£ Wr °rnf m ° tlVeS t0 l6ad them in their con- 
FdV^Ll l ai \ Th61r motives have been to keep the 
depffincv nf n° nda f 6 ^ section, and that, too, 1 as a 
ed declaSnn ^ civ } hzed *ation-a nation whose cherish- 
rivP thSw aS f alway . s been that 0 ust governments de- 
Son wwVh P w ? fr ° m the conse nt of the governed; a na- 
tion which has always stood for freedom and the equality 

5« t\ men i e± ° re the law; a nati on whose people with 
aSe? fwfT Pointed their youth to the noble char- 
tkm w?th^ P r?', Whl ° h 18 Portrayed in his conversa- 
tion with King Charles concerning the American Indians 


11 

and in the history of his dealings with thein; a nation 
which, with great display of moral feeling, recently 
reached down to raise the Creoles of Cuba from bondage 
to freedom. Is such a nation as this now going to ap- 
prove the course of the McKinley dictators and make the 
Filippinos its bondsmen? Shall we, as a father pitieth 
not his children, adopt a following of colonized dependen- 
cies, and, as a writer of of the Baltimore American sug- 
gests, establish a colonial bureau in the war department, 
(yes, there is where it belongs,) under a less exciting 
name? Never! Waft it on the rolling tide! Never!! 

"May our prayer for others be 
That every people may be free." 

Why should we free the Cuban from the tyranny of 
another nation and make the Filippino our bondman? 
Surely, such a course would more nearly satisfy bigotry 
and greed than manifest a benevolent spirit. Have we 
not been at as much expense in Cuba's behalf as we have 
in conducting the iniquitous war in the Philippines? Have 
we not in a righteous humor (?) promised the Cubans an 
independent government? Why should not the Filippinos 
have an independent government also? Why should we 
not just as gratuitously cancel our expense account made 
in our relations with the Filippinos as to cancel the one 
made in behalf of Cuba; especially since our misconduct 
and our attempt to oppress these poor people have made 
it so great as it is? Are not the Filippinos so capable of 
self government as are the Cubans? 

Although Admiral Dewey nor any other American may 
not have promised the Filippinos their freedom, Aguinaldo 
reasoned well when, as the Philippine Commission states, 
he issued a proclamation inducing the Filippinos to ex- 
pect to obtain their freedom through the good offices of 
the government of the United States. He thought he 
was just as capable of enjoying life, liberty and the pur- 
suit of happiness as was the Cuban Creole. And why 
should he not? By this very act he exhibited prudence 
and capabilities for statesmanship. He knew we declared 
war against Spain for the freedom of the oppressed Cu- 
bans, who were similarly oppressed by Spain as was his 
kindred, only perhaps more severely for their greater 
resistance. 

The Philippine Commission may well denounce the se- 
vere rigor and strict censorship of the Spanish rule in 
the islands; but it may not well remain tacitly indifferent 
as to the condition of the Americans there, and their cen- 
sorship and conduct toward the natives. I fear that if it 


12 


were all exposed the better element of our population 
would be heard to wail : ' 'Eli, Eli, lama Sabachthani, ' ' ' 'My 
God, why hast thou forsaken me." Then, to some of our 
"would be" Baal Priests, who have no higher estimate of 
religion than even the Pharisaic, than that it consists in 
posing well m a good name before the people, may well 
pray repentently, "God be merciful to me, a sinner." 

People of different nations are not much unlike regard- 
ing their tendencies toward moral and immoral conduct, 
when the chief prevailing conditions are alike. When 
immoral conditions are rife, and even reigning, those who 
are not much morally inclined are goipg to drift with 
those conditions into immorality. And they will be none 
the less apt to do so where King Greed is on the throne 
than anywhere else. Immorality in its various phases is 
bound to be fostered by him. King Greed was chief of 
the bpanish rule in the Philippines, and under his tutilage 
cio we see cruelty and immorality in their varied forms 
looming up and being protected by a censorship so strict 
as to practically prevent the whole civilized world from 
ZtT^A an y. thin g about it, until that censorship gave 
SK&i Ame 1 rica ? censorship; and then, of course, it was 
JrJ5**5 ??? wafted to the uttermost parts of the 
™ u t„ Jt ndl V s , onl y the old accusation of the "kettle 
calling the pot black, "in pantomine upon the world's 
i+Si- a ^ y P ers °n with a sound mind that looks upon 
ror^F 0 ^ sedfcob e impartial, will agree that this is the 
thllZ ir ^^ rp ^M tl0n of lt Yes ' King Greed was on the 
he £ Lw If Philippines under. Spanish censorship, and 
and ff hH^ e thl '° ne there under American censorship, 
therrSr tho g aS w . e continue *> exploit our power 
a*e and fl™ P 0 UrDOSe ^ f J^P^S ^ Filippinos in bond- 
a?ains?thp1r ^f S « th f ir domi ™n to our government 

uf dpr rh« ™«w ' ^° long as he is on the awme there 
under the auspices of any nation, he is goin<* to foster 
vice and immorality and screen it from the world by t s 
censorship. Why is American censorship any bette/than 
d P *r»SrJ e f° rShl Pi f ltis instituted for the same low, 
tibSS* dot f n "7 he °PP ression and bondage of an 
Sr onriZ wu ;. trodden people? Surely a difference in 
Pr^r! rn w entl ° USness is hard to see - So long as King 
«SS ln th t Philippines, we had rather 

accept than doubt the greater part of the reports concern- 
ing > mmo ™lP r a^ of m any of our soldiers there. The 
soldiers of King Greed are apt to become a little greedy. 
He sets the example for them and promises them protec- 
tion i if thev follow it; for it is by extortion and excess 
that he expects to make his reign profitable He must 


13 


get his emissaries and soldiers to pattern after him if he 
would succeed. 

Admitting, then, that under the circumstances the sol- 
dier is likely to have a desire to satisfy greed, we must 
acknowledge that above all things else to be watched, 
save the devil and a greedy nation, is the man of greed. 
He will do almost anything that is immoral to gratify 
greed— the idol of his heart. And by so doing he will be- 
come so indifferent to nobility of action and purpose as to 
tolerate other immoral conditions which may not even 
have the slightesPtendency to satisfy his greed. 

Having these precepts, then, we need not wonder what 
the future condition of affairs in the Philippines will be if 
we adopt a colonial policv and continue a system of ran- 
sacking and carpet-bagging there. We need not wonder 
at the reports we have already heard as to unscrupulous 
conditions that obtain there. We need not wonder when 
we are told that sickness and death prevails among our 
soldiers as a result of disease contracted by their associa- 
tion with the natives. And in the light of the foregoing 
premises we need not be amazed or astonished when we 
learn that a few days ago the Secretary of War manifested 
his support to indecent customs, when he chartered a ves- 
sel at the expense of the government to transport a party 
of women, which he is pleased to call wives and sweet- 
hearts of the soldiers, from New York to the Philippines. 
Who ever heard of such an act in the history of the civ- 
ilized warfare? Transporting a cargo of women and 
dumping them down in a soldier's camp, where we are 
told pestilences exist worse than are known to the direst 
places of prostitution and disgrace in this country! Ay, 
truly, we must admit that the American soldier, even, 
lacks sound wisdom and discretion when he announces 
such invitation, whether it be by reason of his own fond 
affection a»id amiable moral intentions, or as a base pre- 
tense. The soldier is said to be comparatively idle m the 
Philippines; and though the strictest military discipline 
prevails, which we have reason to doubt, whenever idle- 
ness is enlisted under the banner of greed it is likely to 
beget vice. The eye of reason penetrates the veil of 
American censorship to portray the present conditions 
that prevail; and to interpret the future, so long as King 
Greed is on the throne and the mere lust for blood and 
gold sways a dominating influence. If the Philippine sol- 
diers and their so-called wives and sweethearts expect to 
ever come home again, the sooner we call them from that 
errand of prodigality and greed the better will we pro- 
tect our people from the visitations of iniquity. 


14 


Contrast the life of a soldier or an officer who is sent on 
a mission of prodigality, bondage and greed, with life of 
one whose mission is to foster prosperity, morality, lib- 
erty and enlightment. Which one is it that will most 
likely deal with the people to whom he is sent with a feel- 
ing pi fond anxiety? And which one is it that will act 
with a spirit of indifference regarding their moral and 
material prosperity? Oh, had we not better, if only for 
tne sake of the boys in blue, even, grant the Filippino 
independence and lend him a helping hand amid his cries 
or Excelsior," and his struggles in trying to ascend the 
steeps of civilzation? 

I know that censorship may try to refute logical hypoth- 
eses, but it cannot do it. Dictative expansionists may say 
tnat we are painting the picture too dark. They may say 
tnat the object of a United States colonial sovereignty in the 
i^nilippines is not to gratify srreed. They may say that 
tne object of such sovereignty there is not to make that 
people our bondmen or an inferior national caste; but! 
reu you this is not so, and they do not speak the truth 
when they say it. If they do not make them our bond- 
men m any sense, or an inferior caste, which is bound to 
oe treated with indifference by superiors as soon as the 
Ji^J^u™ 1 ' th& ™ is only one thing else which they can 
no with them, and that is to give that 10,000,000 Filippinos 
citizenship, which would be a far greater crime committed 
against our national self-preservation than to make them 
our eternal bondmen. 

aver . a £ e Filippino is far inferior to the average 
American citizen today, and that being the case, is it wise 
statesmanship to make him a citizen? Have we not about 
as much of the inferior element among us already as we 

lectualiv e n n/fi en u ?^ or ^ socially, physically, intel- 
lectually and financially; which we must do would we 
attain to heights of civilization not yet reached. We are 
compelled to do this and to carry this element which we 
already have with us to a broader enlightenment, or we 
may wen no t attempt the journey as a republic; for the 
xepuonc may undergo transition before the desired goal 
/«« Tt • a 1 d assume an imperial state of being and then 
> 1S a hlstor ically illustrated and corroborated fact 
tnat when republics are found separating their people 
t«» °t S - th . e £ are retrograding and speedily drifting 
toward imperialism and aristocratic rule. 

Yes, it is unwise for a republic, which is the best form 

wh,v£ Vernm , ent for the comm on people, to do anything 
wniejj may have a tendency to divide its people into castes. 
10 tne expansionist who would make the Filippino either 


15 


our bondman or citizen, with a pretense of elevating him, 
I say; "Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam that is in 
thine own eye, and then shalt thou see clearly to cast the 
mote out of thy brother's eye." If we would be living 
monuments to the honor of the republic we must stand 
solidly for the interests, the elevation, and the equality, as 
near as possible, of all the people, and especially the com- 
mon people. 

I say regarding our own present conditions it would 
not be wise to make the Pilippino a citizen, as he is an 
inferior human to us; and we dare not make him our bond- 
man in any sense, by adopting a colonial policy, because 
of reasons already stated and others which I shall pres- 
ently elicit. But we do dare to grant him liberty and pro- 
vide for him and the foreigners there a just and independ- 
ent government, and also compel him to submit to .that 
proposition. And I think that Aguinaldo and his constit- 
uency are fair and wise enough to peaceably submit to 
that proposition. I believe that by adopting that course 
the Filippinos would become imbued with well-founded 
hopes. They would look forward with expectation and 
desire for the elevation of their race. They would, it 
they have common sense, which We know they have, con- 
sider our nation as their friend, and they would be found 
incessantly and in multifarious ways knocking at our 
doors for help and entreating us to turn on the true 
search-light of civilization in such a manner that we could 
not refuse without detriment to ourselves in a pecuniary 
sense, as well as in disobedience to the Divine injunction 
"Let your light so shine before men that others seeing 
your good works may glorify your father which is in 
heaven." Then would we, as Wm. J. Bryan said, be 
sending school-teachers to the Philippines instead of sol- 
diers. In this course lies the true solution of the Philip- 
pine problem. Ay, methinks we would soon hear them 
seeking admission to our national union with right gooct 
will. The "little upstart" would now and then be louncl 
seeking protection from the blasts of the world, by trying 
to hide under the folds of Uncle Sam's coat; and in a sense 
of co-operation and benevolence, in other words in the 
exercise of that "social spirit of nations," he may m ac- 
cord with all righteousness and self-preservation occa- 
sionally protect the little urchin, yet probably not every 
time could he do it without treacling upon the rights of other 
national personages. In this direction even, he will 
need to exercise discretion. Well have sages said, "Wis- 
dom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom.' 5 ^ Uncle 
Sam is a dummy, but he can get wise people to think for 


16 

him yet. 

is-and Would irGESS f™Z H 01 ?f ^^tbere 

0- rpnt hvilli-,™™ Y, cl tllat 1 might be able to paint it in 
dome so SfJ ? n the sldes dear around our celestial 
f^fi^ould 0 ??^ 8 ^ ^rth revolves every Amer- 

^ t , XXt aa lt as a precept and a -warning 
future fcSrnt5 ll0Wed in this hour," and in all 

JfenSttS TKfr?*? invol ving the question of expan- 
£ g ™ Uncle Sam should never take that little 

StetohtaftSn C ° at to P rotect ** ™ th a view to adopting 
S 118 » heir to Ms domain; for if he does 
n tho bolfnf ^ a > ss " m his family that will result 
Sthv Zlt?, umon >eing broken, the loss of family sym- 
will ,t Ration of jealousies and enmities which 
cise S Xnt1. e? w nng ba «iers to prevent the free exer- 
spu^ o?nation!^ e ° U8 c °-°P e ration" and God-like -social 

tni1i^Sj^ ean J^ er ' with national prudence, admit the 
SaSf° ngll f at People's strength and physical beau 
anUWb g t r^ Whei ; e fr omwhatitis & to that of Sampson, 
t \ s to fh\t h ft 7^ V1 f lom ma y range anywhere from what 
from StXSL of S° lo mon. May God protect our nation 
oSSta^Sf^S!^ Fili PPinos even when their will ac- 
John f^W™, ^proposition. The distinguished Mr. 
tionthK ™J^£ U £l lol y announced just before the elec- 
S^J - 1 ^*. 116 is opposed to annexing the Phil- 
SMS Brt W wiU - 1 now would know if he favors 
Daro hl 8 JlT S 1 h0U l d their wil1 accord with such action. 
Show hi™ & d °T S? Dare statesman say he does? 
to do £ hv .o? e! 1 S - ay > la ck« wisdom or he is prompted 
s?4esmn™^i ^^ous and unpatriotic lust. What 
SS? ^ 0l !l d dare admit 10,000,000 inferior people to 
Sp m h h V S countr y? The ^estion reminds me of 

1- f, a fh ^ ? 1C ; h my mother has often given me about 
SI g ' ^ lt s ° unds to o proverbial to even be original 
in w£ have heard her say "Never marry untif you 
S™;f yourself " And I have found that this precept 
«!y& careful interpretation. When could I better my 
tw.'i q S a - great f l uest ion. And now it looms up before 
uncle bam m regard to his espousal to Miss Philippine. 

CHAPTER EL 
I do not wish to be understood as being as opposed to 
marriage. But I say, Uncle Sam, you'd better watch, 
xou poor old widower. You've got a family which is 
aoout as much as you can take care of. You'd better stay 
at borne and attend to your own business, and quit your 


17 


courting if you are courtin, ' like an old fogy. (There he 
comes now. I wonder if he has heard me.) 

Uncle Sam, you seem troubled about something*. It can- 
not be you are in love? Here is a chair. Sit down. Per- 
haps a little rest may do you good, and, possibly I can say 
something to cheer you up and benefit you. 

You look so much worried, my good old man. You have 
so much to attend to and so many "family cares devolving 
upon you. And it seems like your cares are becoming 
more numerous and varied every day, too. Uncle Sam, 
do you think you could stand the pressure if your family 
was twice as large as it is? I know you have wonderful 
vigor, but I don't believe you could. You'd collapse. 

Uncle Sam, is the rumor that you are espoused to Miss 
Philippine true? Or is it only a jest? You really do seem 
bothered, but you don't look like a man in love, it seems 
to me. I can't think you're so old as to be getting child- 
ish — Really are you in love with Miss Philippine? 

If you are I don't want you to become insulted with me 
wow, because I have always been devoted to you, and I 
am going to tell you for your own good, that if you are in 
love with Miss Philippine I don't think you ought to be. 
Because, Dear Uncle, I think you are getting too old to 
marry, and your circumstances won't justify it. Besides, 
if they would, I don't think that Miss Philippine is the 
gir] for you. She is not adapted to you at all, and even 
if she were, clon't you think she is too far away from 
home? I thiuk if you would do a little courtin' you might 
find somebody nearer home that would suit you better — 
but, pshaw, Uncle, talk about you courtin' and marryin'! 
Nonsense! I don't think it would be for your good for 
you to do any courtin', or to sret married, at all, 

I have something in my little library which I read some- 
time ago that may help you to form a very wise decision. 
If you will tarry I will read it to you. Here is some of it. 
Tennyson says — now, mind you, I do not mean to compare 
Miss Philippine to a savage, but I say, though, she de- 
serves credit for what she is under the circumstances, she 
is inferior to you, and for that reason, among others, she 
is not adapted to you. I know you would not think of 
marrying a savage for her wealth if she were as rich as 
John Bright. But I think as Miss Philippine is your in- 
ferior, what Tennyson says here may be construed as hav- 
ing some bearing upon your case, if you are allured in any 
way by her sweet seducing charms. He says here: 
' 'I, to herd with narrow foreheads, vacant of our glorious 
gains; 

Like a beast with lower pleasures, like a beast with lower 


18 


pains. 

' 'Mated with a squalid savage, what to me were sun or 
clime; 

I the heir of all the ages in the foremost files of time, 
"I that rather held it better men should perish one by one, 
Than that earth should stand at gaze, like Joshua's moon 
at Ajalon. 

' 'Never, though my mortal summers to such 'length of 

years should come, 
As the many wintered crow that leads the clanging rookery 

home." 

And then this wise old bard says over here, in another 
place: 

"The jingling of the guinea helps the hurt that honor 
feels. 

And the nations do but murmur, snarling at each other's 
heels. " 

Uncle Sam, you'd better be careful. It seems to me 
I have heard you handling a good deal of money lately. 
Have you been taking it in or giving it out? Have you 
been fingering any English guineas? Do you think it is 
right to marry for money? Can it be that a man who is 
as well fixed as you are, and as wise as you are, would 
marry for money without any consideration for the things 
you marry with it? My mother has often said ' 'Beware 
of marrying for money" and I think it is a good exhorta- 
tion. Uncle Sam, cheer up now old man and own to the 
corn. Would you think of trying to love and marry Miss 
Philippine, your inferior, because you only think she has 
money? What are you smiling about? Your own folly? 
Or, at the thought of your relatives becoming so much 
agitated over a false rumor? Yes, I am certain, it is only 
the thought of the agitation of your people over this false 
rumor that causes you to smile. I know you are not such 
an old fogy as think of trying to love and marry Miss 
Philippine under the circumstances, and even when she 
hasn't exhibited the slightest inclination to such thoughts 
toward you, but has been trying to buffet you ever since 
the rumor was started. I know you have more sense than 
to mistake her little proffered co-operation for her deliv- 
erance from bondage, for a fond love for you. 

Longfellow says, ''who can tell what thoughts and vis- 
ions fill the fiery brains of young men?" But I cannot be 
mistaken as to the thoughts that play upon your brain- 
cells in regard to this afiair. You know full well that 
your marriage to Miss Philippine, your inferior, would 
probably cause mental degeneration among the members 


19 


of your family with whom she would associate, and you 
are too wise to err in this matter. You are right wary of 
a decline of intelligence. 

You know, as Shakespeare says, "There was a time 
when if the brains were out the man would die." Why, 
Uncle Sam, you seem to smile an approval of what I have 
said. Here is your hat. Good morning, sir. 

Well, the poor old man is gone. He seemed to enjoy my 
little talk. He is a good old mau, and I believe he thinks 
a good deal of me. I should certainly be very sorry to 
see him get into trouble about anything, much less a silly 
courtship, which a man in his circumstances shouldn t 
think about. 


CHAPTER EH. 

I cannot believe there is a statesman in the land, even a 
follower of President McKinley, or he himself, ^o would 
think of making the Filippino a citizen, and granting him 
representation in our legislative halls, today. This 
the case, let us now see^what course- would most probably 
be followed should we not place him on a footing of inde- 
pendence. There is only one other course to be ta |5 e ^' 
and that is to adopt an iniquitous colonial policy; and all 
will admit that the only advantage which can be g a "* e ^ 
thereby is a pecuniary one, and that the extentmg of that 
pecuniary advantage is embraced in the extent of the 
assets of our oppression and taxation in one form or another 
above the liabilities incurred by our various mutinous in- 
stitutions. Oppression and taxation without representa- 
tion, which Patrick Henry in the climax of all his sublime 
patriotic eloquence called tyrawiy, and taxation J. ni( t L 
President McKinley in a modern political campaign tn aoe 
would deceitfully, or at least through seeming "^ d y% 
once, make the people belive is not tyranny. VVeu oiu 
Wm. J. Bryan say, "if we adopt a colonial policy; n wi 
pursue a course which excited the Revolution of % 1770, we 
must muffle the tones of Old Liberty Bell, and speaK m 
dusky whispers when we praise the patriotism ot oui 
forefathers." His words are like apples of gold m pic- 
tures of silver. Expansionists are not saying much aoouL 
the nature of the proclamation of Old Liberty Bell ana 
our forefathers just now; and when they do they always 
evade the applicable truth, or put a perverse construction 
upon it; something like, "Taxation without representa- 
tion is not tyranny/' 


20 


If we adopt a colonial policy in the Philippines the only 
purpose m it is to extort them of their wealth and thus 
institute a system of drainage upon the essentials of their 
vitality and subsistence. Now can we by these exactions 
and extortions better prepare them by force for citizen- 
f^ 1 ? 1 say no! no! And we should thank Providence 
that we can not; for it is not best for us to have their cit- 
izenship. This being the case, then the question 
naturally arises: Shall we act toward them with intentions 

^ a S? g them citizens at some future date, when in all 
probabilty they will not be as well qualified for citizenship 
as they now are, or shaU we act toward them with a view 
to making them our perpetual bondmen? God forbid that 
we should do either. It would be imposing injustice as 
great as the unjust taxation itself. And we would at 
some time bring in the harvest of this evil sowing; for 
aTi v ' What soever a man soweth that shall he also reap." 
All history, m every instance, proclaims to us that bitter 
nuits have always been brought home by every people 
wno havjj attempted to enslave another in any way. And 
ail history argues and decides that we cannot, by impos- 
ing a colonial policy of extortion and e xcess upon the 

^F P1 £°' ^ etter P re P ar e him for citizenship. 

vv e should remember that even the colonizing systems 

oi European monarchs are far superior, and that most of 

inem are far more humane and fostering in their nature 

^an any we could possibly devise for the Philippines. 

hould remember that it has been a vital principle in 

• heir colonizin g Plans to send settlers from 

W?. g ™eir own people . and their own race, whom they 

? l\ p " te 7 al fondness for, and whom, in most instances, 

Stfpf 9 ! ubd li e sava Se wilds, and develop sparsely 

we a ttempt to bring such pur- 

S ^^T^ 011 ^^ 11 te a level wit ^ any policy we 
could devise for the Philippines? Contrast such systems 

7^°r,Z VUrV0 ^^ go out amon S our a ntipodes, to a 
teriitory more thickly settled than our Southern States 
would be, were the whole population of the Union 
f w them — to a territory with 10,000,000 people 

^*E ckl y set tled, and of another race, whom we, as 
™' T ed human beings, have no paternal fohdness 
oi natural affection for, save a brotherly love, which 
would begin to steadily decline as soon as the domineering 
process was instituted. The fraternal love of any two 
brothers, one of whom is thought by both to be accorded 
more liberty than the other, is going to wane and even 
+ t^? rate mto .i ealous y which will cause trouble. Con- 
trast the European systems of colonization instituted for 


21 


the purpose of finding homes for then* dense populations 
in sparsely settled districts, among savage wilds, with our 
system proposed for the Philippines, which is instituted 
for nothing in God's world but to gratify greed; and then 
dare say, in the broad light of reason, that should we 
adopt this system we should ever criticise monarchical 
institutions. 

Think what a fallacy it is for a nation that has undevel- 
oped resources within its domain to provide for the natural 
increase of population for the next 150 years to go to the 
opposite side of the globe and institute a cruel system of 
* 'taxation without representation" upen an already over- 
populated territory. Is it not the greatest manifestation 
of greed, hoggishness and nonsense ever heard of? Shame 
come upon the American voter who would support such a 
proposition! Oh! I say, be wary, or the unrighteous ex- 
ercise of your ballot may prove to be "the mark of the 
beast in the forehead or in the hand." Shall this govern- 
ment which has denounced taxation without representa- 
tion as a tyranny, and which has always opposed^ the ad- 
vance of monarchical institutions, now institute a colonial 
policy which monarchies might _well consider beneath 
their dignity? If it should, it would by so doing nicely 
pantomine the life and fate of Capt. Wm, Kidd, who went 
out to capture sea pirates, and, in so doing, became the 
greatest of them all. 


CHAPTER IV. 
It is ridiculous and traitorous to talk of colonizing the 
Philippines with a view to preparing them for citizenship. 
And if we could do it, and should admit them to represen- 
tative citizenship, I know of no other act that would bet- 
ter demonstrate to the world that our people were rapidly 
becoming incapacitated for self-government. Why, mon- 
archies would cite such an act with sneers whenever pop- 
ular government should be mentioned. It is with wise 
policy that European nations waive representative citi- 
zenship to colonies composed of their own kindred and 
posterity. England is well aware that for her to grant 
her colonies representation, today, would work her ruin. 
She was well aware that in the Colonial Period of this 
country it was not conductive to her best interests to even 
grant her beloved American colonies representation i u 
Parliament — colonies composed of her own posterity and 
her own race; and rather than do so she would allow them 


22 


to declare independence in 1776, and meet them on the 
neld of battle even, on that footing, give up her sove- 
reignty, and suffer the gloom of defeat. And by so doing 
sne set an example which republics even, may do well to 
ioiiow, especially when disgraced with a colonizing sys- 
tem imposed upon an alien race. She has studied Roman 
mstory too well to not know when that empire reached 
tne zenith of her glory. She has studied ancient history 
coo well to not know what caused the decline of all the 
world-wide empires. And she is now prospering and 
rearing her name above other nations of the earth, by the 
counter-example set by the nations before her. 

it is exceedingly puerile for our people to think of ex- 
panding our territorial limits, much less opening the doors 
or our legislative haUs to the various alien peoples there- 
by encompassed. No. It would be unwise to make the 
•* uippino a citizen; it would be unwise to make him our 
eternal bondman; but it would be wise and righteous to 
tieat him on a footing of independence and to compel him 
to submit to it should he refuse to do so. 
o-nir, i t 1S ° nlya mere d °ubtful pecuniary advantage to be 
gained by not granting him independence, and to maintain 
mat we would impede his advancement in civilization, and 
imperii our own beloved country with a colonial policy— a 
gi eat sneaking, lurking, chronic disorder— an expansion 
maiady, which would certainly at some day work disaster 
ana rum to our nation, the grand memento and handiwork 
forefathers inherited h V virt ue of the wisdom of our 

Capitalists can be honorable; and doubtless many are. 
yam l would make miUionaires who have safe investments 
S d *° farther accumulate or to live in prodigality 
amid the hungering and distress, the sorrow and heart- 
acne m our land, when they could so grandly utilize their 
surplus income.) J 

I fear there are capitalists promulgating expansion for 
the love of money, which, by hardening their hearts they 
nave mistaken for patriotism. A strong appeal to their 
consciences, which they have greatly smothered with evil 
desires, might incline them to follow not the forbidden 
patn. 1 fear there are capitalists who for the sake of 
greed would favor expansion or any other evil. I fear 
there are capitalists who for the sake of greed would con- 
vert our republic into an empire which would pay them 
tribute. I fear there are capitalists who would supersede 
the natural competency and independence of the laboring 
class with artificial incompetency and dependence upon a 
vain, besotted, gourmandized asistocracy. I fear there are 


23 


capitalists who have already conceived the immigration 
of the pauper class of Filippinos. I fear there are capital- 
ists who too much desire mutual combination of capital 
and diversity and opposition of labor. I fear there are 
capitalists who know that if we adopt the Filippmo he 
could come to this country as a citizen in spite of any con- 
sistent legislation, and should he come, they could send 
him to the polls with his ballot as a tribute to their greedy 

6 f hope I am mistaken in these presumptions. I wish I 
were. But observation and consciousness would make me 

believe I am not. , . . 

To the gross immoral sensualist who views nothing in 
national affairs as patriotic except that which 111 some way 
pays homage to greed, let me say again, and with all tne 
emphasis I can summon, that the advantage to be gamea 
from adopting the Filippino is even pecuniarily a most 
doubtful one. „ . . ... rLnA 

If we should strive against the decrees of Almighty Lroci 
so plainly exemplified in history; if we should undertake 
the blasphemy of brandishing the sword over an unwillm 0 
people to make them Christians; if we should forcibly im- 
pose taxation upon the Philippines; if we should under- 
take the absurdity of forcibly enthroning commerce, 
which always rests upon amity; if we should do ah tins, 
then, in order to perpetuate all this crime, a eonservatn e 
estimate of the expenses of the requisite military regime 

is $60,000,000 per annum. , , 

You will agree then that this amount must be oveiDai- 

anced by the credits of oppression and taxation m oiciei 
to make our licensed crime profitable in a pecuniary sense. 
Now, how under heaven are we to make *b0, W0,00U ouioi 
the Philippine establishment, when Spain, with the most 
odious and oppressive taxation, including a per capita , tax 
on Chinese coolies, has only been able to realize aooui 
$13,500,000 a year from those islands? Is it possible we 
shall plunder those innocent people worse than *V*»" 
Any sensible person should know, that owing to new con- 
ditions that would prevail, we should have to pl™ d ^™J* 
people much worse than Spain if we would even lealize 
the meager sum of §13,500,000, as she did The tinted 
States would undoubtedly want free trade for heise i in 
the Philippines and the extent of her trade theie would 
detract just that much from her revenues. 

Considering this matter in all the light of understand- 
ing, we must conclude, that by this course of force and 
might against right, there is to be gamed not even a pe- 
cuniary advantage, but on the other hand a deficit of 


24 


something like 850,000,000 will be exhibited annually 

™ m ff t e by taxation at home or leave our 

?™f if d ? , Wh y> seems to me that an expansionist 
is not capable of reasoning on financial matters. 

trndi^n Say this deficit wil1 be made U P in increased 
AnfiSl u 6 he - say we can afford to crea *e this national 
TW, f because i t will be many times repaid in trade? 

answer ». ^st, that a true republic would know no 
^.^^People, and will not thus legislate to 
uenent certain classes and oppress the masses. Then I 

S ?7 ' secondl y. that we cannot make up this deficit by 
«Zf S f£ ad ^ se ? ured *"J ™ ch a cou ™- The relative loca- 
Simn? i mted States and the Philippines, and the 
climatic and geographical differences won't admit of our 
so aomg I would say, as Andrew C. Carnegie has said— 
Kr^ ne§ie ' the ablest and best financial friend 
fW McKinley ever had in aU his sixteen years in 
v^on ress, and the one who always contributed largely to 
the campaign fund that helped to keep him there- Andrew 
said, "The Manufacturer of England, Ger- 
H- n Fra £ ce > . the farmer of Australia, the Baltic 
o\ ? USSia and the Argentine reach the Philip- 
EnTJt one - ha lf the freight cost that the American 
M a ^nfn,f aS to , P & y u P° n his products or the American 
manufacturer has to pay upon manufactured articles." 
onr^! , Say also that it we discriminated by granting 
SS!L free trade in the Philippines, and imposing 
SSfffiS 5®? count nes the most consistent tariff for rev 
tW i w balance of trade would then be against us and in 
incluflPrTT 5 f °J th f r frei ^ ht charges and revenue duties 
in our trade" am ° Unt t0 ° the height charges alone 

is to^t^™! 1 * natural ch annels, and all man can do 
un £> S)KV tS , CUrre ? t - He cannot make the current 
t inteurlP f £f y /° rCe would us elessly summon, were 
teWn d °^!? ¥*• And every time he under- 

touch £S ^ m least ' he is g° in S to do just that 
SSS kmthe 11 w e rld for nothing; and his outlay in 
E2 ,nCe ^ be equalto his income > and in the 
SeffoS^ 8 ^J f ar surpass his income; and after all 
trf^fp Ko 'n • S . lltt 1 le art ificial stream of trade is going to 

fate^d b SfT&oS? at natural ° ne ' in obedience to 

Tell me that we have any business in the Philippines! 
Sl^r m ^ T weU ^^ake to make me believe that 

inSmSSLT^ er always have a p° tat °p atch 

May God help us to be careful! 

Truly, "Eternal vigilance is the price of virtue." 


25 


CHAPTER V. 

Well, if we cannot, with impunity to ourselves and 
the Philippines, enforce our power there; let us turn the 
tables once more ux^on the footing of independence. 

If we should propose to form for the Filippinos an 
independent government, and put it into good working 
order, which we are now morally bound to do; if we 
should promise to assign to him at some future date, (the 
date should be specified,) entire control of that govern- 
ment, provided he agree to pay our stipulated expenses in 
organizing it for him, and protecting it in its incipiency; 
methinks the result would be that the animosity of the 
Filippino would gradually melt before the true search- 
light of civilization like an April snow before the sun. 
He would take courage. He would view the future with 
bright prospects. He would, and well may he, gladly 
pay a reasonable redemption fee for his deliverance from 
the bonds of Spanish cruelty and the American. Expan- 
sionists' schemes of extortion. He would doff his military 
garb, and convert the battlefield into a grain field. He 
would, with prospects of a bright future, incline his at- 
tention toward those pursuits which would provide food 
for his hungry, education for his ignorant, morality and 
religion for his immoral and treacehrous, and perpetual 
liberty and self-government for his now down-trodden 
and oppressed people. Filippino ojjposition now extant 
would then be converted into Filippino assistance in our 
work for his sake. And our §60,000,000 expenses annu- 
ally there would be minimized to less than §13, 500, 000, the 
amount of revenues now collected, and the $13,500,- 
000 revenue, owing to * the increase of trade and 
the application of the energy of the Filippino now en- 
gaged in war to the various civil pursuits in life and 
liberty, would be augmented to beyond $60,000,000. Such 
a condition would imbue the Filippino with a hope of soon 
paying us for the exercise of our good offices for his re- 
demption, and such a condition would happily inspire our 
people at home and our soldiers and officers engaged to 
do the good work in the Philippines with a heartier moral 
courage. 

We should make it a point in the period of government- 
al organization in the Philip pines to be very careful to ap- 
point the Filippino to office whenever his capabilities will 
admit of our so doing. We should institute and organize 
original states in such sections as are most favorable, and 
form for these original states a union, and provide for elec- 
tions and statute laws which may be adapted to the require- 
ments. We should provide also for the admission of new 


26 


states that may afterwards be formed. We should place 
his governmemt on a firm basis for his benefit and not 
ours.. In doing all this we should keep self in the back- 
ground, realizing that at the end of the specified period we 
were going to "stir the nest" and let the little eaglet look 
out for itself. The true laborer is only worthy of his hire, 
and that is all he expects. 

That the average Filippino is a being inferior to the 
average American citizen, I do not doubt. But they de- 
serve credit for what they are at the hands of extortion. 
Many of them are well qualified for usefulness in the vari- 
ous vocations. 

Say they are not capable of intellectual improvement, 
or say they are uneducated as a whole, and you say a lie. 
Many of them are peers to our average American college 
graduates. Many Filippinos have been educated in 
Europe. I often hear our college graduates say that they 
would like to take a course in a European college. Why, 
the Philippine Congress contains eighty four members 
who are graduates of European colleges, and yet greed 
has branded them as ignorant outlaws. It is an injustice 
to the cause of righteousness and a shame upon our na- 
tion, that we do not grant this nation freedom, and let the 
better element of it go to work with a fostering love and 
a fond anxiety for the elevation and advancement of its 
own race. 

The Philippine Commission could not more conclusively 
exhibit its partiality and reverence for King Greed than 
it does by citing a whole prologue in its report to bring 
out the false inference, that it thinks that inasmuch as 
the Filippinos have only been* fighting for a redress of 
grievances for the last three hundred years, and not 
for independence, they should not now fight for inde- 
pendence, and should not have it. 

Should our forefathers, who conceived our independence 
for us while we were yet fighting for a redress of griev- 
ances, rise from their graves, and in a review of the full- 
ness of their honor pass by this Philippine Commission, 
its members could only, with deference to themselves, 
hang their heads in shame until the procession had 
passed. 

The Philippine Commission should remember that we 
were fighting in one way or another, with tongue or pen 
or sword, through centuries also for a redress of griev- 
ances only, and that the Revolutionary war was in the 
beginning a fight for the redress of grievances. Will 
they say that that was any reason why we should not 
have independence? Would they have stepped up to 


27 


Thomas Jefferson while he was writing that glorious 
declaration of rights, and have told him that the Amer- 
ican Colonies did not now deserve liberty because they 
had only been fighting for a redress of grievances? Then 
right bitterly methinks he would have rebuked them. 
Why, we should better tear down the turf that wraps the 
clay of our forefathers, and have dragged the Statue of 
Washington in its entirety from our Capitol steps amid 
the Dewey celebrities, than to thus dishonor the spirit of 
our martyred patriots. 

"Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do 
ye even so to them." 


CHAPTER VI. 

A great humanitarian and theologian has said: "For 
$20,000,000 we have purchased of Spain a tablet upon 
which to write the epitaph of the nation." Now, although 
there is truthful significance in his words, it seems to me 
we are a right "lively corpse" yet. And if we have pur- 
chased the tablet for God's sake let us not recognize a 
decline by writing our own epitaph. We can use that 
tablet for better purposes. It was a mistake to have 
bought it unless it was our intention to shape it into a 
statue which would symbolize freedom and denounce ty- 
ranny throughout the world. We can use it in this way 
yet. Will we do it? 

Some may say we can't afford to use the tablet for this 
purpose and lose the §20,000,000. I would say we had far 
better use it for the statue than to let it lie idle; because 
we don't want to set it up as our own tombstone, vvi 
have paid the §20,000,000, instead of which all we can 
claim is the tablet. I fancy making the double-tacea 
statue of it rather than a tombstone; even if by making rc 
a tombstone we should regain the $20,000,000 and have 
the tombstone also. I dare you to measure life, patriot- 
ism and justice by the almighty dollar. We should better 
throw the §20,000,000 to the dogs than to have need to or- 
der for ourselves a tombstone by trying to regain that 
§20,000,000— and with usury, as Senator M. A. Hanna 
might suggest Why, our revenues now amount to some- 
thing like §2,000,000 a day, and we are now prodigally 
spending millions every month. And it doesn't seem to 
hurt us, so President McKinley said. Is such a nation as 
this going to barter its existence, or like Esau, sell its 
birthright for a mess of pottage, or write its own epitaph 


28 

and pose "under it in the arms of death throughout the 
ages that shall roll? And all to regain, by extortion, the 
paltry sum of $20,000,000, which was mistakenly applied, 
or which was paid for the material out of which to build 
the double-faced statue? Shall President McKinley in 
the midst of his glorious successes for the redemption of 
the Cubans wisely erect from the Philippine Tablet that 
double-faced statue? I can not help believing that he 
bought it for the statue. But I fear that by the tumult of 
his Spanish War record and the vanity of his advisors he 
has been led into forbidden paths. I fear that he is chis- 
eling the tablet for the nation's tombstone, and carving 
the first letters of the inscription. Oh, may he retrace 
his steps and remodel his work, or will some one else 
take it up? 

I think that of the two wrongs we would far better lose 
the §20,000,000 than to colonize the Philippines. But we 
shall not need to do either. The Philippines will right- 
eously pay this as a part of their redemption; but they 
will not pay any other expenses which we may have in- 
curred in our relations with them up to the date of treat- 
ing with them on a basis of independence. It may be well 
to claim in part payment of this §20,000,000, an island or 
a port or two, which we may need as a coaling and naval 
station. All we need, and all we should have for our own 
good, outside of our Continuous Domain and Alaska, is a 
few naval stations here and there, wherever new avenues 
of trade are naturally opened up. We should not want 
Hawaii nor Cuba, nor the Philippines, nor even Porto 
Rico. I am opposed to continued expansion, and I be- 
lieve it means retrogression and trouble. 

CHAPTER VII. 

I am twenty-seven years of age today, and of that twen- 
ty-seven years I have been in the school room twenty-one 
years, the last ten of which I have been engaged in teach- 
ing. I have gradually imbibed a fond patriotism and an 
unselfish anxiety for the future welfare of our people, and 
the boys and girls who have been under my tutelage, and 
those like them throughout our land. I think that my 
study of geography and history and my efforts in my 
teaching for others' sake has chiefly done this good work 
for me. T remember some things incidental to the invo- 
lution of my mental attainments, whatever they may be, 
I remember how my early knowledge of geography re- 
volved itself in my mind. 


29 

I was directed to the map of our Continuous Domain, 
was told that it was our country, and that happily, J* wa ^f 
one of the grandest on the globe. Then it was explained, 
to me why it was so great and grand, and naturally, 1 be- 
gan to love it; because of its location, its resources, trie 
little scattering facts of history I had picked up— like tne 
"hatchet story ' —all this and because it was our country x 
loved it. 

The while before I knew about Alaska, whenever my 
eye caught sight of our map, and very often in my imagi- 
nations of it, there would flash throughout my being a 
pleasant and almost indescribable feeling— satisfaction, 
comfort, consolation, competency and gratitude are 
which may help to describe it. I thought our cou °™£ 
was the grandest country on the globe, and had the pie 
tiest map in the geography. I admired its shape, e v« 
the Peninsula of Florida and the little buttress at Minne 
sota. It was so neatly bounded on the north by V an * 
on the east by the Atlantic, on the south by Mexico »" 
the Gulf, and on the west by the Pacific, Oh, I did love iu. 

Then one day I was told that Alaska was a part °| 
United States.' It was hard for me to believe it. \ K *V 
just how I felt. I wished it wasn't so. But later ± _ 
told that it was very valuable for its furs and ^new, 
and its lumber and minerals, and it was yet tuin1 ^ b ^ ense 
and owing to climate it would never contain a yeiy tQ 
population; and that for all these reasons we did wei 
get it. Well, I submitted. I had to adapt my minu 
the decree. I tried to associate Alaska with the urn 
States as well as I could; and I did it without mjicb euo ^ 
too. Whenever my mind imaged the map of tne u 
States, there was Alaska— there it hung away out 
by itself with the southern extension as a handle ■ P™ 1 . § 
this way, as if saying, "hold me." But I gradually gag^ 
patience and resignation, and even thought it was 
to have Alaska; and that it would do very well 101 » 
yard if we did have to go to it in a boat. Endings 

But, oh, how dark and gloomy were my^oreDu g 
when I learned that we were about to secure Ha ^. ' torv 
this time I had gained some knowledge of general msw ^ 
I knew that it was expansion that proved f atal to 
great empires before us, and that without the mstrum« 
tality and forethought of wise statesmanship, insau ^ 
greed would, in this way, get the best of us ??°\ nd j 
prayer was that we would nor, meddle with Hawaii. £ 
made a solemn vow, as did Lincoln when he saw tne si» v «a 
sold at the block and driven off like cattle, that it J. couiu 
ever use my influence to check this crime against tne na- 
tion which our forefathers conceived in blood ana teai* 
for us, I would do it. 


30 


CHAPTER VIII. 

It seems to me that our Republican friends are going to 
get their tariff and expansion ideas muddled. The two 
are incompatible unless they eke in, in some way, the 
word "bondage" or ' 'sectional discrimination. " If they 
have free trade with Hawaii, Cuba. Porto Rico and the 
Philippines, as we have between our States, that will be 
that much free trade, won't it? At least that is the way I 
view it. If they should have the whole world under 
Uncle Sam's coat I wonder which they would have, free- 
trade or sectional discrimination? I expect they would 
choose the latter; and they would have a great muss of 
it, too, in a short while. 

Prom this line of thought, as also many others, any 
reasonable man will conclude that we should oppose ex- 
pansion if we would avoid trouble, preserve this nation 
intact, and stand for the peace of the world- If a nation 
absorbs others about it, it will lose its identity, and this 
will cause patriotism to wane and sectional jealousy to 
arise. 

It fills my heart with grief to think that our expansion- 
ist friends are so unwise as to argue, that because we 
have profited by expansion in the past we will continue al- 
ways to profit by it; that because Thomas Jefferson bought 
the territory of Louisiana we should hold fast to the Phil- 
ippines; that because our forefathers acted wisely by ex- 
panding our territorial limits, it would be wise to continue 
expansion. Crab-apples could not agonize my feelings 
more than such argument. 

I would that all men should agree that it is foolish and 
inexpedient for one nation to even attempt to legislate for 
the whole earth. I would that all men should agree that 
it was wise and expedient for our forefathers to expand 
the limits of our Contiguous Domain; and that there must, 
therefore, be a consistent mean to our territorial limits. 
Then I would that the American voters should agree, and 
forever so decide with their ballots, that the consistent 
mean of the territorial limits over which our grand gov- 
ernment should be exercised is embraced in our Contigu- 
ous Domain and Alaska. 

Then I would that our government should be so nearly 
righteous that other governments might typify with profit. 

But let us discontinue the greedy absorbtion process, 
and establish our national identity of continued being. 
Then with a normal stature, mature and in good health 
let us go about our life-work, throughout which we shall 
let our light so shine before men that others, seeing our 
good works, may thereby glorify our Father which is in 


31 


heaven. This is the true spirit of patriotism, and in it can 
we turn upon the world the true search-light of civilization, 
which will shine so bright as to caus« the demons ot sin 
to seek their secluded allotment. . , 

The immature corn is unfit for use, and the ear tliat 
expands until it bursts the shuck, rots. Methmks this is 
the text from which our expansionist forefathers would 
now preach to our greedy friends. . , 

Expansionists should remember that our past territorial 
expansion is quite different from the proposed coiomai 

P Whenever territories have been acquired in the past 
they have been immediately placed upon a basis uj. 
freedom and self-government. Their people have Dee n w> 
surely guaranteed protection of life, liberty and the pui- 
suit of happiness as have the people of any other state m 
our Union. So sure and well known is this guarantee w 
the territories that our citizens migrate from thestews 
them without the least doubt that they may ™ eT *%JZ* 
any of their liberties as citizens. Discrimination betww 
any other state or section in our Union and these i 
tories is strictly and plainly forbidden by our 
Law. And our laws also guarantee to these tell ^ 01 ^ e 
legislative powers in our government as soon as tu ^ n £ be 
found to contain the required population. There d 
no inequalities in Federal Taxation throughout toe ui _ 
States and the organized territories thereof, bo 
the law. . oiuips 

Would our expansionist friends have any .inWjj; 
between the Philippines and our States? If so, tney " • 
through the instrumentality of King Greed, ^stituti g 
bondage and creating castes in our republic, wn 
treason. If they would not have discriminating of 
in the Philppines, or there execute predatory sa peu ^ 
some kind, then in the name of God and for tae & I 
humanity, I would ask: What are we ngbtin„ i 
would ask: What advantage it would be to * 01S p" ress 
by force over the Filippmo, give him a seat in ^ [ * QV _ 
and grant the Malay race legislative powers m oui 
ernment. We already have two races there reprebw » 
and many consider that a fact grievous to °% bo ™f n the 
we cannot, with justice, refuse to carry that tact si 
two races are found under our flag. We can oniy P 
by looking: with compassion upon our weaker ana w » 
trodden brother in either race, and by trying to J^™» 
him. And this is quite enough for us to do at preseim 
We should have no desire to place the Malay race unciei 
our nag, or to cause it to immigrate upon our people. 


32 


Why not redeem the Filippino and equip him for com- 
petency and independence at a reasonable fee? Think of 
it— to enforce our power over the Filippino for the pur- 
pose of extortion, or to make him a citizen. It makes my 
heart sick. Well may the preacher say it is vanity. 
CHAPTER IX. 

"What is a man profited if he gain the whole world and 
lose his own soul?"— Matt.' 16-26. 

What is a nation profited if it gain the whole world and 
then lose all, even that which it now hath? What shall 
it profit the United States to continue expansion and get 
into trouble, which we would do if we should make our 
new possessions bond or free? If we will have a colonial 
policy of discrimination, then the American Geslers shall 
meet their oppressed on the field of battle, for so always 
to tyrants it shall be— "Sic Semper Tyrannis." Or if in- 
stead of colonial discrimination we should choose diversi- 
ties of representative citizenship, diversities of race un- 
der our flag, diversities of geographical and commercial 
conditions, then we shall have also diversities of civil 

ii* V? r so lon £ as we have a variable climate in the 
world which nurtures variety in the races, variety in 
&uman temperament, variety in occupations, variety in 
manners and customs of people; and so long as man shall 
oe easily led into sin by showing partiality and exhibiting 
ais selfishness; so long it was intended that one nation 
bnouid not rule the earth or any greatly diversified part 
oi it. History has illustrated this. Every nation that 
nas adopted the continued expansion policy has been 
iouna to practice unjust discrimination, which, sooner or 
later proved to be ruinous and fatal. 

fi^ , P?licy were not practiced we would not notice 

tne ushermgm of new nations upon the world's history so 
irequently, and the ushering out of the old. We would 
not notice such irregularities and complexities in the 
boundaries and make-up of the countries of the old world 
, . he mountain barriers of History and Geography, 
l lr % ^ ross evei T school-boy's line of march to the 
cwaey ot Educational Attainments, would not be so high 
ana many of weaker courage would emigrate from the 
Jr-iams oi ignorance, which are so noted for the produc- 
2 %r ? aw material called Misapplied Brains, out of 
which Vice is manufactured and shipped throughout the 
world Oh, may wise policies be adopted for the coun- 
tries of the New World, so that their boundaries may be 
established and ahvays be pleasing to the eve, and their 
history a delight to study. 


# 


33 


This infernal practice of government expansion and 
artificial control and modification of trade causes more sin 
and misery and heartache than all things else combined. 
It is Chief of the Devil's Staff in the^world. It is the 
Demon that has, in all ages and in all climes, dared to 
venture out in the brilliant vitalizing sunlight and pure 
air, among our agricultural classes, and rob them of their 
vitality and happiness and leave them in poverty, distress 
and disease. It is the Demon that has congested the pop- 
ulations in great cities and driven the people to abodes 
amid the stench of foul alleys and the gases and smokes 
above the tenth story. It is the Demon which has done 
all this, and then stands "laughing in his sleeve" at the 
modern scientist trying to determine the cause of the 
advance of poverty, morality, disease and crime. 

If this Demon was driven from the face of the earth, 
then every human being would get a much better allot- 
ment of pure air, sunlight, wholesome food, and all the 
bounties of art and nature. Then would poverty and 
gourmandized aristocracy, disease and mortality and 
crime, gradually vanish from among us, and human life 
would roll on to good old ages of modern Methuselahs. 

Imagine, too, the enormous freight charge of useless 
shipping to these congested centers of manufacture and 
trade. It may do for the balance of the world to go to 
the Torrid Zone to trade for oranges, but it would be un- 
wise and inexpedient to carry all structural material 
there, because oranges grow there, and have it there 
manufactured, and bring back the finished product. 

Could not more of our manufacturers profit by com- 
ing out of the congested populations, noise and foul air of 
the city to the country town nearer their raw material. 
Would it not be better to let the common carriers do 
more useful carrying and less useless carrying. 
Would it not be better to let them carry more of the 
finished product and not so much raw material? 

Common carriers are errand runners for the P^°P 1( ? 
and they deserve to be well paid for their work. .But 1 
tell you, fellow laborers, farmers, and brother teachers, 
that it is a sign of a process of sap-sucking and abnormal 
conditions to seethe managers and chief employees of 
carrier companies so much more prosperous than other 
classes. Understand I don't mean that each employee is 
paid too much. I mean a majority of them are not paid 
enough. The money is not rightly distributed. There 
are too many of the boys "running extra" as they call it, 
making a> few days in a month, enough to pay their board 
bill sometimes, and lying idle the balance of the time. It 


34 


seems to me it would be better for them to work regular 
or quit and get at something else, and let the fellow that 
is retained work more regular. It is a shame to see how 
the human race is being whipped around and deluded and 
misled by the money power. 

Would it not be better if less money were paid to the 
employees and it were better distributed, and they had 
regular work at the same wages, or as nearly as possible, 
as they are now getting? Is it not a dangerous sign to see 
so many laborers begging their bread, you might say, 
from the common carriers, instead of earning a good liv- 
ing in their employment? And is it not more dangerous 
to see that they really do get this bread pieced out to 
them along the route by the carriers, when that bread 
does not belong to the carrier companies but to the peo- 
ple who started them on their errand? If these people 
should need to beg (which they do not naturally) why not 
let them beg that bread from the people who have earned 
it by their labor, and to whom it rightly belongs, instead 
of from these prodigal errand runners? And should we 
think, either, that this bread which is dished out to hon- 
orable paupers by these errand runners is nearly all that 
disappears? I think it is not. Have I herein encompassed 
a thought that manufacturers, farmers, laborers, pro- 
fessionalists and voters, would do well to consider? If I 
have, I hope they may do so, and when there is the least 
doubt leave it, also, in favor of the prisoner at the bar — 
the health of the human race. 

What a horrible spectacle it is for a nation to practice 
expansive adhesion and assimilation, corrupting and 
decomposing its being by sapping the life-blood from the 
surface capillaries to congested centers within until the 
skin is sallow and the heart is sick. Tiuly, nations as 
"well as individuals should have a normal size and a social 
spirit. Hawaii, or Cuba, or Porto Rico, or the Philip- 
pines can only be cancerous modifications of the normal 
structure of our nation. 

I hope I shall not be accused of harboring any sectional 
prejudice against any part of our common country, for 
that does not rankle m my breast. I love our national 
her itage, and desire to see it only symmetrically devel- 
op ed in its entirety, to every nook and corner of its boun- 
dary. I would only see it undergo normal metamorpho- 
se s, passing on from its present marvelous attainments to 
more sublime and greater usefulness in the world.- I 
^vould have its every act and volition conducive to the 
establishment of a character which might be approved by 
Omnipotent Justice as a model for the world. And I 


35 

believe that our national heritage, through a righteous 
guidance of the people would attain to a glory which 
would excite the admiration of the most sanguine. This 
country is so located, geographically and commercially, 
and endowed with such vast resources, as to make it, if it 
considers and acts toward others with good will and 
charity, the most glorious nation the world shall ever 
have known. Of course it would be impracticable, but if 
it were necessary, it could better exist independent of 
trade and communication with the outside world than any 
nation on the globe. 

I would see this nation attend to its own business and 
utilize every part of its own estate, and not encroach 
upon its neighbor's farms, since a farmer can be a beneht 
to his neighbor without trespassing. I believe, since it is 
happily a fact that the North and the South and the West 
are within our domain, and that it is more conducive to 
the symmetrical development and utilization of the entire 
country to have, proportionately, more manufacturing 
done at the North, more cotton raised at the South, ana 
more wheat raised in the West. But it does not follow 
that either section cannot be utilized in many other ways, 
or that there is any need of congesting populations m 
manufacturing and commercial centers. 

I think that if the people of our country consider tnen 
own interest as a nation, they will realize, also, that tne 
nation can do more good for the people of the outside 
world, by neither espousing their governments, nor cov- 
eting their inheritance, nor encroaching upon their terri- 
tory. I believe it is our duty as a nation of power, influ- 
ence and character, to assist our down-trodden brotaei 
throughout the world in every way we can, even tliougn 
sometimes at our own expense; but by so doing it is 
neither necessary nor expedient for us to become espouseu 
to them or covet their possessions. 

"Do you slumber in your tent, Christian Soldier; 

While the foe is spreading woe through the land. 
Do you note his rising power growing bolder e, very Hour.'' 
Will he not our land devour while you stand.' 

' 'Let us arise, all unite, 
Let us arise in our might, 
Let us arise speak for God and the right. 


36 


CHAPTER X. 

In order to protect themselves and other American 
states from the selfishness and greed of European nations 
our people have adopted the precious Monroe Doctrine; 
which implies that any attempt by a European nation to 
gain dominion in America shall be considered by the 
United States as an unfriendly act. 

I would suggest that in connection with this cherished 
Monroe Doctrine, and in order to protect themselves and 
others from the selfishness and greed of our own nation, 
that the people adopt the doctrine that any attempt by 
a i r 1 ulers of ttlis nation to extend our sovereignty beyond 
Alaska and our Contiguous Domain shall be considered 
as an unfriendly act. 

m I would regard the establishment of this doctrine more 
important to our national self-preservation than the es- 
tablishment of the Monroe Doctrine. Yet, both are 
wholesome and beautiful, and deserve to be cherished by 
our people, and handed down to the hearts of succeeding 
generations by history and tradition. 

Show me a true Christian gentleman, and I will show 
you a man who considers it more important to guard 
against his own selfishness than the selfishness of others. 
^wT me a g °°* and * rul y enlightened nation, and I will 
snow you a nation which considers it more important to 
E a ^mst its own selfishness than the selfishness of 
Sf™' We > a* a nation, or as individuals, need to 
watcb both our own selfishness and the selfishness of others. 

l rusting that God may help our people to see the &*- 
£ « ^ Ce i of , thlsd ?. ctri P e ? 1 now submit this manuscript, 
foe^^S^*^^* 0 ** a * d tkanfcs on this Thanksgiv- 
Harr* ' W poetic benediction of Henry H. 


37 


No Empire— Save it be Thine Own! 

God of our Fathers whose command 
Parted the waters from the land, 
And led our grandsires here — that we 
Might dwell in peace and liberty, 
Be. with us in this trying hour, 
And save us from the Tempter's power! 

Ruler of Battles! who sustained 
The patriot armies till they gained 
Our freedom from the kings of earth, 
Who gave the great republic birth, 
Grant that the nation still may see 
The star of hope, of liberty! 

Grant that this people still may lead 
The onward march thou hast decreed, 
And may our glorious mission be — 
To lead mankind to liberty, 
Until the time appointed brings 
The coming of the King of Kings. 

Son of the Morning! who hast known 

How to refuse an earthly throne, 

Grant us too, that grace to make that choice 

And heed not Satan's tempting voice, 

Or money-changers, who would sell 

And league us to the powers of hell! 

Grant that this land may know no throne, 
No empire — save it be Thine Own, 
No empire built with fire and sword, 
No empire stained with tears and blood, 
No empire o'er unwilling slaves, 
O'er ashes, bones and patriot graves! 

Grant that the great republic's name 
May never bear the robber's shame, 
Nor Yankee lust for blood and gold 
Call down the doom of empires old! 
Grant that the needless blood we shed 
Be not upon our children's head! 

O Prince of Peace ! make us content 
With our own boundless continent, 
Not sending armies o'er the waves 
To make far distant nations slaves; 
And may our prayer for others be — 
That every people may be free! 


38 


Rebuke the hypocrites who claim 
To conquer others in Thy name, 
The blasphemy which would compel 
Thy Gospel spread with shot and shell, 
The Baal priests who stay to teach 
And fill their pockets while they preach! 

Lord God of Sabbaoth ! when we fight, 
May it be only for the right, 
And not to plunder those who stand 
For freedom and their native land! 
From blood and spoil make us forbear! 
t*od of the Patriot ! hear our prayer! 


• 


► 


