"Do what is right, 
do your best, 
and God will 
take care of the rest. 





so THAT MY FRIENDS AND 

SUPPORTERS MAY KNOW 5 

HERE I STAND 7 

PRAYER 8 

ON TO THE list CENTURY 9 

THE POLITICAL ORDER: 

CONTINUITY OF POLICY 12 

THE POLITICAL ORDER: 

THE HISTORICAL BASIS FOR CONTINUITY 13 
THE POLITICAL ORDER: 

QUALIFICATIONS FOR LEADERSHIP 16 

OUR SOCIO-ECONOMIC AGENDA 17 

PART ONE: 

SOCIAL REFORM TO FIGHT POVERTY 20 

SOCIAL REFORM 20 

A SPECIAL CONCERN: 

AGRICULTURE & FOOD SECURITY 22 

A SPECIAL CONCERN: AGRARIAN REFORM 23 

A SPECIAL CONCERN: EDUCATION 23 

A SPECIAL CONCERN: PREPARING FILIPINO 

YOUTH For THE 21st CENTURY 25 

A SPECIAL CONCERN: HOUSING AND 

THE PLIGHT OF THE SQUATTERS 28 

PART TWO: 

SUSTAINED REFORMS TO 

STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH 32 

ECONOMIC STABILITY AND GROWTH 32 

POLITICAL STABILITY THRU PEACE 

AND UNITY 35 

A SPECIAL CONCERN: PUBLIC SAFETY 37 

— - o 



Here I Stand 



A SPECIAL CONCERN: FOREIGN AFFAIRS 38 

A SPECIAL CONCERN: REFORMING 

THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM 38 

A REVITALIZED GOVERNMENT 41 

PART THREE: 

AN EMPOWERED CITIZENRY 

AS OUR FOUNDATION FOR GROWTH 

AND COMPETITIVENESS 43 

EMPOWERMENT 43 

GLOBAL COMPETITIVENESS 44 

A SPECIAL CONCERN: OUR OFWs 46 

A SPECIAL CONCERN: ADVANCEMENT 
OF WOMEN AND OTHER 

DISADVANTAGED SECTORS 46 

PART FOUR: 

A STRENGTHENED DEMOCRACY 49 

A FINAL CALL FOR CONTINUITY 50 

MY PERSONAL QUALIFICATIONS 50 

CONTINUITY AND BEYOND 51 



$mipmmm mm mm 



This pamphlet mirrors my 
views and position on 
substantive issues regarding 
the management of the 
economy and the government. 

In the course of my duties 
as Senator, I have travelled 
extensively throughout the 
country and have come to 
meet numerous people from 
various sectors who have been 
encouraging me to seek the 
particularly after I topped 
elections with 
history. Many 




Presidency in 1998, 
the 1995 Senatorial 
the largest national vote in our 
of them have also given me their 



views on how our economy and our government 
should be managed as we move forward into the 21st 
century. 

It is in response to their encouragement and concern 
that I have written this answer to the question: What 
would I do if elected President of the Philippines? My 
basic answer is that I would build upon the historic 
achievements of President Corazon C. Aquino and 
President Fidel V. Ramos, by taking their political and 
economic reforms to the next phase, that of social 
reform. With our democratic institutions and a growing 
economy based on private sector enterprise as foundations, 
I would concentrate on a socio-economic agenda 
whose objective is to allow the greatest number of our 
people to enjoy and feel the blessings of peace and 
prosperity I want the mass of our people, the 



o 



Here I Stand 



common tao, the poor, to feel the upliftment and 
improvement in their daily lives. That they, with 
dignity and pride, can say that their lot has improved 
and that they now live within a better society. 

I am strongly committed to this, and my commitment 
is rooted in my endeavors of more than ten years as 
a public servant. As Undersecretary of Trade and 
Industry, I was part of President Aquino's team when 
she undertook political reforms to restore democracy 
while planting the seeds of economic reform. As 
Senator, I was responsible for sponsoring and/or authoring 
37 bills which formed part of the core of President 
Ramos' legislative agenda to underpin his highly 
successful economic reforms and prepare the way for 
social reform. 

I hope this pamphlet serves as a useful tool for you 
my friends and supporters, as you learn how I stand 
on substantive issues. I hope it will also help you in 
explaining my views to other friends who will also 
jom us. Should you have suggestions on how to 
improve the socio-economic agenda that I am proposing, 
please pass them on to me, as I will be constantly 
seekmg ways to improve our program. In this way, 
we can all be partners in our crusade for a better 
Philippines. 




by 

Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo 

This is my credo: 

If elected President of the Phihppines, I shall do 
three things: 

1 . I will consecrate the Philippines to God, the Almightly, 
and lead our country with integrity, competence 
and moral fortitude. My motto: "I will do what 
is right, do it to my best, and let God take care of 
the rest." 

My cabinet and I will lead by example. We will 
establish a standard of simple living. We will move 
vigorously against graft and corruption. Our 
government will uphold the principle of command 
responsibility. Our officials will be accountable 
under the "unexplained wealth" test. 

2. I will continue the policies of President Fidel V. 
Ramos, thereby assuring our country of endurmg 
economic gains. I will institute social reforms by 
establishing a six-year socio-economic program. 
Our battlecry: Fight Poverty. 

Our priorities will be: The education of our 
youth and the delivery of health services. The 
generation of jobs and of quality livehhood. The 
provision of affordable shelter and of food security. 
The enlistment of women and the youth in nation 
building, and in bringing values back to our society. 
The protection of our environment and natural 
resources. 

3. I will fight crime, and bring peace and unity for 
all Filipinos by following the path that President 
Ramos has prepared. 



Here I Stand 



Peace is our goal. Peace and unity in the South and 
throughout our cities and countryside. Industrial 
peace and unity between labor and management for 
increased productivity and gains for both. Peace from 
violence and crime. Peace from drugs and sexual 
abuse. Peace for the sake of our nation. 

The fight against crime will take center stage. We 
will institute meaningful reforms in our law enforcement 
and prosecution agencies, and make them more attuned 
to the times. But peace and order is also an indispensible 
part of municipal governance and therefore should be 
controlled by the local governments. Thus, we will 
consider establishing a two-tier police system that 
conforms with our constitution, maintaining a national 
police force but returning control of local police units 
to the elected local government executives. This, 
along with the passage of pertinent legislation and 
organizational reforms that we will vigorously undertake 
will make our police and prosecution agencies more 
capable to fight crime. We can then bring the benefits 
of stability and peace to all Filipinos by winning the 
war against crime. 

PRAYER 

I pray with God's blessing, that I will be able to bring 
peace and prosperity, the greatest good to the greatest 
number of our people. Of whatever creed. Christian or 
Muslim. Of whatever ethnic heritage. Of whatever lot 
m life, no matter how humble. Whether in our cities, the 
countryside, our remote islands, or in distant lands away 
from home. 

God bless us all. 



ON T© rag^Hsif CEOTKV 



The Philippines today is on the road to a historic 
rendezvous. Three events invest that rendezvous with the 
pith and moment of great national endeavor. Two of these 
events will occur in 1998. They are the presidential elections 
and the celebration of the Centennial of our fight for liberty 
and freedom enshrined by the Malolos Republic. These two 
events will merge into a formidable current and flow into 
a third event. This is the year 2000 and the vast vistas and 
challenges of the 21st century. 

Together, these three events will define us once again 
as a nation, as a republic, as the onlv Christian nation in 
Asia. ^ " fPM— — 



century. They \ if^^HI 
will also determine whether we can draw moral and 
spiritual sustenance from two wellsprings. The first is 
our heroic revolutionary past, where freedom in Asia 
rang for the first time against the colonial master The 
second is our culture, where the family, school and 
religion grafted our Malayo-Polynesian roots to the 
spreading and luxuriant foliage of Christianity and Western 
democracy. 

The Filipino can? Yes, the Filipino can. He can if we 
all apply ourselves to the oars of a new national crusade. 
It is a crusade that will complement the substantial economic 
achievements of President Ramos. In this crusade, we 




determine 
whether we can 
forge the steel of 
national unity 
required for this 



They will 




Here I Stand 



must not only satisfy the Filipino's material necessities. 
Just as importantly, we must give him the spiritual and 
intellectual armor to navigate the uncertain currents of 
the 21st century. 

Would we then be ready to cross over to the 21st century 
with the sure step of men and women ready and willing 
to address that century's challenge? Would they be able 
and competent because they draw nourishment from the 
heart and soul of our spiritual heritage and the noble 
sacrifice of men and women who died so we could be free? 
From the Katipunan Revolution? From the Malolos RepubUc? 
From the Insurrection against America? From the guerilla 
war against the Occupation and Japanese Imperial Army? 
From the modern world's first successful peaceful revolt 
agamst tyranny that was EDSA and People Power? 

And yet even as we throw darts at Spain and the 
nited States, we recognize our legacy from these two 
countries. From the first, we inherited Christianity that 
mtorms and inspires the religious life of majority of our 
ci i^sns. We of course equally respect the religion of our 
inherU d^^^^^"^^ in the South. From the second, we 
tw'^^^ ^11 political system called democracy, and its 

in pillars of liberty and freedom. Christianity and 
uemocracv tl-iprof^ . . , . . . , . 
nation "''=^^^iore are mextricable m our identity as a 



We thus face the even more exacting challenge that the 
Philippines be the bridge between America and the West on 
the one hand and China and the Orient on the other. A 
bridge to Asia. A bridge to the future. 

This is therefore the road of high adventure that looms 
before us. Under the tenure of President Ramos, so much 
has been achieved particularly in the realm of economic 
progress. That is his priceless legacy. But President Ramos 
himself agrees it must be expanded. We were the erstwliile 
''Sick Man of Asia". Today, economically speaking, the 
Philippines stands closer to the threshold of entry into that 
elite Asian group of economic dragons or tigers. 

Still, there is so much to be done and accomplished, 
particularly in the crusade against crime and violence, graft 
and corruption, clironic poverty, skullduggery in our political 
ranks. Six years in Malacanang are too brief a time to slay 
or at least cripple these monsters. That would therefore be 
the challenge of the 1998 elections. We need a sword to 
battle organized crime, and entrenched corruption in our 
political system. We need a sceptre to bring the values back 
to our society as a largely Christian nation, livingin harmony 
with our Muslim brethren in Mindanao. 

And what are these values? Those of love of God and 
love of flag and country, sacrifice, hard work, honesty and 
probity, knowledge through rigorous education that lays 
store by science and technology, respect for elders, the good 
of the community above that of the individual. Respect for 
the law and the constitution. The family, the school, and the 
Church or churches must again stand sentinel over our 
youth. 

We have depicted the throb of events and their passage 
to the 21st century. Now we must define the political path 
that will take the nation forward to the 21st century. 



Here I Stand 



THE pooTiicM (^mmi tmmmm m mua 

When I topped the 1995 Senatorial elections with 
the largest national vote in Philippine history, it meant 
an overwhelming approval by the people of my 
legislative performance. 

This performance consists of the economic legislation 
supporting the reforms of President Ramos. 

Though President Ramos and I were elected under 
different political banners within our multiparty system, 
we have been brought together by a common policy 
vision. 

On June 30, 1992 President Ramos declared two 
goals for his term, national unity and economic reform. 
These two goals have been fulfilled. 

President Ramos transformed our economy from 
an inward-looking industrialism with an ethic founded 
on access to power and easy money, to an outward- 
looking economy founded on self-discipline, thrift, 
hard work and productive enterprise. 

He dismantled the complex rules, simplified the 
tariff system and abolished the licensing powers on 
which the ethic of easy money was founded. 



He reduced the economic role of the State, and 
increased the role of private enterprise. 

By promoting liberalization, deregulation and 
privatization, he handed power to the people: The 
freedom and opportunity to mobilize individual creativity, 
initiative and entrepreneurship. These were the building 
blocks for economic growth. 

The government that has empowered the people 
must be emulated by future administrations. Building 
on its gains means sustaining economic reforms and 
accelerating the fight against poverty through social 
reform. 

By mobilizing the public wealth that economic 
growth makes available, the government will have the 
means to undertake social reform. The State can then 
be an activist in making economic opportunities and 
the delivery of public services available to the poor 
and disadvantaged. This is further empowerment. 

I offer, therefore, continuity of the Ramos policy. 

THE POLITICAL ORDER: 
THE HISTORICAL BASIS FOR CONTINUITY 

''No President can build the whole Edifice of a 
nation. 

All that he is called upon to do 

is to add a fine stone to that Edifice, 

so that those who shall come after him may add 

other fine stones that will go 

for a strong and enduring structure." 

(Diosdado Macapagal, Inaugural Address, 1961) 

Since the time of our first President of the 
century, Manuel Quezon, the PhiUppine economy 
had prospered under a free enterprise system. 



Here I Stand 




In 1950, President Elpidio Quirino launched a 
system of exchange and import controls, as a temporary 
emergency measure to address the needs of a newly- 
independent Philippines reconstructing its economy 
in the post-war era. 

By 1962, during the administration of President 
Macapagal, the country restored the free enterprise 
system. Our economy had become the second strongest 
in Asia, after Japan. 

However, in 1970, the next administration returned 
to a system of controls, in line with the martial law 
regime which was later to be imposed in 1972. 



It was under this system that the FiUpino people 
would come to suffer its worst economic crisis, even 
as our neighboring countries were enjoying 
unprecedented economic growth. 

It was a system that imposed the heavy hand of 
the State on the economy, dispensing favors to a 
chosen few, while stifling private sector initiative. But 
in truth, it is with the private sector that the potential 
for rapid economic development lies. 

Our history has shown that the best system for 
economic growth is that which requires the least 
intervention in private enterprise by government 
bureaucracy. That system is people empowerment. 

In 1986, the EDSA revolution gave us the opportunity. 
Its banner was People Power. 

EDSA was a fragile victory made strong by the 
leadership of two Presidents. President Corazon 
Aquino restored our democratic institutions of 
politics and governance: Our constitution, our legislative, 
our tradition of free elections. She planted seeds of 
other reforms, even amidst armed threats to the 
constitution. 

Fidel Ramos, as Defense Secretary, was President 
Aquino's strongest protector of the constitution. When 
he succeeded to the Presidency, it was under the 
same constitution that he had so ably defended. 
As President, he restored political stability, economic 
growth, and people empowerment. 

Our history during the 20th century has taught us 

hard lessons. 

That our present gains have come about only after 
tremendous sacrifice and effort by our leaders and our 
people. 

That we cannot take it for granted that our gains 
will continue. We need the right leadership for our 
gains to endure into the 21th century. 

o 



Here I Stand 



THE poyirncM ©mm: 




What are the quaUfications for the Presidency? Let 
us hear from men who have successfully governed 
their nations: 

For President John Kennedy, it entails measuring 
up to the highest standards of behavior: 

''No President can excuse or pardon the slightest 
deviation from irreproachable standards of behavior 
on the part of any member of the Executive Branch. 
For him firmness and determination are the ultimate 
source of public confidence in the government/' 

For President Diosdado Macapagal, it is integrity: 

''I regard integrity and capacity for self-denial as 
the prime requisites for the Presidency." 

Finally, a leader must have the technical and 
spiritual strength to make tough decisions for the 
good of the country, for as President Ramos has said: 

''...the decision to go forward rests with me as your 
President. To paraphrase an American President, 'Now 
there are many, many people who can recommend and 
advise, and a few of them consent. But there is only one 
who has been chosen by the people to decide.'" 

I subscribe to the above declarations. A President 
must be both technically competent and spiritually 
prepared to lead the nation forward. 



Ipropose to move us forward through a socio- 
economic program whose objective is to truly spread 
the benefits of all that we have achieved through 
reforms and economic growth to the people. We 
must bring the greatest good to the greatest number 
of our people. 

Our socio-economic program will be founded on 
the following: 

First, social reform to fight poverty. Social 
reform is the next phase of economic reform. 
Social reform means government and people's 
organizations working together for the effective 
delivery of basic social infrastructure and services 
to the people, so that the quality of their daily 
hfe is improved and the improvement is truly 
felt, and their capacity to be employed as 
productive members of our economy is achieved. 

Second, sustained reforms to strengthen 
economic growth. Social reform will be financed 
by mobilizing and competently managing the 
increasing public wealth that economic growth 
creates. Thus, we should strengthen growth by 
building upon the reforms that have led to our 
present gains. Reforms whose cornerstones have 
been economic stability and growth, pohtical 
stability through peace and unity, and a revitalized 
government bureaucracy. 

Third, an empowered citizenry as our 
foundation for growth and competitiveness. If 
our people are truly empowered, if the 
individual Filipino's will, energy and vision are 
harnessed, we will have the most potent force 
to make the Philippines competitive with anyone, 
anywhere in the world. Thus, our socio-economic 

O 



Here I Stand 



program should be meant for all the people, to 
empower and energize our entire citizenry, not just 
the rich and privileged. 

Fourth, a strengthened democracy as a way to 
bequeath our gains to future generations. As we 
strengthen democracy, we also promote the 
moral and spiritual values that come hand-in- 
hand with a democratic tradition, such as love 
of God and country, hard work, honesty, 
knowledge through education and technology, the 
good of the community. 

Upon these principles, we will build our 
program. Many times I have travelled throughout 
the length and breadth of our country. Over 
the years, I have therefore had the privilege 
to meet with thousands upon thousands of Filipinos 
from all walks of life. They have told me of 
their problems and their fears, and they have 
told me of their hopes for the future. These 
countless Filipinos are the source and inspiration 
for the socio-economic program I want to bring 
to reality. Thus, the program belongs to the people 




and not to me — it 
is OUR program. 



I vow to 
continue consulting 
with the people, 
so it is to be 
expected that our 
program will adapt 
to changing needs 
and circumstances, 
and as ever better 
ideas are 
contributed by the 
people. But our 





founding principles should remain as constant 
guides. 

The most important principle is that our socio- 
economic agenda is for the Filipino people, many of 
whom are still struggling with poverty. Thus, it is 
necessarily an agenda for the common man. The 
blood of the common man runs within me. My 
father was born of a peasant family, and so 
Diosdado Macapagal was known as ''the poor 
boy from Lubao" and ''the man of the masses". 
When he rose to the Presidency through faith 
in God, education, hard work and integrity, it was 
considered a triumph over poverty. As President, his 
heart remained with the masses, for whom he 
estabUshed Common Man's Day at Malacanang, when 
ordinary people could come to the presidential palace 
to talk one-on-one and face-to-face with their President. 

I will restore the Common Man's Day, and I will 
bring the Presidency to the masses throughout 
the Philippines by having Common Man's Day 
not only in Malacanang but also in the provinces. 
This is the surest way to know how well our socio- 
economic agenda is working for the people — the 
people themselves will meet with me and tell me. 



Here I Stand 




PART ONE 



TO riGm 



1 agree with the view that economic growth by itself 
is meaningless. That since the fundamental fight 
is against widespread poverty, it is essential that 
prosperity achieved is not confined to a privileged few 
but be equitably shared with the greatest number of 
our people. 

SOCIAL REFORM 

We must take economic reform to its next level, 
that of social reform. Our social reform agenda 
should be based on the following principles: 

A. We should continue with our pro-poor bias. 

The social reform agenda of the Ramos government 
began by understanding who the poor are, where 
they are, and why they are poor. The policies of 
government then took on a pro-poor bias, with 
programs and projects that addressed directly the 
concerns of specific groups of the poor. These have 
included alternative financial systems, education 
and training, and appropriate technology. In this 



effort, government should work with people's 
organizations. i ' • * • 



B. Economic opportunities should continue to be 
increased. 

Programs for job creation and liveUhood have 
been the traditional economic components of 
the fight against poverty, and these must 
continue. 

C. We must deliver basic social services so that the 
impact can be felt by way of improvements in the 
daily life of the poor. 

We must continue to concentrate public spending 
on basic social infrastructure and services. These 
include education, health and sanitation facilities, 
affordable housing, and basic utilities such as 
public tranportation, power and water. To sectors 
such as the urban poor, delivery of these social 
services can mean a dramatic increase in the quahty 
of their daily life. In many instances, the delivery 
of these services entail a partnership with local 
governments units. But often, the national leadership 
must take the lead. For example, pubUc transport, 
energy and water must reach the remotest areas. 
This is possible when Build- Operate-Transfer and 
privatization programs are maximized and 
facilitated. It is for this reason that I am proud to 
have been the principal author of the BOT law. 
The Ramos administration set the example of vigorous 
action by solving the power crisis. Our turn for 
similar accomplishments should come in the other 
social services, such as public transport and water 
supply. 



Here I Stand 



A SPECIAL COE^CSiE^: 
AGRICULTURE & FOOD SEC^^QIY 

Our program should give 
emphasis to the agricultural and 
fishery sector for a number of 
reasons. 

First, so many of our people 
still depend on agriculture and 
fishing for their livelihood. Rice 
and corn peasants and small 
fishermen are among the poorest 
in our society. 

Second, due to the poverty 
and low productivity of our farmers and fishermen, one of 
the most vexing but vital problems of the country has been 
the security of supply of our basic food staples. Since the 
time of President Quezon, government has striven hard to 
achieve self-sufficiency in rice and corn. We must continue 
the effort, and complement it by promoting production of 
and self-sufficiency in the other types of basic food consumed 
by the ordinary Filipino, such as fish. 

Third, by pursuing an agricultural program, we create 
raw materials for industry. Self-sufficiency in staples and 
eventual agricultural diversification are foundations for 
industrial modernization. 

We should be commited to promoting agricultural 
development thru infrastructure building, technology, 
and appropriate policies on food security and self- 
sufficiency. Farm-to-market roads, and inter-island 
shipping and ports, should be made an integral part of 
the agricultural development program. 

For our basic crops, reforms to reduce costs and raise 
productivity should focus on credit access, post harvest 
facilities, downstream processing, and improving farmers' 
access to markets. 

— — ==============^^ 




r 



In the medium term, more land and water resources 
should be devoted to more diversified and higher value 
crops with good market potential. 

Cooperatives should also be strengthened to make 
them self-reliant and able to assume some traditional 
functions of government agencies, as they have with the 
National Food Authority. 

Legislative reforms must also continue. For example, 
I authored legislation to strengthen our crop insurance 
system. I have pending legislation to strengthen 
mechanisms for rural credit and price support. 

A SPECIAL CONCERN: AGRARIAN REFORM 

Reforming the economy and setting into motion a 
socio-economic development plan are not all that we 
need to pursue the national goal. For many generations, 
the problem of impoverished tenant farmers has made 
it impossible for the mass of our people to participate 
in the progress of our country. 

Thus, to lay the basis for achieving prosperity shared 
by all, we need to continue pursuing our agrarian reform 
program. But I believe that our measure of success 
should not only be in the number of land titles that 
change hands. It should be reflected in higher production 
yields and increasing incomes for farm families. 

A SPECIAL CONCERN: EDUCATION 

Education is a crucial factor in improving the quality 
of life of our people. There is a need to improve the 
standard of education in the country, specifically in science 
and technology. Thus, a functional literacy program 
should be vigorously supported by the government to 
teach the youth something that will be useful to their 
trade after graduation. 



Here I Stand 




The following measures need immediate action: 
First, computer literacy shall be the showcase of my 
administration in order to prepare the Filipinos for the 
hi FT jipL V? ^^^^ century. Basic 

' Jr^^W^^^f computer training should 
m m^^^^^Bt^^ taught in public and 

ift I'^^^^l^^y private schools in the 

elementary department 
or grade school level. 

Second, basic skills in 
reading and writing the 
national language should 
be taught to the communities of indigenous people. The 
use of their own local dialects and cultural practices 
should be respected and enhanced. 

Third, basic skills and farm technology training should 
be taught to farmers and landless rural workers through 
local farm schools that cater to the specific needs of the 
agri-agra sector. 

Fourth, government subsidy to poor but deserving 
students should be expanded and given directly to private 
schools or to the students themselves. 

Fifth, the government should encourage private firms 
to get formal and non-formal students in an apprenticeship 
student work program in exchange for fiscal incentives. 

Sbcth, public schools should be given more fiscal 
autonomy for tiiem to have greater flexibility in their 
sources and uses of funds. 

Seventh, private schools should have more autonomy 
in their academic operations for them to be more innovative 
and responsive to the changing needs of our time. 

Eighth, the government should give more support to 
private tertiary schools of higher education, such as fiscal 
incentives, use of idle government land for schoolbuildings, 
and a share of the assistance from foreign countries such 
as science and laboratory facilities. 



A $mmi mmmu: prepmdpjs Filipino 
xmm the 2ist cmwm 




to most of us now living. Our global society is 
undergoing major restructuring in the ways that we 
create wealth, govern ourselves, and educate our 
children, leaving no aspect of our lives and jobs 
untouched by transformations. 

At the dawn of this third millennium we have 
witnessed nations falling apart, global terrorism, shifts 
in how wealth is created, shifts to a service economy, 
global trade, electronically flowing investments, 
containerized shipping, mass migration, global warmmg, 
global pollution, decline of morality, degraded ethics, 
degeneration and splintering of families, HIV-AIDS, 
the computer and telecommunications revolution of 
telepresence, videoconferencing, fiber-optics transmission, 
e-mail, internet, electronic superhighways. The Ust 
goes on and on. 

The common Filipino does not remain untouched 
by globalization, as we experienced in the recent 
APEC conference in Manila. We have started to realize 
that we either flow with the tide, learn to swim in it, 

— & 



Here I Stand 



or drown in its current — it will affect us all. Those 
who get there first gain to benefit the most as users 
of the new tools, leaving little to the latecomers. 
Incoming foreign investors, competition and lower 
trade tariffs have challenged our skills and competency. 

Our young Filipinos are not far behind in discovering 
how their lives will be influenced, altered, and transformed 
by the onrushing future. College students today 
wonder whether a college degree guarantees a job 
upon graduation. While radical youth in the 70's and 
80's sought to change the government and society, 
today's urban yuppies wish that government and 
society would focus priorities on preparing them to 
compete in the 
coming 21st century. 
Having seen their 
parents' generation 
seeking jobs abroad, 
today's youth are 
concerned about 
employment 
opportunities our 
changing economy 
will offer, despite the 
many attractions y 
given by government (n 
to bring in foreign 
investors. Our young hope and seek for security 
amidst the many concerns that touch their lives, such 
as the state of our justice system, whether jobs will 
provide permanency even after six months, our dying 
environment. Many ask what the new rules will be 
with this fundamental shift in the way we live, work 
and govern ourselves. 

The task of preparing young Filipinos of today's 
civic society must be made strategic and systematic. 




As part of a global community dictated by the access 
to and influence of information and not just traditional 
factors such as capital and wealth, young Filipinos 
need to be equipped with effective skills and access 
to the latest information technologies. Values of 
tolerance and understanding, necessary to make 
cooperation among countries beneficial to all and to 
end global conflict and ethnic wars, must begin with 
Filipinos at ages as young as possible. Even as 
values of service, involvement and commitment are 
slowly becoming a past characteristic of days gone 
by, today's youth continue to search for fulfillment 
and meaning in life. Thus, at the threshold of this 
rare moment in history, we need to equip our 
FiUpino youth with what it takes to ride above the 
wave into the 21st century. We can group these into 
three: 

First, global consciousness and awareness. We 
must create a national consciousness among young 
FiUpinos of the urgent need to understand, analyze 
and act on the benefits, consequences and opportunities 
in preparing for the 21st century. 

Second, relevant skills and education. We must 
support regional and sub-sectoral youth networks in 
coordinating projects and programs that concretely 
prepare young Filipinos for the 21st century, providing 
and strengthening use of and access to global information 
technologies and economies, in conjunction with the 
private sector. 

Third, values and community. We must promote 
global and FiUpino moral values aimed at instilUng 
among the young such values as competition and 
cooperation, sustainable development, service and 
commitment, values that prepare young FiUpinos for 
meaningful, interactive and productive venues for 
leadership in tomorrow's global viUage. 

& 



Here I Stand 



A SPECIAL copacE^Ms TOysDPa© m\E 

mmi OF THE S(QyMTERS 

Every Filipino should have an effective opportunity to 
have a home fit for a human being. 

Our socio-economic program must call for the 
immediate provision of housing assistance for the 
expected number of beneficiary-households that will 
increase from around 215,000 in 1995 to nearly 280,000 
by 1998, to meet the housing needs on a national scale. 
Behind these statistics lurk a serious social welfare 
problem — the miserable housing in which countless 
FiUpinos languish. The situation makes a mockery 
of society's duty to help provide our people with the 
rudiments of human existence, namely food, clothing 
and housing. 




The enormity of our housing problem 
staggers the imagination. The rapid concentration 
of families in urban centers and the inadequate 
housing facilities available at the present time 
emphasize the magnitude of the resources 
required to provide shelter, not to say, civilized 
dwellings to our people. The much deplored 

=============^ 



squatters' problem in our cities and even in the 
provinces is an outburst of the grave problem of 
inadequate housing for milUons of Fihpinos. 

The consciousness of the misery brought about 
by the lack of decent housing among impoverished 
Filipinos must influence our Administration in 
meeting the housing problem. In many rural areas, 
the nipa huts in which people dwell are unfit for 
human beings. Often, those built on river banks 
become floating coffins for the occupants when 
storm and flood strike mercilessly in the dead of 
night. The low built shacks in typhoon areas to 
avoid the strong winds are like animal pens because 
the roofs are so low that the dwellers have to stoop 
or crawl inside. 

One of the first measures we must recommend 
to Congress should be the creation of a 
Department of Housing tasked to provide strong 
action to address the problem of housing. By 
elevating executive action on housing to the cabinet 
level, I shall be able to personally and constantly 
work with the Secretary of Housing to draw up our 
housing program, and well as help resolve technicalities 
and bottlenecks until the program is completely 
implemented. 

The program should operate at two levels. 
On one level, the government should continue its 
support for the private sector's own housing 
development activities, which are conducted on a 
commercial basis. Here, an important component 
involves maintaining a viable and sustainable funding 
mechanism for home-buyers, particularly in the 
low and medium cost categories. 

At another level, the government should address 
the needs of the very poor. While our ideal goal 
should continue to be the ownership of individual 



Here I Stand 




housing units, we must also consider the increasing 
value of land as our economy progresses, as well as 
the inclination and trait of Filipinos not to move 
from their former homes or communities. Thus, in 
certain overcrowded urban centers, it might be 
impractical to provide individual housing units 
due to the scarcity and the high cost of land. 
In this situation, vertical expansion in providing the 
housing critically needed by the people will give the 
maximum facihties. In many other countries with 
similar constraints to take into account, the solution 
has been the construction of multi-storey tenement 
houses. 

Our Department of Housing should supplement 
the existmg socialized housing programs by embarking 
on a tenement housing program. The multi-storey 
tenements will be intended for the poor and homeless 
or the indigents. Thus, priority for occupancy 
should be with the poorest and the homeless. Rentals 
or installments, while covering expenses to keep the 



projects in good and clean condition, should be the 
lowest possible, and should provide the occupant 
with equity in the housing unit, so that the rentals 
or installments will eventually result in ownership. 
The tenement houses can be built on NHA sites to 
be reserved by proclamation as necessary. The 
guiding philosophy should be to provide housing 
to the homeless as a social service and not for 
profits. 

Since the Department of Housing will be 
extending a social service by providing housing to 
the homeless, many of whom are members of the 
SSS and GSIS, these institutions should extend their 
fullest cooperation to the government's housing 
thrusts, in harmony with the protection of the 
interests of the employees for whom the SSS and 
GSIS funds are administered in trust. In order that 
these financial institutions can maximize their capability 
to synchronize these goals, they should privatize 
aspects of their operations for more efficient 

management. 

The tenement housing program can help address 
the social problems associated with squatters. While 
legitimate private property rights must be respected, 
we must also realize that squatters are often victims 
of profound social inequities characterizing our 
society. Squatters should be treated with consideration, 
and not bulldozed mercilessly like livestock being 
driven away. Thus, relocation should be the core 
of the solution to the plight of the squatters. The 
government must organize resettlement sites as 
communities to host the relocation of citizens without 
decent homes. The program of multi-storey tenement 
homes can serve the same purpose as resettlement 
sites — as host communities for ejected squatters 
and other impoverished citizens. 





Here I Stand 



PART TWO 



SUSTAINED REFORMS TO 
STRENGTHEN ECONOMIC GROWTH 

Government's primary role is to provide the 
environment conducive to private enterprise 
as the engine of economic growth. 
This environment has three aspects: Economic 
stability and growth, political stability, and a revitalized 
government. 

ECONOMIC STABILITY AND GROWTH 

We have achieved greater economic independence. 
We have demonstrated our capability to manage our 
economytowards stability and growth. We have surmounted 
our historical boom-bust cycles, as evidenced by: 

One, exports and investments, and not just consumer 
spending or government pump-priming, is boosting 
growth. 

Two, growth is accompanied by increased domestic 
savings and not necessarily by increased foreign loans. 




Third, the economy is now more resilient to economic 
shocks. 

To sustain our economic gains, we must adhere to 
the following principles: 

A. We must continue to liberalize, deregulate and 
privatize where we can in order to promote private 
sector free enterprise, but the pace and manner of 
implementation must take affected sectors and 
vital national concerns such as food security into 
account. 

B. We must maintain macroeconomic stabihty with 
low inflation. 

Rising consumer prices are a grave concern to our 
people. Low inflation and the economic stability 
it brings, is conducive to savings and investments. 
We must control inflation through responsible but 
imaginative use of fiscal and monetary policy. This 
means keeping our consolidated public sector deficit 
to within a very low percentage relative to our 
economy and resisting the temptation to finance 
growth by borrowing. This means maintaining the 
independence of our monetary authority, the Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas, as well as its system of market- 
determined and competitive foreign currency 
exchange rates. Over time, the increased production 
generated by our socio-economic program will also 
have a naturally stabilizing effect on prices. 

C. We must mobilize more savings and capital. 

We must improve our financial sector's capacity 
for mobilizing savings and capital to fund both 
economic and social needs. We must develop a 



Here I Stand 



strong capital market that encourages savings by 
responding to the needs of domestic and foreign 
investors. Government must coordinate the lending 
policies of its own financial institutions and follow 
a project finance program consistent with its plans 
for developing infrastructure and promoting 
industrialization. 

D. Government must provide for public works and 
infrastructure. 

We must pursue an integrated national public 
works program to support the private sector's 
needs for roads and other transport facihties, 
telecommunications, utilities such as power and 
water supply, irrigation and water control. 

E. We must protect the environment and our natural 
resources. 

We have a constitutional mandate to ''protect and 
advance the right of the people to a balanced and 
healthful ecology in accord with the rhythm and 
harmony of nature." 
Accordingly, we should 
insure a policy to attain 
and maintain the right 
balance between socio- 
economic growth and 
environmental protection 
through sustainable 

utilization, development, 

management and conservation of natural resources 
that will include the protection, as much as possible, 
of the environment, but at the same time, advance 
the quality of life of the people, not only for the 




present but also of future generations. In effect, 
a policy of intergenerational equity shall be 
translated into actuality and not merely pay lip 
service to the United Nations mandate of including 
environmental concerns in planning for national 
economic development that will benefit the Filipino 
people not only of the present but also of the 
ifuture generations to come. 

FOOTHCM STABILITY THRU PEACE AND UNITY 

The gains of the Ramos administration in this field 
have been truly historic. We must build upon them 
thru the following principles: 

A. National security is our primordial concern. 

I will consider it my primordial duty to safeguard 
the territorial integrity of the Republic. Along this 
line, the continuing modernization of the AFP 




must be pursued to allow the country to have a 
credible. defense posture so that we can pursue our 
legitimate security interests. Together with the 
modernization program of the AFP, I will work 



Here I Stand 



hard to professionalize and reform the AFP Our 
armed forces must be lean and mean and composed 
of competent, dedicated and well motivated Filipino 
fighting men safeguarding our nation's democratic 
way of life. 

B. We should continue efforts to bring all political 
rebels back as productive members of society. 

I will continue to pursue the peace talks initiated 
with great success by President Ramos with the 
various factions 
opposing our 
government in 
order that all 
FiHpinos can be 
one in unity for 
the first time in a 
very long time. 
Only in peace can 
the Filipino 
progress and this 
I will strive to my 
utmost best. 

C. We must address 
the long history 
of economic grievances of Mindanao. 

As we draw up and implement our economic program, 
our infrastructure plans, and our social reform agenda, 
Mindanao should have a special place. 

D. We should bring the benefits of stability and peace 
to the level of the average Filipino by winning the 
war against crime. 




A smaai concern: public safety 



Crime today has indeed become a national problem. 
If left unchecked it could threaten our political stability 
and derail the significant economic gains that the 
country has so far achieved. 

As a Senator, I supported the PNP Modernization 
program. As President, I will do more and the following 
will be included in my program of government: 

First, I will 
work for tougher 
laws against 
drug and sex 
offenders. I will 
also work for the 
enactment of 
laws against 
white collar and 
transnational 
crimes which are 
now totally inadequate to deal with the growing 
menace of international terrorism. 

Second, I will work for the amendment of R.A. 
6975 to remove the inconsistent provisions of the 
law to make the PNP more efficient administratively 
and operationally. 

Third, we will continue weeding out the scalawags 
in the poUce service to ensure that only the best will 
stay in the poUce service. QuaUty will be emphasized 
over quantity. 

Fourth, we will continue to reform the PNP on 
matters such as doctrine, training, fiscal and personnel 
management, operations and organizational structure 
to make it more attuned with the demands of the 
times. The PNP must simply have to do more in the 
fight against crime. Only by achieving meaningful 

^ 




Here I Stand 



PNP reforms can the PNP truly deserve the claim that 
it is the guardian of peace of the Filipino people. 

Although I will be hard on the police to do their duties 
as the guardians of peace, I will work hard to improve the 
living standards of our police personnel so that they can 
perform their duties properly. In other words, the Filipino 
will have a police force that will be better equipped, better 
trained, and better motivated to do battle with the criminal 
syndicates under my administration. 

A SPECDM C©[\3CEK[\Ils f©K[EB(StJ MIF^DI^S 

We should continue active involvement in the affairs of 
the international community. We should maintain good 
relations with ASEAN and our other neighboring countries, 
and with all peoples and governments who share our 
values and way of life. We should continue marketing and 
promoting the Philippines to our trading and investment 
partners. Our tariff policy has been defined by our 
commitments to the World Trade Organization, the AFTA, 
and APEC. We should honor these commitments. 

At great national sacrifice, the Philippines honored its 
foreign debt. In a sense, the emotional debate on foreign 
debt which divided us in the past was overtaken by events. 
With increased foreign exchange inflows from investments, 
exports, tourism and remittances from our overseas Filipinos, 
we have put the problem of our foreign debt behind us. We 
should now move forward as one people. 

A SPICDM COPJC^^M: 
I^HFOMdM® THE CiDfflDI^JM JjySlTDCg SVSTTEffl 

Judicial Reform 

Reforms in the judiciary may be made through 
designation of more branches in multi-sala Regional 




Trial Courts, limiting cases reviewable by the Supreme 
Court, undertaking improvements in the management 
of court cases and records, etc. Trial court judges and 
personnel should observe punctuality, dedication and 
accountability. 

Corruption may be minimized through strict 
application of court rules, developing modes of 
resolving cases in a speedy manner, increasing the 
compensation of judges and other court personnel, 
among others. 

To improve efficiency, problems of low 
compensation for judges and court person-nel, as 
well as un-availability of equipment, should be 
addressed. 

Administrative Reform 

Law enforcement agencies, including the police 
and armed forces organizations, should go through a 
process of cleansing to remove the undesirables and 
promote respect for human rights. 



Here I Stand 



Legal Education and Creation of a Judicial 
Academy A Judicial Academy for judges, lawyers 
and prosecutors must be seriously considered 
to address the need for continuing legal 
education. 

The problems of the legal system may be solved 
by starting with instilHng in future lawyers and 
judges the values of competency, integrity and 
social responsibility in the legal profession. 

Role of the Private Sector 

Private initiatives should be encouraged in order 
to make justice assessible to most. Pro-bono work 
among lawyers must be encouraged and 
institutionalized. The activities of human rights 
legal groups and developmental/alternative law non- 
government organizations must be recognized and 
encouraged. 

Role of Media and Public Opinion 

The monitoring of the judiciary, through fair 
and objective media reportage as well as 
through public opinion polling, should be 
encouraged. The IBP and various judges' 
associations have a role to play in building the 
image of the legal profession. 

A National Commission on Criminal Justice 

A National Commission on Criminal Justice must 
be established to review all penal statutes, the 
correction and rehabilitation system, jail management, 
upgrading of police training and other related 
matters. 



Law Reform 



There is a need to develop alternative dispute 
resolution mechanisms in order to achieve two 
objectives, namely: (1) to challenge the judiciary 
to reform, and (2) to provide for a more 
efficient and equitable means of dispute resolution 
than the judicial mode. This would include 
commercial arbitration, administrative mechanisms 
for arbitration and mediation, streamlining the 
Katarungang Pambarangay law, and recognition of 
indigenous customary procedures of administering 
justice. 

Reforms in Judicial Procedure 

Judicial procedure should be reformed to the 
end that the cases may be decided with dispatch. 
The use of the different modes of discovery 
should be encouraged. 

A REVITALIZED GOVERNMENT 

As the government's policy and philosophy has 
changed, so too must the bureaucracy and 
administrative machinery that implements it. The 
principles in managing this process of change should 
be: 

A. The challenge is one of reorientation. 

In today's world, government's role is not so 
much to control and regulate, as to support and 
promote. I stand behind the way President 
Ramos has redefined government's role. He 
has deregulated many areas of the economy. 



Here I Stand 



For example, he has reoriented the BOI from 
regulating trade and investments to 
promoting it. We must continue this 
reorientation with other appropriate agencies. 
We must continue to privatize government 
corporations exercising proprietary functions. 
We must be prepared to act decisively to 
revitalize the bureaucracy. 

B. Our premise should be that most government 
workers want to serve in an honest and dignified 
manner. 

We must equip our civil service, our armed 
and pohce forces, for their mission. We must 
clearly define their roles and spell out 
their work objectives. We must modernize 
their skills and facilities. By curtaihng 
unnecessary spending and prudent use of 
the increased resources that come with 
economic prosperity, we should improve the 
benefits and career paths within government 
service. We should also have a program to 
assist those who eventually wish to engage 
in a second career as professionals or 
entrepreneurs within the private sector. 

C. Government must view the private sector as a 
partner in policy making. 

President Ramos showed the way by establishing 
a private sector Council of Economic Advisers, 
in a law that I principally authored. Congress 
also created a private sector Export Development 
Council which meets with the President 
regularly. 




AN Efii'WiKl^t^ <ZMWHRy AS 
©ME [?®l!!)MDA"ini®M ©l!J®WfH 
AND COMPETBTfiVENESS 



In today's world, the role of a goverriment devoted 
to people empowerment is to assist the private 
sector to develop an industrial economy with a 
modern agricultural base, one that is competitive 
within the world economy. 

. IfflPiWERMENT 

The focus of empowerment is on the individual 
citizen. It means the politization of ordinary 
citizens. The mobilization of individuals and 
people's organizations into potent participants 

=_ =_= 



Here I Stand 



in our political and economic processes. The 
harnessing of the common Filipino's will, energy 
and vision to shape their own future. 

At another level, empowerment means 
community access to natural, physical and 
financial resources. Community control of 
these resources, and the enhancement of the 
community's capacity to organize and manage 
these resources. 

Dismantling the regime of regulation and 
controls and setting into motion a program 
of socio-economic progress, sets our economic 
actors free and empowers the people to 
achieve prosperity. This develops a linkage 
between industrialization and the masses of 
the people. 

Thus, people empowerment means economic 
prosperity thru competitive production. And 
may I add: It should also mean an equitable 
distribution of basic services to our people. 

GLOBAL COMPETITIVENESS 

Today, our competition is no longer local, but 
global. 

We have enacted macro-level reforms to allow 
our economic actors to compete internationally. 
In doing so, we have exposed them to the high 
product standards that the world expects. These 
are the same standards that our consumers deserve, 
and that our producers must meet. 

To help our producers adjust, government 
must continue enacting other policies and 
programs that help them become competitive. 
These should be based on the following 
principles: 

- = — =— ^ = 



\ 

i 



A. Entrepreneurship should be encouraged. 

We should regard national business as a partner in 
development. We should applaud honest business 
success. We should support enterpreneurship. 

B. Government support, particularly for small and 
medium enterprises, should be translated into 
practical results. 

Areas of support include technology upgrading, market 

enlargement, and skills buUding. We must encourage 
local innovation,researchanddevelopment.Thebenefits 
of our macro-level programs should be translated to 
entrepreneurs by way of availability of capital and 
credit, infrastructure to support their logistics needs, 
and the Uke. Strong incentives for exports, provided in 
a law which I authored, also work to increase our 
competitiveness in the world market. 

C. Labor is a full partner in development, and there can 
be no economic progress without industrial peace. 

We should give the highest priority to the maintenance 
of harmonious relations between labor and 
management, that these relations are cooperative 
and not adversarial. We believe in collective bargaining 
as the principal means of arriving at just wages. 
We are committed to realizing the democratic 
aspirations of Filipino workers, to the development 
of their skills, to their economic well-being, and to 
their social upliftment. We should encourage 
investments into productive activities that pay 
good wages to skilled labor, that recognize their 
full value added. We should strive to move away 
from industries that capitalize on very cheap labor. 



Here I Stand 



A SPECIM CiDI^CE^N: OUI^ (DIFWs 




I am a staunch supporter of our Filipino overseas 
workers. • 

President Ramos had used his good offices 
to influence foreign governments to treat 
Filipino OCWs with a bias towards humanitarian 
considerations. This tradition should continue. 

While our OFWs remain abroad, the 
government should be prepared to assist them 
thru all its overseas offices and agencies. In 
anticipation of their return to the PhiHppines, 
the government should strengthen its program 
of reintegration. 

wfiMfS^^!/lf CONCERN: ADVANCEMENT OF 
WOMEN AND OTHER DISADVANTAGED SECTORS 

At the threshold of the 21st century, we 
are faced with new challenges. The emerging 
demands of the times are defining for us new 
imperatives in the next millen-nium, which we 
may view as the Century of Women and the 



Youth. In another part of our program, we 
discussed the need to prepare our youth for the 
21st century. Now we focus on the Filipino 
woman. 

Poverty alleviation, social transformation, 
economic productivity and the shaping of a 
humane, peace and environmentally-sound nation 
— these are our common commitments. 

In all these, we put a stress on the need to 
continue our national crusade in realizing the 
primary goals to raise the status of Filipino 
women, protect their rights and welfare, and 
enhance their roles and capacities as vital 
partners in development and nation-building. 

Imbued with the mandate to serve our people 
and as a woman leader, I affirm my commitments 

to: , 
First, the empowerment and advancement of 
women in various fields of endeavors; thus 
responding to the intellectual, moral, economic, 
social, political and spiritual needs of women, 
individually or in community and ensuring 
that their full potentials are harnessed. 




Here I Stand 



Second, the eradication of poverty based on 
sustained economic growth, social development, 
environmental protection and social justice. 

Third, the recognition of the vital roles and 
involvement of women in all spheres of life and 
the protection of their rights and welfare including 
equal opportunities and access to resources and 
benefits of development. 

Fourth, the 
promotion of 
women's eco- 
nomic indepen- 
dence, including 
employment 
through chan- 
ges in the eco- 
nomic structures 
that would favor 
women, espe- 
cially those in the rural areas and the countryside. 

Fifth, the protection of women and the youth 
against violence, sexual assaults and other forms 
of discrimination through the institution of measures 
and policy structures that affirm the full 
implementation of CEDAW (Convention on the 
Elimination of Discrimination Against Women) 
and other international instrumentalities affecting 
women and disadvantaged sectors. 

Sixth, mainstreaming of gender in all 
policy directions and development programs to 
ensure that the needs of women and all 
disadvantaged sectors are addressed. 

Seventh, the continuity of policy that recognizes 
the vital contributions and achievements of women 
in leadership, in program planning and 
implementation and in policy-making. 

——^ — ___ 




We have seen that democracy is inextricable 
in our identity as a nation. 
We should support democracy by bringing 
values back to our society. Values that promote love 
of flag and country, respect for the law and the 
constitution. Moral values 
that create good citizens. 

Women and our youth, 
with their idealism and 
strength of character, have 
a special role in forming 
these values. 

We should support 
democracy by strengthening the integrity of our electoral 
process. Through the tradition of a peaceful transition 
of power from one government to its freely elected \ 
successor, we will have the means to bequeath the 
gains of our national endeavors from one generation 
to the next. 

Finally, we should support democracy by reorienting 
our culture to accept democracy as a way of governance 
wherein issues and ideas are the implements of its 
poUtics. The politics of tomorrow must be based on 
issues, not personalities. 

I reaUze I run the risk of political isolation in taking 
this stand. But let me emphasize this: I can take a 
chance on my political fortunes, but I cannot take a 
chance on what my upbringing, my training, my very 
life tell me is best for our country. 




Here I Stand 



Thus, this is my pledge: My poHtics will be based 
on issues. My politics will be based on performance. 

A Bmi CAii mn mmmmn 

MY PERSONAL QUALIFICATIONS 

My training as an economist, and my legislative 
performance, enable me to offer the kind of leadership 
that would complement and continue the successful 
economic program of President Ramos. 

My additional task, if I should triumph in 1998, 
would be to spread the benefits of continuing economic 



several years. I am proud to have done my share 
in restoring political and economic democracy to 
the Philippines. 

This is my track record. I do intend to expand and 
enrich this record which hoists the torch of free 
enterprise and economic democracy. God willing, 
I shall be successful. 

I also commit myself to improve and enhance 
the moral fiber of our country. I shall demand 
spiritual preparation and technical competence of 
our pubUc officials. 

I am prepared to lead by example. 




progress to the 
masses, to the very 
poor and 
underprivileged. 



I have served 
our country as a 
senior official and 
a Senator for the 
last 10 years. Prior 
to that, I was an 
educator for 



CONTINUITY AND BEYOND 



It is to the great and lasting credit of the current 
leadership that it has paved the way for the emergence 
of a new generation of leaders. The gains, political 
and economic, that we have so far achieved are 
immense. The future beckons with great promise. 

But this promise can only plant its flag upon the 
mountain if the new leadership builds upon these 
gains. President Ramos has shown us the way by dint 
of principle, selflessness, hard work, devotion to duty, 
and love of country. 

We who shall take over from him can do no less. 
The healing process has began. But some wounds still 
remain of what was once a national gangrene. We 
shall bind these wounds and in time we pray they will 
no longer afflict the nation. 

We the citizenry, we the nation are on the march 
to the 21st century. We shall build that bridge to the 
year 2000. And you and I will cross that bridge with 
assurance, with confidence, with hope, with pride and 
with honor. 

God bless us all. 




GLOR 
MACAP. 

Tinataguyo' 
minamahol 



