LIBRA 



' INAUGURAL ADDRESS 
GOVERNOR-GENERAL 

DwiGHT F. Davis 



AT THE 



AYUNTAMIENTO, MANILA 

DELIVERED JULY 8, 1929 




[IN ENGLISH AND SPANISH] 



246725 



MANILA 
BUREAU OF PRINTING 
1929 



INAUGURAL ADDRESS 

OP 

Governor-General Dwight F. Davis 

Delivered at the Ayuntamiento upon his arrival in the Philippine 
Islands on the morning of July 8, 1929 



Twenty-five years ago I first visited Manila, led here by 
the idle curiosity of the tourist. Today I return, not as 
an idle tourist but as your sincere friend, animated not by 
curiosity but by an earnest desire to work with you for 
the welfare, progress, and prosperity of the Philippine 
people. 

You may well be proud of the material, cultural, and 
spiritual betterment which you have brought about in this 
short quarter of a century; and the people of the United 
States have been sincerely happy to cooperate with you 
in making this development possible. Towards the Phil- 
ippine people, the people of the United States have but 
one desire: to extend to them their friendly aid in the 
solution of the problems of the future. That feeling is 
cordially shared by our great President, who, better than 
any Chief Executive of recent years, understands the prob- 
lems of the East, Herbert Hoover. 



8 



INAUGURAL ADDRESS OF 

Next week it will be my pleasure and privilege to discuss 
various plans and policies with that distinguished body, 
the Philippine Legislature. On this occasion I wish to 
express my very warm and sincere appreciation of the 
kind welcome you have accorded to me. I landed this 
morning among strangers; already I feel that I am among 
friends. 

In my message to the Legislature I intend to discuss 
the proposal, which was introduced in the United States 
Congress and overwhelmingly defeated in the House of 
Representatives, to limit the free entry of Philippine sugar 
into the United States. Today I shall only say that I am 
strongly and unalterably opposed to this proposal. 

As my immediate predecessor pertinently pointed out, 
the determination of the political future of the Islands 
does not come within the province of the Governor-General. 
However, practical problems directly affecting the founda- 
tions upon which that political future must rest, do confront 
us for solution. If these foundations are not strongly and 
firmly built, any structure of government, no matter what 
its character, will inevitably fail. 

One of the corner stones of the foundation of any gov- 
ernment is the honesty of its officials. Public office, it 
cannot be repeated too often, is a public trust. Dishonesty 
among public servants must be fearlessly suppressed. If 
it is not detected and punished, it spreads insidiously 
throughout the whole service, corrupts those who condone 

4 



GOVERNOR-GENERAL DAVIS 

as well as those who connive at it, and dissipates public 
moneys so seriously needed for essential improvements. 
The public official who betrays his trust is not only un- 
faithful to those who honor him by election or appointment 
to office. He is faithless to the children who must grow 
up without educational opportunities due to lack of rev- 
enues, to the sick who cannot get hospital treatment, to 
the unfortunates in our eleemonsjmary institutions, and 
to all the people who benefit by public improvements vital 
to their welfare. The responsibility for the elimination 
of dishonesty from the government rests not only upon 
our officials but also upon the people, who themselves are 
the principal sufferers. If public opinion demands honesty, 
it will get honesty. If it condones dishonesty, it will get 
dishonesty. I confidently rely upon the support of the 
press and the public in the insistence that public officials 
be faithful to their trust. 

Closely related to this subject is the most effective use 
of the available revenues. Efficient economy must be exer- 
cised in every department of the Government. I assume 
that it is beang practiced today. I am confident that every 
administrative official will cooperate to this end. If any 
official is unable or unwilling to do so, he should and will 
promptly be replaced. 

Efficient economy does not mean merely the saving of 
pesos and centavos. It is measured in terms of increased 
health, more education, better living conditions for the 

5 

246725 2 



INAUGURAL ADDRESS OF 

people. Every peso wasted, or inefficiently or unnecessa- 
rily expended, deprives the people of these facilities for 
which they have taxed themselves. I shall rigorously insist 
upon "Efficient Economy," by which I mean a peso of 
service to the people for every peso of taxes taken from 
them. 

There is one element of weakness in the present founda- 
tions which threatens the strength of the whole govern- 
mental structure. That is the lack of adequate resources 
to carry on the work which has started so auspiciously. 
Government revenues are practically stationary, while the 
needs and proper demands are steadily expanding. The 
development of educational, eleemonsynary, and cultural 
facilities, the building of roads, waterworks, harbors, rail- 
roads, irrigation systems, schoolhouses and other important 
public improvements too numerous to mention, the culti- 
vation of all the elements vital to modern civilization^ 
these essential governmental activities require constantly 
increasing revenues. Taxes probably cannot be materially 
raised. A steady increase in the wealth of the people, 
which in turn will steadily increase the revenues of the 
Government, is essential. How this can best be brought 
about is one of the pressing problems confronting the Leg- 
islature. Economic and industrial development is thus one 
of the corner stones in the foundation upon which our 
governmental and political future will rest. I am confident 
that the Filipino people have the intelligence, the ability, 

6 



GOVERNOR-GENERAL DAVIS 

and the courage to build that foundation so strong and 
secure that it will safely sustain any structure, social, 
industrial or political, that the future may build upon it. 

I thank you from the bottom of my heart for the warmth 
of your greeting today. I realize that it is not a personal 
tribute, but is the cordial courtesy of a hospitable people 
to one who comes from a gi-eat nation whose only wish 
is their advancement. Were I merely to give expression 
to my personal gratification at such a cordial reception, 
you might well feel that I had missed the broader signi- 
ficance of this occasion — had failed to sense its unmistakable 
evidence of friendship on the part of the people of the 
Philippine Islands for the people of the United States. I 
regard this warm welcome as a happy augury of that close, 
cordial, constructive cooperation under the Organic Law 
which I hope will be the keynote of my administration, a 
cooperation with political, business, journalistic, and spirit- 
ual leaders for the sole purpose of promoting the welfare 
of all the people. 

I am proud to follow that illustrious group of my prede- 
cessors from Governor Taft to Governor Stimson. If my 
administration of the high office which they have so ably 
filled is to maintain worthily the high standards which they 
have set, that result must be accomplished largely through 
the generous cooperation and assistance of the people living 
in these Islands, Filipinos, Americans, Spaniards and those 
of other nationalities. Your warm welcome today is an in- 

7 



INAUGURAL ADDRESS OF 

spiration and encouragement to believe that I may confi- 
dently expect that support. I am fortunate in having as 
my associates Vice-Governor Gilmore, who has so faithfully 
labored for many years to promote your best interests, and 
the other splendid men, both Filipinos and Americans, who 
make up the administration. And I am happy to say that 
I have been assured of the cordial cooperation of many 
distinguished public leaders, whom I am glad to number 
among my personal friends. 

A marvelous transformation has taken place in that brief 
quarter of a century since I first visited Manila. A beauti- 
ful city has grown up, worthy capital of these beautiful 
islands. The school system, the foundation upon which all 
future greatness must be builded, has had a wonderful 
growth. Health and sanitation, without which progress is 
impossible, have been vastly improved. Peace and good 
order maintain everywhere. Trade and commerce, which, 
rightly or wrongly, largely determine the importance of a 
country in the estimation of the world, are expanding. The 
standard of living of the people, a truer measure of real 
progress, is steadily improving. Transportation and com- 
munication have been facilitated by the construction of good 
roads, telephone, and radio facilities. The magnificent dock 
at which we have just landed, unsurpassed in the entire 
world, is an evidence of healthy commercial development. 
Your progress in the art of government is a credit to the 
intelligence, sejf-control, and ability of your people. Every- 

8 



GOVERNOR-GENERAL DAVIS 

where are proofs of the progress and prosperity which have 
marked these twenty-five years. 

A quarter of a century, while a long period in the life of 
an individual, is but a moment in the life of a people. The 
progi-ess which has been made, while highly commendable, 
is merely a start towards fulfilling the needs of the future. 
Much has been accomplished ; far more remains to be done. 
Our task has just commenced. The road to our goal is 
long, hard, hazardous. There is no easy road to greatness, 
whether of an individual or of a people. Hard work, sacri- 
fice, self-restraint, unselfish service, these are necessary 
elements of future progress. We cannot rest content on 
past performances. To stand still in a rapidly advancing 
world is to go backwards. But by looking back on past 
progress, we get faith for the future. 

What will the coming years bring to these lovely Islands? 
I have a vision of that future. Perhaps it is too roseate. 
Yet to succeed we must set our goal high. In that vision 
I see the Philippine Islands as the happy home of a con- 
tented, prosperous people, spiritually, politically, and cul- 
turally leaders of the Far East, with boundless natural 
resources developed to enrich its inhabitants, a high stand- 
ard of living for all the people not merely for the fortunate 
few, a model of education, sanitation, and health. 

A start towards this goal has been made, but it is only 
a start. The goal is still very far away. If I can share 
with you in bringing this vision a little nearer to fulfiU- 

. 9 



INAUGURAL ADDRESS OF GOVERNOR-GENERAL DAVIS. 

ment, I shall rest content in the consciousness of having 
contributed a little to the future greatness of a splendid 
people. 

I have but one aim, to work with you to promote the 
welfare, progress, and prosperity of the Philippine Islands. 
In that spirit I come to you. In that spirit I seek sincerely 
to cooperate with you in making what is now but a glorious 
vision into an equally glorious reality, 

Manila, July 8, 1029. 



10 



DISCURSO INAUGURAL 

DEL 

GOBERNADOR GENERAL 
DWIGHT F. DAVIS 

EN EL 

AYUNTAMIENTO DE MANILA 
PRONUNCIADO EL 8 DE JULIO DE 1929' 




MANILA 
BUREAU OF PRINTING 
1929 



m 




DISCURSO INAUGURAL 

DEI. 

GOBERNADOR GENERAL 

DwiGHT F. Davis 

Pronunciado en el Salon de Marmol del Ayuntamiento 
el di'a de su Uegada, el 8 de julio de 1929 



Hace veinticinco aiios visite por primera vez a Manila, 
conducido aqui por la frivola curiosidad del turista. Hoy 
vuelvo, no como un ocioso turista, sino como sincero amigo 
vuestro, y aniniado, no por la curiosidad, sino por un fer- 
viente deseo de trabajar con vosotros por el bienestar, pro- 
greso y prosperidad del pueblo filipino. 

Bien podeis estar orgullosos del adelanto material, cultu- 
ral y espiritual que habeis alcanzado en este breve periodo 
de un cuarto de siglo. El pueblo^ de los Estados Unidos 
se ha sentido verdaderamente f eliz en cooperar con vosotros 
de manera que hizo posible este resultado. El pueblo de 
los Estados Unidos no abriga mas que un deseo hacia el 
pueblo filipino : prestarle su amistoso auxilio en la soluci6n 
de los problemas del porvehir. De ese sentimiento parti- 
cipa nuestro ilustre Presidente, Herbert Hoover, el cual. 



13 



DISCURSO INAUGURAL DEL 

mejor que cualquier otro Jefe Ejecutivo de estos ultimos 
anos, comprende los problemas del Oriente. 

La semana que viene tendre el placer y el honor de dis- 
cutir varios planes y programas con esa distinguida cor- 
poracion, la Legislatura Filipina. En esta ocasion deseo 
expresar mi ferviente y sincero agradecimiento por el ama- 
ble recibimiento que me habeis concedido. He desembar- 
cado esta manana entre extranjeros; ya me siento rodeado 
de amigos. 

En mi mensaje a la Legislatura me propongo tratar de 
la proposicion que se ha presentado en el Congreso de los 
Estados Unidos y que ha sido rechazada por un numero 
abrumador de la Camara de Representantes, de limitar-la 
entrada libre del azucar filipino en los Estados Unidos. 
Hoy solo dire que me opongo energica e invariablemente a 
esa proposicion. 

Como ha manifestado oportunamente mi antecesor in- 
mediato, la determinaci6n del futuro politico de estas Islas 
no es de la competencia del Gobernador General. No obs- 
tante, los problemas practices que se relacionan directa- 
mente con los f undamentbs y sobre los cuales debe descansar 
ese futuro politico, surgen ante nosotros para su solucion. 
Si no se construyen estos cimientos s61ida y firmemente, 
se vendra al suelo cualquier obra de gobierno que levan- 
temos sobre ellos, cualquiera que sea su caracter. 

Una de las piedras angulares de los cimientos de un go- 
bierno consiste en la integridad de sus funcionarios. Todo 



14 



GOBERNADOR GENERAL DAVIS 

cargo publico — esto nunca se repetird demasiado — es un 
fideicomiso publico. La falta de probidad entre los fun- 
cionarios publicos debe ser suprimida resueltamente. Si 
no se descubre y castiga, se propagara insidiosamente por 
todo el servicio, corrompera a los que la condonan, lo mismo 
que a los que la consienten, y malgasta el erario publico 
que tan imperiosamente se necesita para la ejecucion de 
mejoras indispensables. El funcionario publico que que- 
branta la fe que en el se ha depositado no es solamente 
infiel para con aquellos que le ban honrado por la eleccion 
o el nombramiento para el cargo; es tambien desleal para 
con los nines que creceran careciendo de los medios de 
educarse a consecuencia de la falta de ingresos; para con 
los enf ermos, que no podran tener asistencia en el hospital ; 
para con los desgraciados recogidos en los establecimientos 
benefices, y para con todo el pueblo, que es el que debe 
disfrutar de los beneficios de las mejoras piiblicas que son 
indispensables a su bienestar. La responsabilidad de la 
extirpacion de la falta de probidad en el gobierno recae, 
no solamente sobre vuestros funcionarios, sino tambien 
sobre el pueblo mismo, el cual resulta el principal perjudi- 
cado. 

Si la opinion publica exige integridad, integridad ten- 
dra; si tolera la corrupcion, tambien la tendra. Yo cuento 
confiadamente con el apoyo de la prensa y del publico en 
el empeno de que los funcionarios publicos sean fieles a las 
obligaciones de su cargo. 



15 



DISCURSO INAUGURAL DEL 
El empleo eficaz de I03 ingresos disponibles guarda estre- 
cha relacion con este asunto. Se debe emplear la mds 
eficaz economia en todos los departamentos del Gobierno. 
Supongo que ya se practica hoy. Abrigo la esperanza de 
que todos los funclonarios administrativos cooperaran per 
el logro de este fin. Cuando un funcionario no pueda o no 
desee hacerlo. debe ser reemplazado, y lo sera inmediata- 
mente. 

Una eficaz economia no significa simplemente ahorrar 
pesos y centavos. Se mide en terminos de mejor salud, mas 
educacion, mejores condiciones de vida para el pueblo. 
Cada peso que se malgasta o que se invierte ineficaz e in- 
necesariamente priva al pueblo de esos medios para los 
cuales se les ban cobrado las contribuciones. Yo exigire 
con rigurosa insistencia "Economia Eficaz," con lo cual 
quiero decir: un peso de servicio al pueblo por cada peso de 
contribucion que de el se reciba. 

En los cimientos actuales existe un elemento de debili- 
dad que amenaza la firmeza de todo el edificio guberna- 
mental. Es la falta de recursos suficientes para continuar 
la obra emprendida bajo auspicios tan favorables. Las 
rentas publicas se mantienen casi estacionarias, mientras, 
por otro lado, se expanden continuamente las necesidades 
y las exigencias justas. El fomento de los medios de edu- 
cacion, beneficencia y cultura; la construccion de carreteras, 
traidas de aguas, puertos, ferrocarriles, canales de riego, 
escuelas y otras importantes mejoras publicas que serla 

16 



GOBERNADOJi GENERAL DAVIS 

prolijo enumerar; el cultivo de todos los elementos que son 
indispensables a la civilizacion moderna; todas esas fun- 
ciones esenciales del Gobierno reclaman ingresos constante- 
mente crecientes. Probablemente no se puedan aumentar 
en cuantia considerable los impuestos. Es indispensable 
un aumento firme en la riqueza del pueblo, que, a su vez, 
aumente de un modo Arme las rentas piiblicas. Como se 
podrS. lograr esto mejor constituye uno de los apremiantes 
problemas que tiene ante si la Legislatura. En efecto, el 
fomento economico e industrial constituye una de las pie- 
dras angulares de los cimientos sobre los cuales se ha de 
asentar nuestro porvenir gubernamental y politico. Yo 
abrigo la confianza de que el pueblo filipino posee la inteli- 
gencia, la habilidad y la resolucion que son necesarias para 
construir esos cimientos tan firmes y seguros, que puedan 
sostener sin riesgo alguno cualquier obra social, industrial 
o politica que el porvenir levante sobre ellos. 

Desde el fondo de mi corazon os doy las gracias por el 
fervor de vuestro saludo de hoy. Comprendo que no es 
un tributo rendido a mi persona, sino una cordial cortesia 
de un pueblo hospitalario al que viene de una gran nacion 
cuyo unico afan es su progreso. Si yo me limitase a expre- 
sar mi gratitud particular a tan afectuosa recepcion po- 
driais creer que no he comprendido la mayor trascendencia 
de este acto, que no he percibido que es una prueba ine- 
qulvoca de amistad del pueblo de las Islas Filipinas al pue- 
blo de los Estados Unidos. Considero esta calurosa bien- 

17 



DISCURSO INAUGURAL DEL 
venida como un augurio fdiz de la cooperacion I'ntima, 
cordial y positiva bajo la Ley Organica que espero sera la 
clave de mi administracion una cooperacion con los pro- 
hombres en el orden politico, mercantil, perioxlistico y espi- 
ritual con el unico objetivo de promover el bienestar de 
todo el pueblo. 

Me enorgullezco de haber sido precedido del ilustre grupo 
de mis antecesores, desde el Gobernador Taft hasta el Go- 
bernador Stimson. Si mi ejercicio de este alto cargo que 
ellos han desempenado con tanta habilidad ha de tener por 
objeto conservar dignamente las altas normas que han 
establecido, ello se ha de lograr principalmente mediante la 
cooperacion y auxilio incondicional de los habitantes de 
estas Islas, filipinos, americanos, espanoles y otras nacio- 
nalidades. Vuestra afectuosa bienvenida de hoy me ser- 
vira de inspiracidn y aliento para creer que puedo esperar 
confiadamente en esa ayuda. Afortunadamente, tengo por 
companeros al Vicegobernador Gilmore, el cual ha traba- 
jado celosamente durante muchos aiios por el fomento de 
vuestros intereses, y a los demas ilustres hombres, tanto 
filipinos como americanos, que constituyen la administra- 
cion. Me es grato manifestar que se me ha prometido la 
cooperacion cordial de muchos hombres publicos eminentes 
a los cuales tengo el gusto de contar entre mis amigos par- 
ticulares. 

En este breve cuarto de siglo transcurrido desde que vine 
por primera vez a Manila se ha operado una maravillosa 

18 



GOBERNADOR GENERAL DAVIS ' ^ 

transfoimacion. Se ha formado una bella ciudad, digna 
capital de estas hermosas Islas. La instruccion publica, 
cimientp sobre ej cual debe fundarse toda futura grandeza, 
se ha desarrollado de un modo admirable. La sanidad e 
higiene, sin las cuales es imposible el progi'eso, han mejo- 
rado mucho. Doquiera reinan la paz y el orden publicos. 
El comercio que, con razon o sin ella, marca generalmente 
la importancia de un pais en la estimacion universal, se 
expande. Las normas de vida del pueblo, medida mas fiel 
del verdadero progreso, mejoran constantemente. El 
transporte y la comunicacion se han facilitado por la cons- 
trucci6n de buenas carreteras y el servicio telefonico y 
radiotelegi-afico. El magnifico muelle en que acabamos de 
desembarcar, no superado en todo el mundo, es un signo 
evidente de un sano desarroUo comercial. Vuestros pro- 
gresos en las artes de gobierno acreditan la inteligencia, 
la moderacion y la idoneidad de vuestro pueblo. Por todas 
partes se ven signos del progreso y la prosperidad con que 
se han distinguido estos ultimos veinticinco anos. 

Un cuarto de siglo, aunque es un largo periodo en la vida 
del individuo, no es mas que un momento en la existencia 
de un pueblo. El progreso que se ha alcanzado, no obstante 
ser altamente plausible, no es mas que el primer paso hacia 
la satisfaccion de las necesidades del porvenir. Mucho se 
ha hecho ; mucho mas queda por hacer. Nuestra labor s6Io 
ha comenzado ahora. La senda de nuestro destino es larga, 
penosa, esta prenada de peligros. No existe ningun ca- 

19 



DISCURSO INAUGURAL DEL^ 

mino corto hacia la grandeza, sea de un individuo, sea de 
un pueblo. Trabajo rudo, sacrificio, moderacion, servicio 
desinteresado : he aqui los elementos necesarios del pro- 
greso future. No podemos dormir sobre nuestros laureles. 
En un mundo que progresa rapidamente, detenerse es retro- 
ceder. Mas, dirigiendo la vista al progreso alcanzado, sen- 
timos confianza en lo f uturo. 

iQue prometen los anos venideros a estas encantadoras 
Islas? Tengo una vision de ese f uturo. Tal vez sea dema- 
siado halagiieno. No obstante, para triunfar debemos co- 
locar lejos nuestra meta. En esa vision contemplo a Fili- 
pinas como patria feliz de un pueblo contento y prospero, 
como maestro espiritual, politico y cultural de los pueblos, 
del Extremo Oriente, con ilimitadas fuentes naturales de 
riqueza explotadas para enriquecer a sus habitantes, con 
una elevada norma de existencia para todo el pueblo, y no 
exclusivamente para unos cuantos afortunados, modelo de 
cultura, sanidad e higiene. 

Ya se han dado los primeros pasos hacia esa meta; solo 
los primeros pasos. El objetivo esta todavia muy lejos. 
Si pudiera cooperar con vosotros en la obra y acercar un 
poco mas la realizacion de este ideal, me sentiria satisf echo 
con la conviccion de haber contribuido un poco a la futura 
grandeza de este noble pueblo. 

Solo me anima un proposito : trabajar con vosotros en el 
fomento del bienestar, eJ progreso y prosperidad de Fili- 



20 



GOBERNADOR GENERAL DAVIS 

pinas. He llegado a vosotros animado de ese espiritu. 
Con ese espiritu me propongo sinceramente cooperar con 
vosotros para que lo que ahora no es mas que una esplen- 
dorosa vision, se convierta en una realidad igualmente 
esplendorosa. 

Manila, 8 de jnlio de 1929. 

O 

LIBRARY 
MALACANAN PALAC£ 



21 



