v ■w 

MRS. ROSARIO ARGONZA ORDIZ, SENIOR NURSE SUPERVISOR 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH - MANILA 


The above - mentioned employee engaged in the buy and sell busi- 
ness during the Japanese administration. Taking advantage of her po- 
sition as Senior Nurse Supervisor and Property Officer during the Jap 
regime , she purchased medicines in big quantities from Nakashima, Jap- 
anese dealer in drugs, paying thereby the money of the government en- 
trusted to her care as cash advance. The said purchases were made to 
appear as if they were for the Government of the City of Manila, but 
when the medicines were delivered, her husband, Mr. Ordiz, who was 
engaged in the buy and sell business during the Japanese administrat- 
ion, ^sold them at the black market at exhorbitant prices. As a result 
the couple accumulated wealth and in fact, they were able to buy real 
estate property somewhere in Juan Luna, Tondo. 

During the Japanese administration, prime commodities were being 
sold to the employees of the government. Mrs. Ordiz and Dr. Belmonte 
were the ones in charge thereof. Many employees of the Department of 
Health were not able to buy their share of the prime commodities bec- 
ause they (Mrs. Ordiz and Dr. Belmonte) appropriated them for their 
own use." In fact, as a 'result thereof, there arose a quarrel between 
two employees of the said Department named Dr. apolonio del uosario, 
c/o Department of Health, City of Manila, and Atty. Perez. 

The following persons who are aware of the activities of Dr. 
Belmonte and Mrs. Rosario Ordiz during the Japanese Administration 
may be cited: 

I 

Dr. Apolonio del Rosario, Conchu, Singalong Subdivision 
now working in the Dept, of Health, City of Manila. 

Dr. Edgardo Javier, 1353 San Andres corner Dart. Paco. 

Mr. Gelacio Salas, c/o Dept, of Health, City of Manila. 

Dr. Macaraig San Agustin, F. B. Harrison, near Robert St. 

Miss L. M. Cruz, Lieutenant of the Philippine Army ARC. 

Miss Josef ina Tombo, Catalvna, Sampaloc c/o Mrs. J. Lara, 
(nee Estrella Tombo) 

Mrs. Antonio Murin, Isabel St. Sampaloc near Jocson ot. 
in fron of Mr. Inf antado * s house. 

Judging from the past activities of the above-named employees 
which show in an unequivocal and unmistakable way their true co ors 
as Japanese collaborators, I am wondering why they are still retained 
in the service of the U.S. Government, when they are supposed to be 
■ enemies > of said government . 



CONFIDENTIAL 


