FUTURE POLITICAL 
STATUS OF THE PEOFLE 
OF THE PHILIPPINES 



1915 



Calendar No. 831. 

63d Congress, ) SENATE. f Report 

3d Session. | - I No. 942. 



FUTURE POLITICAL STATUS OF THE PEOPLE OF THE 
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS. 



Kk intuARY 2, 1915.— Ordered to be printed. 



Mr. Hitchcock, from the Committee on the Philippines, submitted 

the following 

REPORT. 

[To accompany II. R. 18459.] 

The Philippine Committee herewith reports H. R. 18459, popularly 
known as the Philippine bill, with a recommendation that it be passed 
with certain amendments to its legislative features and with a sub- 

8t The comnrittec began hearings on this bill on the 14th of December 
and closed them on the 11th of January. These have been printed 
and furnished to each Senator. When the^sessions b gin there were 
widely divergent views as to the merits of the measure entertained 
by membars of the committee. At the close of the hearings there 
was substantial unanimity of opmion among members of the com- 
mittee without ngard to party as to most of the legislative features 
•of the bill and proposed amendments. 

Upon the preamble there was more divergence, but even with the 
unusual problem presented by that feature of the bdl the chairman 
was authorized to make a favorable report by the. votes of 10 mem- 
bers of the committee, 3 dissenting and 1 being absent. 

For the most part the bill as n passed the House of Representatives 
and in its pre sent form i£a reenactoent of existing law, which fact 
accounts for its length. The important changes may be summarized 
as follows: 

CHANGES FROM PRESENT LAW. 

The nresent Philippic Legislfure consists of two houses, of 
Which the lower ousE is elected, by the people and b called the 
assemb y, Se the upper house » J^m as too commission, and 

ippine Islands to elect 22 of its members, the length of the term to 



2 POLITICAL STATUS OF PEOPLE OP THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS. 

be four years, the other two senators to be appointed by the Gov- 
ernor General to represent the districts inhabited by the non-Chris- 
tian tribes. 

Tne lower house is increased in number from 81 to 90, and 81 of 
the representatives shall, as heretofore, be elected by the people, 
wiile 9 of the representatives shall hereafter be appointed by the 
Governor General to represent the districts inhabited by the Moros 
and other non-Christian tribes. 

' ILretofore the Governor General has been a member of the upper 
house, witrout any veto -power, w V} ch lias existed, however, in the 
Secretary of War. Hereafter the Governor General under this bill 
will have the right to exercise the veto power and will not be a member 
of tiie upper body. His veto may ^overridden by the votes of two- 
ti iris of the ssnate and assembly, but m such cases the President 
of the United States has the right to interpose an absolute veto witl in 
six months. Certain legislation can not, however become firci ve 
until signed by the President of the United States' iSdef hi tie 
legislation requiring tuc approval of the President of the United 
States may be mentioned acts providing for the disposition of con- 
c-ssions in respect to public land, timber, and mining rights- acts 
relating to immigration into the islands; acts relating to currencv 
or coinage: acts aut! onrmgthe issue of bonds for indebted!^ 
restricting the Philippine Islands for legislative elections- S 
relating to the tariff on imports. ons > and acts 

Orio-inally the Philippine Legislature was permitted • 
export duties. Within recent years, however, ff^JS 
ftwav. Tue present bill imposes no restriction on the le^sht, 
levying export duties except that they can not be levied mS ? f 
ports to the United States, nor upon imports from the United f*" 

Hnvtofore the limit- of indebtedness of the Philipninp p ed Statf ' s - 
was placed at 810,000,000, exclusive of the ST.O^OOo" oil^T^ 
bonds As th» latter are m course of retirement by m eft T,« ( la . r ' land 
fun , the present bill places the limit of jndebtednS »hS^n g 
so that as the friar-land. bon< s are retired other bonds in nll^ 00 ' 0 ? 0 ' 
«»Ktfr works mav ^ e issued to take their place nnt ? a y*»ent for 
ESSS a £l "idebtedness f 817^00,000. ^fe^ to 
;<Tw deluded such bonds as the Phihpp mo Governn^i ' however, 
ta^mble it huy and hold as treasury asscts ^ £SkV]i aU iss « e ' 
Sf25££fiS8-. which otherw.se would have no '^^inces 
These in turn, however, ate unmeet lor each 

^nicip^jj^ 1811 '^ 0 ^ 
• Pr u"^, flir( , the right of suffrage has been exercise.l k 7 

hv extending the righc of suffrage to any citizen able to J hls , timber 
by ninawK i«ncruaee. Tins addition. hm™,* *°.**ad «« 



as 
in 



write a native language. Ihis addition, however, SiW as well 
r, Lt election to be held under this bill TvJ 11 n °t annlv 
nci ase he SSSSB to a total of probably fo,#^ 
increase y iatmo nts made^Jy the Governor CiL 

sub £3 i S ^th^onnrmation of the Philippine %8^£* 
of this m Y tho terms 



POLITICAL STATUS OF PEOPLE OF THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS. 3 
IMPORTANT AMENDMENTS PROPOSED. 

The committee proposes a substitute for the preamble as adopted 
by the House of Kepresentatives. This substitute is deemed to be 
free from certain ambiguities in the House preamble and avoids the 
reference* to debatable historical events included in the House pre^ 
amble. It states in plain language the reasons for the present bill 
and also declares the purpose of the United States with regard to 
ultimate independence under proprr conditions. Some members of 
the committee who originally opposed any preamble have been 
induced to support this substitute because they have felt that to 
cut the preamble from the bill now would be construed hi the Philip- 
pine Islands as a declaration that independence was never to be 
given, which would result in widespread disappointment and dis- 
content. The committee therefore, considered that the preamble 
herewith recommended, indicating the purpose to grant independ- 
ence to the people of the Philippine Islands when m the judgment 
of the United btates the Philippine people have become litted for 
its enjoyment, will serve to encourage them in the enormous progress 
they are now making and in the experiment of self-government 
which they are now to try. It is believed that its adoption will for 
the present settle and remove from political agitation in the islands 
the question of independence and that the attention of the people 
will be turned toward the important local problems of education, 
public works, industrial progress, agricultural development, and 
sanitation. 

Tne committee recommends dividing the Philippine Islands into 
districts, as proposed in section 17, for the first election instead of 
leaving tiie matter in doubt until tne commission acts, as proposed 
in the House bill. We also propose that any subsequent change of 
districts shall be subject to the approval of tne Pivsi ent. 

Tne committee proposes to make the terms of members of the Phil- 
ippine Assembly two years instead of three, senators four years in 
place of six, and Resident Commissioners to the United States four 
years in place of six. We also propose that the Governor General 
shall have power to remove a Commissioner wnen the same is reque st< d 
by a resolution adopted by a two-thirds vote of the Philippine 

Legislature. . i 

As a precautionary tneasure the committee reports an amendment 
providing for the appointment of a Vice Governor General by the 
President, in order that the great powers and responsibilities of the 
office may in case of the a^se*nce or disability of the executive be in 
the hands of one appointee^y the President and com.rmed I by he 
United States Senate. For a similar reason it is proposed that the 
highly important executive department of public mstruction.embrac- 
inl the bureau of education, the bureau of health the bur.au of 
science, and the bureau of non-Christian tribes shall be placod under 
the control of the Vice Governc*»General thus appointed and 

C °i?thepast the law has provided that an auditor appointed by the 
Secretary of War shall have full and independent control of the 
important work ot auditing,, cliee king up and settling the accounts 
of public revenues and expenditures m the Philippine governme nt, 
the provincial governments, and the municipal governments. This 



4 POLITICAL STATUS OF PEOPLE OF THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS. 

has proven a very wholesome safeguard, and for that reason the 
committee has proposed by section 26 to incorporate a similar pro- 
vision in the pending measure, except that the appointment shall 
be by the President. 1 F 

In order that no backward step may be taken in the administra- 
tion of the laws now protecting the civil service in the Philippine 
Islands, the committee proposes in section 28 that the administra- 
tion of them shall rest in a director of civil service, chosen by the 
president, and that no change in these laws shall be made without 
the approval of the President. 

It is the opinion of the committee that there is an urgent need for 
action on the pending bill at this session, for two reasons : 

rirst. Longer delay will inflame and provoke political agitation, 
possibly leariing to disturbancss, and certainly breeding discontent. 

becond. Longer delay will continue and increase the present 
business depression in the islands, due in part to the fact that the 
uncertainty prevents capital from entering upori new enterprises 
and even from developing tnose already entered upoiv 

For these reasons t£e committee deems it higidy important for 
the welfare of all interests in tne islands that action be had on this 
bill at tnis session. T\ds consideration has so impressed members 
of the committee that they have considered the bill in a nonpartisan 
spirit and tnus been able to reach an almost unanimous decision on 
most of its features. 



.V 



! 



4t 



# 

"Hi 




