THE 

MALOLOS 
CONGRESS 




Cover. Inauguration of the Philippine Republic 
on January 23, 189% Malolos, Bulacan 



COMPLIMENTS 
OF THE 

NATIONAL HISTORICAL COMM1SS 
OF THE PHILIPPINES 




A float depicting Mother Philippines during the inauguration 
of the Philippine Republic on January 23, 1899 in Malolos. 




... 



THE COAT OF ARMS OF THE ERSTWHILE 
PHILIPPINE REPUBLIC 

THE 

MALOLOS 
CONGRESS 




THE SEAL OF THE 
REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENT 



Published by: 



THE NATIONAL HISTORICAL INSTITUTE 

T.M. Kalaw St., Ermita 
Manila, Philippines 

Tel. 523-1037 Website: www.nhi.gov.ph 



Copyright © 1999 NATIONAL HISTORICAL INSTITUTE 

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be 

reprinted or reproduced in any means whatsoever 

without the permission of the copyright owner and publisher. 



Recommended entry : 
The Malolos Congress - Manila : National 
Historical Institute, 2010. 
PP- ; cm. 

1. Malolos Congress I. Title. 



ISBN : 971-538-122-7 



DEDICATION 



Dedicated to the 
Filipino People 
in their struggle for 
Independence and Nationhood 



NATIONAL HISTORICAL INSTITUTE 



GLORIA MACAPAGAL -ARROYO 

President, Republic of the Philippines 



AMBETH R. OCAMPO 

Chairman 



JOSE CRUZ, S.J. HEIDI K. GLORIA 

Member , . . 

Member 

BENITO J LEGARDA, JR. SERAFIN D. QUIASON 

Member KA u 

Member 

2 S " ALVINA PRUDENCIANA C. CRUZ 

c~ aI Museum Director. National Library 

^-Officio Member Ex-Officio Member 



LUDOVICO D. BADOY 

Executive Director III 

EMELITA V. ALMOSARA 

Deputy Executive Director 



REYNALDO A. INOVERO 

Chief, Historic Preservation Division 



0 CARM,NDAR. AREVAL o 

'^^Publications and 
"eraldry Division 

RO Cht R /? V ' SAPITAN VERONICA A. DADO 

Admini \ anCe and Chief > Historic Sites and 

•Native Division Education Division 



THE MALOLOS CONGRESS 



A Centennial publication 

on the inauguration of the Philippine Republic 
(January 23, 1899-Januaiy 23, 1999) 




On behalf of the Philippine Centennial Commission, I wish to convey my warmest felicitations 
and congratulations to the National Historical Institute for publishing a definitive volume on theMalolos 
Congress and the centennial of the inauguration of the Philippine Republic 

As one of our most active partners in our various endeavors, it is with the great pride that we 
recognize the NHVs invaluable contribution to the attainment of missions and goals set forth by the 
Commission. I am confident that this laudable project will become a significant resource material not 
only for our scholars, historians, researchers, teachers and students but also for the general public as well 

It is our fervent hope that the NHI will continue to evolve as a dynamic organization that will 
ensure present and future generations of Filipinos of a responsive and dynamic repository of our heritage. 

Congratulations and Mabuhayl 






NATIONAL HISTORICAL INSTITUTE 



Message 



As we look to the historic events that took place in Malolos a hundred years ago, we are awed by 
the profound significance they have evoked in the Filipino struggle for justice, unity, and freedom. They 
have continued to inspire the search for meaning in national development and a sense of purpose 
national aspirations. 



in 



The National Historical Institute whose mandate is anchored on the preservation and promotion 
of the Filipino historical heritage is firmly committed to the legacy which the Malolos Congress and 
public have bequeathed to the Filipino people It joins both the government and private sectors in the 
effort to bring the centennial commemoration of the birth of the Filipino nation and the First Philippine 
epublic to the highest level of national importance and consciousness it deserves. 



Mabuhay ang Republika ng Pilip 
Mabuhay ang Sambayanang Filip 



inas 



ino. 




Chairman and Executive Director 



CONTENTS 

The Malolos Congress 

by Nicolas Zafra 13 

Members of the Malolos Congress 
of the First Philippine Republic 

and the Framers of its Constitution 23 

La Constitucion de Malolos 

(Official Text) 50 

The Malolos Constitution 

(English Text) 60 

APPENDICES 

A. Aguinaldo's Inaugural Address 72 

B. Message to the Congress by Gen. Aguinaldo 74 

C. Paterno's Inaugural Address 75 

D. Members of the Malolos Congress 76 

E. Message of Gen. Aguinaldo in the 

Proclammation of the Republic 81 

F. Official Protest Against the Paris Peace 

Treaty (Spanish Text) 82 

Official Protest Against the Paris Peace Treaty (English Text) 85 

G. Officials of the Revolutionary Government 88 




By NICOLAS ZAFRA 

Professor of History (Retired) 
University of the Philippines 
Member, Philippine Historical Committee 



The Philippine Revolution, 
understanding by that term, the struggle 
waged by the Filipinos in the closing years 
of the nineteenth century for independence 
from Spanish rule, passed through two 
distinct stages. The first covered the period 
from the outbreak of the Katipunan revolt 
in the latter part of August, 1896, to the 
cessation of hostilities following the 
conclusion of the Pact of Biac-na-bato on 
December 14, 1897. The second stage lasted 
from the resumption of the war against Spain 
shortly after the return of Aguinaldo from 
Hongkong on May 19, 1898, to the outbreak 
of the Filipino-American conflict early in 
February, 1899. 

The period covered by the second stage 
was of short duration lasting less than one 
year. Nevertheless, this period witnessed 
some of the most momentous events in the 
political history of the Philippines. It was 
during this period that Dewey's naval force, 
on May 1, 1898, destroyed the Spanish navy 
in battle in Manila Bay, thereby dealing a 
mortal blow on Spanish colonial power in 
the Philippines. This event was followed 
three months later, August 13, 1898, by the 
occupation of Manila by American troops. 
That event marked the virtual termination 
of the more than three hundred years of 
Spanish rule over the Philippines. In this 
Period, too, the Filipino people had their first 
experience of political independence and had 
occasion to show, through their actuations 
as a free and independent nation, their 
capacity to manage their affairs. 

It is generally admitted that, of the 
events and developments of this period of the 
Revolution, one of the most memorable was 
the coming into being on September 15, 1898, 
of the Malolos Congress. 1 The Congress was 



'Many excellent studies have been made on the Malolos 
Congress by Filipino scholars. Among these are: Jorge 
Bocobo, "Felipe G. Calderon and his Great Work," in The 



the third of the representative assemblies 
which in the course of the Revolution arose 
to assume a vital role in the affairs of the 
Filipino people. The first of these was the 
assembly of Katipunan leaders which met 
at Tejeros, San Francisco de Malabon, 
Cavite, on March 22, 1897. The Tejeros 
Convention, as that assembly is historically 
known, set up a revolutionary government, 
with Emilio Aguinaldo as president, to lead 
and direct the revolutionary movement 
against the Spanish forces in the Philippines. 
The second came into being on November 7, 
1897, at Biac-na-bato. That assembly was 
made up of leaders of the Revolution who 
were in Biac-na-bato at the time. Its avowed 
purpose was to modify the constitutional 
basis of the revolutionary government which 
had been established at Tejeros on March 
22, 1897. Its main accomplishment was the 
adoption of what is historically known as 
the "Constitution of Biac-na-bato." The latter 
created, as governing body of the Philippines, 
"a Supreme Council, composed of a President, 
a Vice-President and four Secretaries." 2 

On May 24, 1898, a few days after his 
arrival from Hongkong, Aguinaldo set up a 
government to direct the course of the 
revolution against Spain which in the 
meantime had started anew. The 



Filipino People, September, 1914; Rafael Palma, "Apolinario 
Mabini - Estudio Biofragico," in A. Mabini, La Revolucion 
Filipiiia (Manila, 1931), vol. I; Teodoro M. Kalaw, "Felipe 
Calderon," in Philippine Review, June, July, October, 1919; 
Maximo M. Kalaw, The Development of Philippine Politics. 
(Manila, 1926), Chapter IV; Leandro H. Fernandez, The 
Philippine Republic. (New York, 1926), Chapter III. 

A later study is that by Jose Lopez del Castillo, formerly 
Chief of the Division of Bibliography and Historical 
Investigation of the National Library. Written in Spanish, it 
appeared in a series of articles in Nueva Era during the years, 
1948-1950, under the title, "Malolos y Sus Prohombres." 

Recent studies on the Malolos Congress are: Teodoro A. 
Agoncillo's, The Crisis of the Republic, Q.C., 1960, Chapter 8, 
and Cesar Adib Majul, Mabini and The Philippine Revolution, 
Q.C.. 1960, Chapter 6 & 7. 

'The full text of the Constitution including the names of 
the signers of the Constitution is in Kalaw, Maximo M., op 
cit., "Appendix B." 



13 



THE MALOLOS... 

government was dictatorial in form. The 
conduct of affairs was to be by decrees set 
forth under Aguinaldos sole responsibility. 
A dictatorship was deemed best suited to the 
wartime conditions then prevailing in the 
Philippines. Such a type of government, 
however, was not intended to continue 
indefinitely. It was to last only, in the words 
of Aguinaldos proclamation, "until the time 
when these Islands, being under our 
complete control, may form a constitutional 
republican assembly and appoint a president 
and cabinet, into whose hands I shall then 
resign the command of these islands." 1 

The government, however, did not wait 
for the contingency mentioned in Aguinaldos 
proclamation, namely, bringing "these 
Islands under our complete control," before 
it took steps leading to the eventual 
formation of the "constitutional republican 
assembly" envisioned in that proclamation. 
For it was felt that the interests of the 
country and the exigencies of the times 
demanded that such steps be promptly taken. 
On June 18, 1898, therefore, upon the advice 
aad recommendation of Apolinario Mabini 
who, in the meantime, had joined 
Aguina do s government and had become 
Aguinaldos trusted political adviser, the 
government issued a decree establishing 
municipal and provincial governments in 
owns and provinces which had come under 
the control of the Phili Ppine revolutionary 
government. The decree provided not only 
for the organization of municipal and 
provincial governments but also for the 
election of delegates to a national congress/ 

A few days later, June 23, another 
decree drafted like that of June 18 by 
Mabini, was promulgated by Aguinaldo. 
This decree transformed the Dictatorship 
into a constitutional government to be known 
as "Revolutionary Government." The decree 
made specific and detailed provisions for a 
national congress. The latter was to be 
composed of members elected by voters in 
accordance with the provisions of the decree 

'Full text of the proclamation is in Taylor. Philippine 
Insurgent Records. Quotation is from Fernandez op cit 

Text of this decree is in Mabini, A.. La Revolucion Filipino 
Vol I, P 169. 



of June 18. The Government, however, was 
empowered to appoint "provisional 
representatives" in those provinces where, 
because of war conditions, elections could not 
be held. Such representatives were to be 
selected from among "persons most noted for 
their education and social position who were 
natives of, or for a long time residents in, 
those provinces." The decree enumerated 
the powers and prerogatives of congress. 
Included among these was the power to 
summon and interpellate any of the 
Secretaries of the Government/' 

The Revolutionary Government achieved 
marked success in its efforts to extend its 
authority and control over the Philippines. 
At the time of the capitulation of Manila on 
August 13, 1898, it had established itself in 
power in eight provinces of Central Luzon, 
with officials of its own choosing exercising 
authority in those provinces as provincial 
governors. These provinces were: Manila, 
outside of the areas occupied by American 
forces, with Ambrosio Flores as governor; 
Cavite, except the port which was under 
American control, with Ladislao Diwa as 
governor; Bulacan, under the governorship 
of Segundo Rodrigo; Batangas, under the 
governorship of Manuel Genato; Laguna, 
under Escolastico Salandanan; Pampanga, 
under Tiburcio Hilario; Nueva Ecija, under 
Felino Cajucom; and Bataan, under Pedro 
de Leon." 

Elsewhere, the Revolutionary 
Government was equally successful in its 
efforts to establish its power and authority. 
Units of the armed forces of the Government, 
led by Manuel Tinio, occupied the Ilocos 
provinces. Another force, under Daniel 
Tirona, brought the entire Cagayan Valley 
under the authority of the Revolutionary 
Government. Farther up the headwaters of 
the Cagayan River, another revolutionary 
force, under Delfin Esquivel, occupied 
Bayombong, Nueva Vizcaya. Some time 
later, Vicente Lukban brought the Bicol 
provinces under the authority of the 
Revolutionary Government. 7 



a Ibid. The provisions of the June 23 decree relating to 
Congress are in Chapter II of the decree. The Chapter bears 
the title, "Of the Revolutionary Congress." 

°Calderon, Felipe G., Mis Memorias Sobre la Revolution, 
Manila, 1907, p. 100. 

7 Fernandez, op. cit., p. 129. 



14 



On August 12, 1898, a peace protocol 
was concluded in Washington which ended 
hostilities between the United States and 
Spain. One of the articles of the protocol 
provided that American forces were to occupy 
and hold the city and harbor of Manila 
pending the conclusion of peace which was 
to determine "the control, disposition and 
government of the Philippines." 

News of this event aroused, as was to be 
expected, deep apprehensions among the 
leaders of the Revolution. The latter 
understood readily enough the significance 
and implications of that event. There was 
the possibility that, in the conference which 
was going to decide the future political status 
of the Philippines, the interests of the 
Filipinos might be completely ignored. In 
such a contingency there was grave danger 
that the Filipinos might lose their cherished 
national ideal and aspiration - the 
independence of the Philippines. 

Philippine independence was the 
supreme purpose and objective of the 
Philippine Revolution. It had been 
proclaimed at Kawit, Cavite on June 12, 
1898 The independence proclamation was 
ratified in a meeting of local officials held in 
Bacoor, Cavite on August 1, 1898. In that 
meeting, a resolution was adopted calling 
upon the President of the Philippines to take 
steps to secure from foreign powers their 
recognition of the independence of the 
Philippines. Complying with that resolution, 
the Revolutionary Government on August 
6 1898, sent diplomatic notes to foreign 
nations requesting them to accord formal 
recognition to the Philippines as a free and 
independent nation. 

At about the same time, the 
Revolutionary Government appointed Felipe 
Agoncillo, a well known lawyer from 
Batangas province, then living in Hongkong, 
as diplomatic representatives of the 
Philippines abroad. Agoncillo was instructed 
to proceed to Washington and later to Paris 
where the peace conference between the 
United States and Spain was scheduled to 
meet beginning October 10, 1898. 

Uncertain as to what the peace 
conference would decide regarding the future 
of the Philippines, the Revolutionary 



government proceeded to strengthen its claim 
for the recognition of Philippine 
independence by convening a national 
congress. In two decrees, one promulgated 
at Bacoor, Cavite, on September 4, 1898, and 
the other issued from Malolos, Bulacan, on 
September 10, 1898, Aguinaldo announced 
the appointment of persons as "provincial 
representatives" and called upon these 
persons, together with those duly elected by 
voters in the provinces already occupied by 
the Revolutionary Government, to assemble 
at Malolos, Bulacan, on September 15, 1898.* 

The body which came into being by virtue 
of the aforementioned decrees was the one 
which is historically referred to as the 
"Malolos Congress." The latter held its 
inaugural session on the designated date, 
September 15, 1898, in the church of 
Barasoain, Malolos. Fifty delegates were 
present on that historic occasion. Included 
among them were outstanding 
represetatives of that period of the culture 
and intelligentsia of the Nation. Ambrosio 
Rianzares Bautista, one time political adviser 
of Aguinaldo, was in that honored group. He 
served as temporary chairman of the 
Congress. Pedro A. Paterno, the nogotiator 
of the Pact of Biac-na-bato, was also there. 
He was chosen permanent chairman of the 
Congress. Other prominent members were 
Felipe G. Calderon, Pablo Ocampo, Benito 
Legarda, Gregorio Araneta, Joaquin 
Gonzales, Arsenio Cruz Herrera, Tomas G. 
del Rosario, Arcadio del Rosario, Alberto 
Barretto, Perfecto Gabriel, Pablo Tecson, 
T.H. Pardo de Tavera, Leon Ma. Guerrero, 
Antonio Luna, Aguedo Velarde, Jose 
Alejandrino and Ignacio Villamor. 

The first important act of the Congress 
was the ratification of the independence of 
the Philippines. On September 29, Congress 
formally ratified the Declaration of 
Independence which had been adopted by the 
assembly of local officials in Bacoor, Cavite, 
on August 1, 1898. In the course of the 
deliberation on the ratification measure, 
Pedro A. Paterno, Chairman of the Congress, 



•Calderon, Felipe G., Mis Memorias Sobre la Revolution 
Manila, 1907. Appendix. The names of the delegates listed 
in the two decrees are given therein. 

°Fernandez, op. cit. 

(Please turn to next page) 



15 



THEMALOLOS... 

delivered an impassioned address which 
thrilled and electrified, with its eloquence, 
the members of the Congress. According to 
Calderon, at the termination of his speech, 
Paterno received a prolonged ovation. Many 
of his colleagues, moved by a spontaneous 
desire to express their gratification and 
admiration, went to him and embraced him 
enthusiastically. 

But the work for which the Malolos 
Congress is best known was the framing of 
the Malolos Constitution. 

Many prominent men in and out of 
Congress assumed that the framing of a new 
constitution for the Philippines was the task 
of major importance and urgency that lay 
»tZ J? 8 *- In their ™ w ^t was, as 

ConerlT ° aCt ' ^ *»' «*ich 

Congress was convened. 

shar^W^' 6 °t her8 ' h ° Wever ' wh0 d ^ not 
Apohnal -o m K- F ° rem ° 8t amon S them was 
counZT ^u" 1 ' ^^aldo's adviser and 
counselor. Mabini held that Congress had 

w o as au „o h t or a ity to ? dopt a «-«2ssi?i 

was not a constituent assembly. Neither 
did it possess legislative powers sLe una 

^ve 0 r r nm n ent Ia c W on° e f R ^^ry 
. nent, Congress was merelv a 
consultative body whose main duTy was to 

(toJ^T^ ° f the Evolutionary 
Government and to raise funds for the 
maintenance of those activities Mabin! 

to Irame a constitution at that time 

nTrtr Philipp,ne ^ 

the PhH reCOgmzed °fficially. Besides, 
the Philipp lnes with a constitution 

VelaZTf inde ^ nd -ce, would be 
SS^Sr C ° ndudi ^ *»y agreement 
except on the basis of the recognition of its 
independence, for, otherwise, it would violate 
its fundamental law. In the situation then 
existing, Mabini believed it was advisable 
that the Government should retain certain 
freedom of action which would give it a more 



favorable position in dealing with the United 
States. 11 

A majority of the members of Congress 
were not inclined to accept the views of 
Mabini. Calderon was the spokesman of that 
group. Calderon pointed out that there was 
urgent need for the Philippines to adopt a 
constitution of its own in view of the 
proximity of the date of meeting of the 
American and Spanish commissioners. A 
Philippines duly constituted as a sovereign 
state would be in a strong position to press 
its claim for recognition. It could present as 
a powerful argument in support of its plea 
for the recognition of its independence, the 
fact, that, within such a short time, it had 
succeeded in organizing itself into a state, 
with a constitution duly adopted and laws 
regulating its internal affairs. 12 

The existence of two diametrically 
opposed views on such a matter of vital 
importance as the framing of a constitution 
for the country posed, as could well be 
imagined, a difficult problem for Aguinaldo. 
He had to choose between two courses of 
action: first, that pointed out for him by 
Mabini, his trusted counselor, and, second, 
that favored by the majority of the members 
of Congress. Aguinaldo chose to abide by 
the latter's wishes. It was a difficult choice 
to make. But it revealed an admirable trait 
of Aguinaldo - his high regard and respect 
for Congress as the authoritative spokesman 
for the Filipino people and the true 
interpreter of their desires and aspirations. 
He made known his decision in the message 
which he read in the inaugural session of 
the Congress. In that message he expressed 
his hope that Congress would see fit to write 
"the immortal book of the 'Constitution of 
the Philippines' as the supreme expression 
of the Nations will." 13 

Following the formal organization of 
Congress, with the election of Pedro A. 
Paterno as president, Benito Legarda as vice- 
president, and Gregorio Araneta and Pablo 
Ocampo as secretaries, Congress proceeded 
to the task of preparing a constitution for 



"Palma, Rafael, "Apolinario Mabini - Estudio Biografico," 
in Mabini, A. La Revolution Filipina. Vol. I. pp. 50, 51. 
"Calderon, op. cit. 
"Ibid. 



.16 



the Philippines. A committee of nineteen 
members was created to draft a constitution. 
Outstanding members of Congress were 
named to that committee among whom were 
Joaquin Gonzales, Gregorio Araneta, Pablo 
Ocampo, Aguedo Velarde, Tomas G. del 
Rosario, Alberto Barretto, Antonio Luna, 
Felipe Calderon, Arsenio Cruz Herrera and 
Felipe Buencamino. 14 

To Felipe Calderon, the Committee 
entrusted the task of preparing a draft of a 
constitution for the Philippines. Calderon 
proceeded at once and in earnest to perform 
the task assigned to him. The story of how 
he went about this task is told by him in his 
Memorias Sobre la Revolution Filipino as 
follows: 

Mabini had written a proposed 
constitution based on the Constitution 
of the Spanish Republic with slight 
variations; and, after studying it, I 
became convinced that it was not 
suitable to our country. Pedro 
Paterno, on his part, had given me a 
constitutional draft of his own which 
was patterned much after the Spanish 
Constitution of 1868. Paterno's draft, 
like Mabini's, proved unsatisfactory 
to me... I, therefore, decided to write 
one that would be eclectic... I spent a 
few days studying the constitutions 
of other countries... Using as a 
basis... the constitutions of the South 
American republics... particularly 
that of Costa Rica, I prepared my own 
draft... One day, in the drugstore of 
Juan Cuadra in Ermita, I wrote down 
the draft of the constitution, or rather 
had a clean copy made of the draft by 
three scriveners, who were Don 
Mariano Icasiano, Don Hugo 
Aunario, and another whose name I 
can not now recall. 

Submitted to the committee, the 
draft was approved with slight 
changes; but we encountered 
opposition from Mabini's partisans 
who wanted Mabini's own plan to be 
adopted... The draft having been 
approved by the committee, copies 
thereof were printed and distributed 
among the delegates. Thereafter it 



"Ibid. 



was submitted to Congress where it 
was taken up in debate, from the 
closing days of October until 
November when it was approved by 
Congress. 

The proposed constitution which the 
Committee submitted to Congress had 
several distinctive features. One of these 
was its provision for a unicameral 
legislature. Calderon had his own reasons 
for proposing a single-house legislature. He 
explained, in the first place, that there were 
no distinct interests in the Philippines which 
demanded representation in the legislature. 
Secondly, in the formative stage in which 
the country found itself, a legislature of two 
houses could cause unnecessary delay in the 
enactment of urgently needed legislation. 15 

But the most significant feature of the 
proposed constitution was the dominant 
position which the National Assembly 
occupied in the government. As pointed out 
by Calderon, the National Assembly was the 
embodiment of popular sovereignty. As such, 
it assumed the supreme prerogative of the 
people, namely the power of legislation. 
Apart from its purely legislative functions, 
the Assembly possessed executive and 
judicial powers. These powers, however, 
were clearly defined allegedly in order to 
preserve the integrity and independence of 
the Executive and the Judiciary in 
consonance with Montesquieu's doctrine of 
the separation of powers. But, as the 
embodiment of popular sovereignty, the 
Assembly assumed powers of scrutiny and 
supervision over the affairs of government. 
To insure the continuity of this scrutinizing 
and supervisory power, a Permanent 
Committee of Congress was created to 
perform the functions of Congress while that 
body was not in session, with full power to 
act in cases of emergency. The National 
Assembly was thus, in the words of Calderon, 
"the omnipotent power in the entire nation." 16 



,5 Ibid. 

I9 Loc. cit. Calderon says that the idea of a Permanent 
Committee of Congress was adopted from the Constitution of 
Costa Rica. The source of that institution may be traced to 
the Spanish Constitution of 1812. A summary of the provisions 
of that Constitution is given by Jose O. Rubio, Historia de 
Espaiia, vol. V, p. 272, ft 

(Please turn to next page) 



17 



THE 



What impelled Calderon to give to the 
National Assembly its dominant position in 
the government was explained by Calderon 
himself in these words: 

Being fully convinced that upon 
attaining our independence we shall 
have for a long time a veritable 
oligarchy in which the military 
element would predominate, I wanted 
to see that oligarchy neutralized. 

Calderon's ideas found ready acceptance 
?k SUpport amon e the members of 

wfchS? StS** Congress approved 
mthout much difficulty the provision, of the 

1Z1 °!? l elating t0 the National 
Assembly and the Executive in the form in 
winch they were presented by Calderon. 

avJo^/r a i ineS9 With whlch Congress 
quite unl f 011 ? plan government was 
F"!pL set r8tandable - U bes P°ke the 
rp<r a ^ f„ iL V, 1 Dreva iling at the time in 

mSe of' Co 3 " 811 C0l0maI Th * 
f-m personal ?/ re8S kneW Wel1 en0U ^ h 
knowlecj ^of PhT nenCe and fr ° m their 
Spanish USSP 1 ^ hi8t ° ry that thG 
a governor InH admimstrativ e system with 
broad discretion? tam gGneral endow * d with 
be oppreS 0 ^ Was in <* ned to 

fully aware of ^ ty / an ™^ They were 
system, the ri^L! ? Ct that > under that 
were not adequate^ ******** ° Hhe people 
that a pat^T^ P1Dt6Cted - ^believed 
by a powerful I g ° Vernment dominated not 

people wasm^f "Tf - and desires of the 

theyclTose to aSt ST*' that 
proposed by Ca^ 

natural reaction Z tlj ™ Ch01Ce Wa8 8 
administrate Jy^^^ the 
established in the ^^ hlch 

The constitutional project was taken up 
for general discussion on October 25th 
S m ^ rftb Pr ° P08ed ^aaui 
burden of defending it and explaining its 
provisions and peculiar features on the floor 
of Congress. That responsibility he 
discharged creditably and well. In the 



debates which followed, of which detailed 
reports appeared in the newspapers 
published at the time - La Republica 
Filipino, and El Heraldo de la Revolution - 
he distinguished himself by his eloquence, 
his learning, and his forceful logic. 

In the session held on October 28th, 
Congress, by a vote of 37 against 7, approved 
in principle the constitutional project. 
Immediately thereafter, Congress began the 
consideration of the same project, this time 
article by article. In sessions held between 
October 28 and November 29, it devoted itself 
almost exclusively to this task. 

With one notable exception, the 
provisions of the constitutional project were 
approved without much difficulty and, 
substantially, in the form in which they were 
submitted. The one exception was that 
relating to the subject of religion. 

The articles in the proposed constitution 
on this subject set forth three basic 
principles. The first declared the Catholic 
religion as the official religion of the 
Philippines. As such, its ministers were 
entitled to financial support from the 
government. The second permitted other 
forms of worship as long as they were not 
contrary to morals and good usage or 
endangered public security. The third 
principle declared that appointments to 
positions in the public service as well as the 
enjoyment of civil and political rights should 
not depend upon the religious affiliation of 
the persons concerned. 17 

These principles were not in their 
entirety acceptable to all the members of the 
committee that drafted the Constitution. 
Tomas del Rosario for one was not agreeable 
to the basic idea contained in those 
principles. In fact he made it known that 
he was going to prepare an amendment 
which he intended to submit in substitution 
to the provisions agreed upon by a majority 
of the Committee. The text of his proposed 
amendment read as follows: 

The state recognizes the liberty 
and equality of all forms of worship, 



,7 TitIe 3, Articles 5, 6, 7 of the constitutional project. 



18 



as well as the separation of Church 
and State. 

The religious question was taken up for 
consideration on November 22. Tomas del 
Rosario and Arcadio del Rosario took turns 
in pleading for religious freedom and for the 
principle of the separation of Church and 
State. They stressed the point that the 
interests and welfare of the country 
demanded that there be complete separation 
of Church and State. True religious freedom, 
they explained, implied that the Government 
should not favor any form of religion and 
that the Church should not depend for 
support upon the State. 

Speakers for the original proposition 
were Manuel Gomez and Felipe Calderon. 
Gomez spoke on the importance of religion 
in the life of a nation and advised that the 
Philippines should adopt the Catholic religion 
as its official religion, that being the religion 
in which many Filipinos were born. 

Calderon, in his remarks, argued that 
to establish the principle of separation of 
Church and State was, in the critical stage 
through which the Filipinos were passing, 
undesirable and prejudicial to the interests 
and welfare of the country. For one thing, 
he explained, it was offensive to the religious 
sensibilities of the great portion of the 
Filipino people. The great need of the time 
he went on to say, was national unity, but 
the proposed amendment would create 
divisions among the people. They would 
alienate the goodwill of the native priesthood 
which was an influential element in the 
Nation. 

In the session of November 29, Congress 
voted on the question. The result was a tie, 
25 members voting for the original proposal, 
and 25 for the amendment submitted by del 
Rosario. Pedro A. Paterno as Chairman of 
Congress had the rare privelege and 
opportunity to decide by his vote the great 
issue. But he chose to remain neutral. He 
refrained from casting the vote that would 
have broken the deadlock. Another voting, 
therefore, had to be taken. This time Pablo 
Tecson, who had refrained from voting in 
the first balloting, voted in favor of the 
amendment. By a vote of 26 against 25, 
therefore, Congress approved the 



constitutional principle recognizing religious 
freedom and the separation of Church and 
State. 18 That principle was incorporated in 
Article V, Title 3 of the Constitution, the 
text of which read as follows: 

The State recognizes the freedom 
and equality of all cults, as well as 
the separation of the Church and the 
State. 

With the solution of the religious 
question, the main task of Congress was 
brought to a close. Congress then 
transmitted the Constitution to Aguinaldo 
with the recommendation that it be officially 
promulgated. 

Mabini, who from the beginning was 
opposed to the adoption of a constitution 
pending the recognition of Philippine 
independence, advised Aguinaldo to withhold 
the official promulgation of the Constitution. 
He advanced two reasons for his action. In 
the first place, the constitutional guaranties 
of individual freedom could not be 
maintained since the urgent need of the 
times was precisely the predominance of the 
armed forces of the country. Secondly, it 
was not advisable to establish completely the 
principle of separation of Church and State 
as such a move would alienate the Catholic 
elements of the nation. Furthermore, Mabini 
explained, the interests of the nation 
required that the hand of the Executive be 
strengthened. The country was faced with 
grave perils. It was important that the 
Executive be clothed with the powers needed 
to give him the strength and the energy to 
meet contingencies and unforseen 
developments. 

Following the advice of Mabini, 
Aguinaldo on January 1, 1899, sent a 
message drafted by Mabini to Congress 
recommending the adoption of certain 
changes or amendments to the Constitution. 
One proposal would give the President a 
certain measure of legislative power by 
authorizing him to promulgate decrees while 
Congress was not in session. Another sought 
to emasculate the Permanent Commission 
by taking away from it important powers 



"Calderon, op. cit. (Please turn to next page) 



19 



THEMALOLOS... 

and prerogatives. A third proposal 
authorized the arrest of members of 
Congress who were caught in fraganti 
committing acts against the security of the 
State, without previous authorization of 
Congress. Another sought to strengthen the 
President's control over legislation by 
expanding his veto power. Still another 
would empower the President-to dissolve the 
Congress without the formality of the latter's 
consent. 

Congress was not disposed to accept the 
proposed changes in so far as the National 
Assembly's powers and prerogatives were 
concerned. Calderon and his colleagues were 
firm in their opposition to Mabini's attempts 
to strengthen the arm of the Executive at 
the expense of the powers and prerogatives 
of Congress. They took their stand on the 
proposition that Congress, not the Executive 
was the true representative of the people. 

Interestingly enough, the only proposal 
which received ready acceptance and 
approval on the part of Congress was that 

m£f ln n tHe religious lss »e, more 
specif lca ii y the establishment of the principle 

ssp-ssr and the separation ° f 

The proposed change was incorporated 
as arucle 100 of the Constitution. The text 
ot the article read as follows: 

The execution of Article 5 Title 
3, is hereby suspended until the 
meeting of the Constituent Assembly 
In the meantime, the municipalities 
or places which may require the 
spiritual offices of a Filipino priest 
shall provide for his maintenance. 

The new provision represented a happy 
compromise between the two rival ideologies 
that clashed in Congress in the course of 
the debates over the religious issue. The 
first of these was embodied in the proposed 
amendment by substitution which del 
Rosario submitted to congress and which the 
latter approved on November 29. 

The other was that championed by Felipe 
G. Calderon. It was an expression of the 



sentiments of the Catholic elements of the 
Nation. Their representatives in the Malolos 
Congress, and they constituted a major 
group, according to Calderon, wanted to 
preserve the status of the Catholic religion 
in the belief that Catholicism was of vital 
importance in the social, cultural and 
spritual life of the Filipino people. 

As embodied in Article 100 of the 
Constitution, the compromise formula 
represented a statesmanlike settlement of 
the religious issue. It impliedly established 
as a fundamental doctrine of the 
Constitution the principle of freedom of 
worship. This principle reflected the liberal 
spirit and tendencies of the Filipino reform 
movement. Its implantation in the 
Philippines was a major goal and aspiration 
of the leaders of the nationalistic campaign 
and of the Revolution. At the same time the 
new provision recognized the justice of the 
contention of Calderon and many other 
members of the Malolos Congress that the 
State should, in the Nation's interest, give 
financial aid to Filipino priests who were 
called upon to attend to the religious and 
spiritual needs of the people. 

The settlement of the religious issue in 
the manner above described speaks well of 
the good sense and statesmanship of the 
members of the Malolos Congress. Well 
could Jose Lopez del Castillo say that the 
members of the Malolos Congress were men 
of "political maturity" endowed with a strong 
sense of responsibility. 19 

On January 20, 1899, the Constitution 
was definitely adopted. The Executive and 
the Congress on that day reached a 
satisfactory agreement on all pending 
issues. The way was thus cleared for the 
official proclamation of the Constitution. On 
January 21, 1899, Aguinaldo issued a decree 
promulgating the newly approved document. 
He called upon his countrymen to safeguard 
and obey the Constitution as the 
fundamental law of the land, the expression 
of "the sovereign will of the Filipino People." 
Two days later, January 23, 1899, the 
Philippine Republic with Aguinaldo as 
President, was inaugurated at Malolos. The 
Malolos Congress thenceforth came to be 
known as "National Assembly", the title 
assigned to it by the Constitution. 



™ Malolos YSus Prohombres. 



20 



The Philippine Republic did not live long. 
Within a few days after its inauguration, it 
had to deal with the problem of survival, 
being faced by the grim reality of war. On 
February 5, hostilities broke out between 
Filipino and American troops around Manila. 
Hard pressed by superior forces, the 
government evacuated Malolos and began 
its odyssey, moving northward from one 
capital to another, finally going into hiding 
in the mountain fastnesses of Northern 
Luzon. 



The Malolos Constitution was not 
vouchsafed the time or the opportunity to 
show its real worth. Undoubtedly, it had 
its deficiences and imperfections. Whatever 
its defects, however, it had one thing for 
which its framers could well be proud, 
namely its democratic spirit and ideal. It 
proclaimed as a basic principle of government 
the doctrine that sovereignty resides 
exclusively in the people. 

That the Malolos Constitution faithfully 
reflected the ideals and aspirations of the 
Philippine Revolution is the sober judgement 



of posterity. This view is well stated by a 
distinguished American scholar, the late Dr. 
Joseph R. Hayden. Commenting on the 
Malolos Constitution, Dr. Hayden wrote: 20 

This organic law (the Malolos 
Constitution) was a free expression 
of the type of state to which the 
articulate Filipinos aspired at the end 
of the Spanish regime. This state was 
democratic and liberal and was 
pledged to a careful regard for the 
protection and development of the 
masses of its citizens. In these 
important matters there is a 
remarkable consistency between the 
Malolos Constitution and the organic 
law of the Philippines adopted in 
Manila thirty-six years later. 

It was with good reason, therefore, that 
President Aguinaldo could say that the 
Malolos Constitution was "the mosjt glorious 
expression of the noble aspirations of the 
Filipino people, a mirror of their culture and 
a clear proof before the world of their capacity 
to govern themselves." 21 



K The Philippines - A Study in National Development. N. 
Y., 1955, p. 32. 

J, "Message to Congress," in Mabini, op. cit. 



21 




Arrival of Gen. Emilio Aguinaldo 
atMalolos on January 23, 1899. 



Members 

of the 

Malolos Congress 

of the 

irst Philippine Republic 

and 

Framers 

of its 

Constitution 

(Signers of the Malolos Cc 




PEDRO A. PATERNO 

President of the Malolos Congress 




25 



Members with photos 





'V /; ' v 



• 



■■ ! 

MARIANO ABELLAy ISAAC 

Caches Q0 ™ SCPtC ! nber 25 ' 1860 ln N «eva 
Cacercs. Ambos Camarines (now part of 
Camarmes Sur). Licentiate in Canon Law 
Umversnyof Santo Tomas. 1889. Member 



GREGORIO AG LI PAY y LABAYAN 

Priest. Born on May 5. 1860 in Batac. Ilocos 
Norte. Obtained Bachiller en Artes, San Juan de 
Letran. Ordained as Roman Catholic secular priest, 
December21, 1889. Manila. Appointed Military' 
Chaplain and Military Vicar General (Vicario 
General Castrence) by Gen. Emilio Aguinaldo. 
October 20, 1898. Elected Delegate of Ilocos 
Norte. 




GREGQREO AGUflLERA y SOLIS 
Propagandist. Born in Lipa, Batangas in 1869. 
Graduated Bachiller en Artes, Ateneo de Manila, 
1889. Edited Columnas Volantes de la Federation 
Malaya in Lipa, Batangas. Elected delegate of 
Batangas. 



26 




JOSE ALBERT y MAYORALGO 

Physician. Born in Binondo, Manila. April 3, 
1867. Completed Bachiller en Artes degree. 
Ateneo de Manila. 1880; Licentiate in Medicine, 
1887 and Doctorate in Medicine. 1889 from 
Universidad Central de Madrid, Spain. Member. 
Medical Faculty. Universidad Cientifico Literaria 
de Filipinas. Appointed representative of Dapitan 
y Lal-lo. 




JOSE ALEJANDEINO 

Engineer and Chief of Corps of Military Engineers, 
Philippine Revolutionary Army. Born, Arayat, 
Pampanga. Graduated with Bachiller en Artes 
degree from University of Santo Tomas, 1889 and 
with degree of Chemical Engineer, July 1895, 
Madrid, Spain and Civil Engineering, University of 
Ghent, Belgium. Appointed to represent 
Catanduanes. Member. Budget Committee and 
Committee to Draft the Constitution. 




LEON APACIBLE 

Lawyer. Born in Balayan, Batangas, October 25, 
1861. Obtained degree of Licenciado en 
Jurisprudencia from the University of Santo 
Tomas in 1886. Appointed to represent Lepanto. 



27 




Lawyer. Bom^^^ 

CamarinesSur onE* L (now Na S a )- 
at the SeminS^ M ber18 1866 - Sta ditd 
obtained hisTSeAnA^ CaCeres where h * 
de San Juan de San ^h? 11 * ^ 
of Perito AgronomT r n „« ? nied the title 
University of SanS t«£ n u ed Stud y at th * 
his Uce^T^^ Jfj 
Law degree from the Universidaj I r^ 11 ? 1 
SSL?"* ^ 'C^fi* 




GREGORIO ARAN ETA 

Lawyer. Born in Molo, Iloilo, April 19. 1869. 
Graduated Bachelor of Arts from Ateneo de Manila. 
1884. Obtained Titulo de Agrimensor y Tasador 
de Tierras in 1886 and degree of Licentiate in 
Jurisprudence from University of Santo Tomas. 
1891. First Secretary of Malolos Congress. 
Member, Committee to Draft the Constitution. 




Pmm.€M3 1SAH1LON 
Lawyer. Obtained his Titulo de Notario from the 
University of Santo Tomas in 1889; Licentiate in 
Canon Law in 1889 and Licentiate in Civil Law in 
1890. Appointed delegate of Burias. 



28 




SANTIAGO BARCELONA 

Physician. Born in Pulilan. Bulacan on May 23. 
1863. Studied at the University of Santo Tomas 
and received the degree of Licentiate in Medicine 
at the University of Barcelona. Spain in 1891. 
Appointed Delegate representing Butuan. 




ALBERTO BARRETTO 

Lawyer, Born in Cabangan. Zambales. November 
21, 1867. Earned his Bachiller en Artes at the 
Ateneo Municipal and Licenciado en 
IN rr^mdencm from vb, ■ I laiversity of Santo Tomas 
in 1893. Member, Law Faculty, Universidad 
Cientifico-Literaria de Filipinas. Appointed Delegate 
io represent Masbate and Ticao. Member, 
Committee oo Inte* . i IV-; - Platioos and fbsnmittee 
to Draft the Constitution. 




IOSE BASA y ENRIQUEZ 

Lawyer. Born in San Roque, Cavite on August 6. 
1 843. Earned the degree of Bachiller en Filosofla 
from the University of Santo Tomas in 1866 and 
Licentiate in Jurisprudence also from the 
University of Santo Tomas in 1870. Elected 
Delegate of Cavite. Member, Committee on 
Message. 



29 





FELIX BAUTISTA 

Physician. Born in Malolos Bulacan. May 18. 
1863. Obtained Titulo de Agrimensor y Perito 
Tasador de Tierras in 188 5 and Licentiate in 
Medicine from the University of Santo Tomas. 
1888. Appointed Delegate of Zambales. Member. 
Committee on Felicitation. 




ARISTON BAUTISTA LIN 

Physician. Bora in Santa Cruz, Manila on February 
TomJth K tUdi6d at the Unive ™ty of Santo 

taTSTS? ea i rned his Licentiate in Medicine 

n 1885 and completed his medical studies at the 
Umversidad Central de Madrid. Member. Medical 
Faculty of Umversidad Cientifico-Literaria de 
Hhpinas. Appointed Delegate of Cebu. Member 
Committee on Internal Regulations 




VETO BELARMINO 
Military Officer. Born in Silang, Cavite on June 
15, 1857. Studied in San Juan de Letran. 
Appointed Delegate of Batanes. 



30 




BIIG1NIO BENITEZ 

Lawyer. Born in Manila, on January 11. 1851. 
Studied Psicologia Logica y Filosofia Moral and 
graduated in 1870 from the University of Santo 
Tomas. Obtained Licentiate in Jurisprudence from 
the University of Santo Tomas. 1881. Elected 
Delegate of Laguna. Member. Committee on 
Felicitation. Committee on Internal Regulations 
and Committee to Draft the Constitution. 




FELIPE CALDERQN 

Lawyer. Born in Santa Cruz de Malabon (now Tanza), 
Cavite on April 4, 1868. Took his primary course at 
the Ateneo Municipal de Manila and his Licenciado en 
Leyes from the University of Santo Tomas, 1894. 
Member. Law Faculty. Universidad Cientifico-Literaria 
de Filipinas. Member. Committee on Internal 
Regulations. Committee on Style and Committee to 
Draft the Constitution. Author and Sponsor of the 
Malolos Constitution. Appointed representative of 
Paragua. 




FELIPE BUENCAMINO 

Lawyer. Born in San Miguel de Mayumo. Bulacan 
on August 2 3, 1848. Took his Bachiller en 
Artes at the University of Santo Tomas and 
finished in 1868. Also took Bachiller en Filosofia 
finished in 1866. Graduated with the degree of 
Licenciado en Derecho in 1876 and Licenciado 
en Jurisprudencia in 1884. Obtained law degree 
from the University of Santo Tomas in 1884. 
Appointed Secretario de Fomento by Gen. 
Aguinaldo on September 26. 1898. Became 
Secretary of Foreign Affairs in the Paterno- 
Buencamino Cabinet. May 10.1899. Appointed 
Delegate of Zamboanga. Member. Committee on 
Felicitation. Committee to Draft the Constitution 
and Committee on Internal Regulations. 



31 




FERNANDO CANON 

? Biftan ' La * una - Graduated 
Bachelor of Arts, Ateneode Manila, 1877 Studied 
Engineering at the Universidad Central de Madrid 
in Spam. Appointed Delegate of Bontoc. Member 
Committee on Style and Committee on Budget 




TELESFORO ANTONIO CIIUIDIAN 

Businessman. Born in Binondo. Manila on 
January 5. 1855. Studied at Ateneo de Manila 
for his Bachiller en Artes. Appointed Delegate of 
Tucuran. 




JOSE CORONEL 
Farmer, Born in Indang, Cavite. May 7, 1868. 
Studied at the Colegio de San Juan de Letran and 
the University of Santo Tomas. Elected delegate 
of Amburavan. 



32 




MARIANO CRISOSTOMO LUGO 

Lawyer. Born in Atlag. Malolos. Bulacan. 
February 3, 1862. Took his secondary 
education at the Colegio de San Juan de Letran 
and finished his licenciado en jurisprudencia from 
the University of Santo Tomas in 1892. Secretary, 
Universidad Cientifico-Literaria de Filipinas. Elected 
Delegate of Bulacan. 



" 




ARSENIOCRUZBflERRetA 

Lawyer. Born in Tondo, Manila December 4, 186 3. 
Obtained his Licentiate in Canon Law from the 
University of Santo Tomas. 1889; Licentiate in 
Jurisprudence in 1892. Appointed Director of 
Education. 1898. Member, Law Faculty. 
Universidad Cientifico-Literaria de Filipinas. Elected 
Delegate of Manila. Member. Committee to Draft 
the Constitution and Committe on Internal 
Regulations. 




ANTONIO FELICIANO 

Physician. Elected delegate of Pangasinan 



33 




FELIX FERRER PASCUAL 

Lawyer. Elected Delegate of Manila. Member, 
Committee on Internal Regulations. 




MELECIO FIGUISROA 

Engraver. Born in Arevalo, Iloilo on May 24, 
1842. Studied at the Escuela de Artes y Oficios 
and at Academia Superior de Bellas Artes de San 
Fernando in Madrid and other art centers in Italy. 
Winner of various competitions. Appointed 
Delegate of Iloilo. 




JOSE FLORENTINO FERNANDEZ 

Businessman. Born in San Miguel, Manila on 
March 14, 1871. Graduated Perito Mercantil from 
Ateneo de Manila in 1887. Appointed Delegate of 
Siasi. 



34 




X*X*!* 


v 


'•"•*•*•*•*•*•*•*•*•*•*•*•*•*•*•* 

X*X*X^iv*X *X*X 


»••*•••••••••••••• 

:-x : x : >:;X* 

:•:•:•:•:•>:•&• 










•••vX 








.v.*.*! 


Jfm. 


























?*x*x:x-x<#x- 


5X*X*X*X* 
§*X*X*X*X 


•Iv'v 


: : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 




[X-X^X-X; 


ijX'X 






































lillll 


: : : : : x : : : : : x* 



ARISTON GI-LLA 

Pharmacist. Born in Pandan. Antique on February 
22, 1869. Studied at the Colegio dc San Juan dc 
Letran; earned the title of Professor in 1886 and 
graduated in 1895 with the degree of Licentiate in 
Pharmacy in 1895. Elected representative of 
Antique. 




TEODORO GONZALES LEONO 

Lawyer. Born in Navotas, Morong (Rizal Province). 
September 11, 1865. Elected Delegate of Manila. 
Member, Committee on Internal Regulations. 




JOAQUIN GONZALES 

Physician. Born in Baliwag, Bulacan. July 22. 
1853. Obtained his Bachiller en Artes from the 
Colegio de San Juan de Letran in 1872 and studied 
Medicine at the Universidad de Valladolid and the 
Universidad Central de Madrid where he obtained 
the degree of Doctor of Medicine. First President 
of the Universidad Literaria-Cientifico de Filipinas. 
Elected Delegate of Pampanga; Member. Committee 
to Draft the Constitution; Committee on Style; 
Reception Committee and Committee on Internal 
Regulations. 



35 





LEON MA. GUERRERO 

2l^ff £°V" Ermita ' Mani,a on I an ^rv 

Arts at th/ l Af hed * C dCgree 0f Bachelor of 
a ?* 1 ° Ateneo de Manila in 1870 and 

a H degree of Bachelor of 

n i « 7 A p 6 d6gree of Lic entiate in Pharmacy 
n 1876 Became second President of the 

Univcrsidad Cicntifico-Literaria de Filipinas. 

Appointed Secretary of Public Works in 

the Pate ™o-Buencamino 
Cabmet on May 10. 1899. Appointed to represent 



HUGO I LAGAN 

Lawyer. Born in Indang. Cavite on April 8. 1844. 
Obtained his Bachiller en Leyes from the University 
of Santo Tomas in 18 70 and a Liccnciado en 
Derecho Civil in 1874. Appointed Secretary of 
the Treasury in the Paterno-Buencamino Cabinet 
on May 10. 1899. Elected delegate of Cavite. 




JOSE R. INFANTE 
Lawyer. Born in Guagua, Pampanga on November 
29, 1864. Completed Bachelor of Arts degree at 
the Ateneo de Manila in 1 880. Member, Committee 
on Message and Budget Committee Elected 
delegate of Pampanga. 



36 




BENITO LEGARDA 

Lawyer-Businessman. Born on September 27, 
1853. Graduated with Bachelor of Arts degree 
from the University of Santo Tomas in 1870; 
earned the degree of Bachiller en Derecho Civil in 
1875 and the degree of Licenciado en 
Jurisprudencia in 18 79. Appointed delegate 
representing Jolo. 




JOSE M. LERMA 

Farmer-Businessman. Born in Quiapo, Manila, 
April 3, 1858. Appointed Delegate representing 
Cotabato. Member, Committee on Message and 
Committee on Internal Regulations. 



CEFERINO DE LEON 
Lawyer. Born in San Miguel de Mayumo. 1859. 
Appointed Delegate representing Padre Burgos. 



37 




ANTONIO LUNA 

mEEKVI? Military 0fficer - Born in 

wifh 2! ' M ^ la ' ° ctober 29 ' 18& 8- Graduated 

ofSo if 1 • StU ^ Pha ™acy at the University 
fnH Th ° ^ ^ d 3t the U^ersity of Barcelona 
a ^Hp„ J niV ^ ldad Central de Madrid, earning 
™„S?V f D °. Ct0r of p «armacy. Appointed 

D^tnrnf W eral c 0f PhiU PP ine A ^ 

Director of War in September 1898 by Gen. Emilio 

Aguinaldo. Member. Faculty of Pharmacy 
Universidad Cientifico-LiterarVdeXlS 

flt^'p . m i tte ° n Messa 6 e - Commitee on 
Internal Regulations. Committee on Style and 
Committee to Draft the Constitution 




JUSTO LUKBAN 

Physician. Brother of Gen. Vicente Lukban. Born 
in Labo, Ambos Camarines (now part of 
Camarines Norte), May 28. 1863. Earned his 
Bachiller en Artes from the Colegio de San Juan 
de Letran in 1889; graduated with degree of 
Licentiate of Medicine from the University of Santo 
Tomas. 1888. Member, Medical Faculty. 
Universidad Cientifico-Literaria de Filipinas. Elected 
Delegate representing Ambos Camarines. 




JOAQUIN LUNA 

Businessman. Elder brother of Gen. Antonio 
Luna. Bom in Manila on December 11, 1864. 
Graduated with degree of Bachelor of Arts from 
the Ateneo de Manila in 1880. Elected Delegate 
of La Union. 



38 




■:.^,:^ V -: : ::X:S:---. 



JOSE LUNA 

Physician. Elder brother of Gen. Antonio Luna. 
Bora inTrozo, Manila, June 28, 1861. Graduated 
with degree of Bachelor of Arts from Ateneo de 
Manila in 1877 and Licentiate in Medicine from 
the University of Santo Tomas, 1884. Member, 
Medical Faculty, Universidad Cientifico-Literaria de 
Filipinas. Appointed Delegate representing Ilocos 
Norte. Member, Committee to Draft the 
Constitution. 




PABLO OCAMPO 

Lawyer. Born in Quiapo, Manila, January 25, 1853. 
Took his secondary schooling at the Colegio de 
San Juan de Letran and graduated with Licentiate 
in Jurisprudence from the University of Santo 
Tomas in 1882. Member, Law Faculty, Universidad 
Cientifico-Literaria de Filipinas. Appointed to 
represent Principe and Infanta. Member, Committee 
to Draft the Constitution. 




JOSE F. OLIVEROS 

Lawyer. Born in Antipolo, Morong (Rizai) on 
March 19, 1872. Graduated Bachelor of Arts. 
Colegio de San Juan de Letran, 1 894 and Licentiate 
in Law from the University of Santo Tomas. Elected 
Delegate of Morong. 



39 





TRINIDAD H. PARDO DE T A VERA 
Physician-Scholar. Born in Manila on April 13. 
1857. Studied at the Ateneo de Manila, the 
University of Santo Tomas and the Sorbonne 
University where he received the degree of Doctor 
of Medicine, Member, Medical Faculty. Universidad 
Cientiiico-Literaria de Filipinas. Appointed Delegate 
representing Cebu. Member. Committee on 
Felicitation, Committee on Internal Regulations. 
Reception Committee and Committee on Style. 



RICARDO PARAS, Sr. 

Educator. Born in Calapan, Mindoro on August 
12, 1861. Studied in Ateneo de Manila. Elected 
Delegate of Marinduque. 




BSIDRO PAREDES 

Lawyer. Obtained Law degree at the University of 
Santo Tomas. Elected Deleate of Abra. Member, 
Committee on Internal Regulations and Budget 
Committee. 



40 




PEDRO A. PATERNO 

Lawyer- writer. Born in Santa Cruz, Manila on February 
27, 1857. Obtained Bachelor of Arts degree at the 
Ateneo de Manila in 1871. Studied Philosophy. 
Theology and Law at the University of Salamanca, 
Spain and obtained the degree of Doctor of Laws at the 
Universidad Central de Madrid in 1880. Negotiator of 
the Pact of Biak-na-Bato. Elected Permanent Chairman 
of the Malolos Congress. Appointed Delegate 
representing Ilocos Norte. Appointed by President Emilio 
Aguinaldo as President of the Council of Ministers on 
May 9. 1898. 





VICENTE DEL PRADO 

Farmer. Born in San Jacinto, Pangasinan. 
Obtained Bachelor of Arts degree at the Ateneo 
de Manila. Elected Delegate of Pangasinan. 



PHO DEL IPMLAIRl CASTA^ITOA 
Military Officer. Born in Culi-Culi, Makati on July 
11,1 860. Appointed Delegate representing Negros 
Oriental. 



41 





AMBROSIO RIANZARES BAUTISTA 

Lawyer. Born in Biflan. Laguna. Took his Bachillcr 
en Lcvcs from the University of Santo To mas in 
1865. Political adviser of Gen. Aguinaldo. author 
and reader of the proclamation of Philippine 
Independence in Kawit. Cavitc on June 12. 1898. 
Also first to officially display the Philippine flag, 
during the occasion. Elected delegated of Bulacan. 



ESTEBAN DE LA RAMA 

Businessman. Born in Molo. Iloilo on December 
Z6, 1866. Studied in France 
of Iloilo. 



Appointed Delegate 





ARCAOHO DEL ROSAMO 
Lawyer. Born in Pandacan, Manila on November 
13, 1846. Studied at the Colegio Real de San Jose; 
obtained the degrees of Bachiller en Derecho 
Canonigo, 1871 and Bachiller en Derecho Civil, 
1875 from the University of Santo Tomas. Member, 
Law Faculty, Universidad Cientifico-Literaria de 
Filipinas. Appointed Delegate representing Baras. 

42 




MARIANO V. DEL ROSARIO 



Pharmacist-Journalist. Born in Manila in December 
1869. Took his Bachelor of Arts from the Colegio dc 
San Juan de Letran and obtained the degrees of Licentiate 
in Pharmacy in 1 890 from the University of Santo Tomas 
and Doctor of Pharmacy from the Univcrsidad Central 
dc Madrid. Spain in 1893. Member. Faculty of Pharmacy. 
Univcrsidad Cientinco-Literaria de Filipinas. Contributor 
to the newspapers La Rcpublica Filipinas and La 
Indcpendencia. Appointed Delegate representing 
Concepcion. 




MATEO DEL ROSARflO 
Born in Tarlac. Appointed delegate representing 
La Union. 




TOMAS G. DEL ROSARIO 

Lawyer. Born in Binondo. Manila in 18 59. 
Obtained his Bachiller en Artes from Atcneo 
Municipal de Manila in 1875 and his Licenciado 
en Derecho from the University of Santo Tomas 
in 1886. Appointed Delegate representing Surigao. 



43 




Phxm • IOSE SALAMANCA 

Cavite. Cavite. on 
'WacvtoLL his Li centiate in 

1888 Elec^H n , Umversit -V of Santo Tomas in 
Elected Delegate of Tarlac. 




TEODORO SANDIKO 

Educator and Lawyer. Born in Pandacan. Manila 
on March 31, 1860. Earned the title of Professor. 
1886 and Profesor de Latinidad from the University 
of Santo Tomas in 188 7. Studied law at the 
University but completed the degree at the 
Universidad Central de Madrid. Spain. Appointed 
Secretary of the Interior on January 2. 1899 in 
the Mabini Cabinet. Appointed Delegate 
representing Misamis. 




PABLO TECSON ROQUE 
Lawyer. Born in San Miguel de Mayumo, Bulacan 
on July 4. 1859. Appointed Delegate representing 
Cagayan. Member. Committee on Felicitation. He 
was one of the Secretaries of the Malolos Congress 
and it was his vote which broke the deadlock on 
the issue of the separation of Church and State. 



44 




ISIDORO TORRES 

Military Officer. Born in Malolos, Bulacan on 
April 1, 1866. Studied at the Colegio de San Juan 
de Letran and at the University of Santo Tomas 
where he graduated with the degree of Bachelor 
of Arts. Appointed Delegate representing Palaos 
Islands (Palau). 




AGUEDO VELARDE 

Lawyer. Born in Sta. Cruz. Manila on February 5, 
1857. Obtained Licentiates in Law and 
Jurisprudence from the University of Santo Tomas 
in 1855. Member, Law Faculty. Universidad 
Cientifico-Literaria de Filipinas. Appointed Delegate 
representing Albay. Member, Committee on 
Felicitation. 




IGNAOO VILLAMOR 

Lawyer. Born in Bangued. Abra on February 1, 
I860. Obtained Law degree from the University 
of Santo Tomas in 1893. Elected Delegate of 
Ilocos Sur. Member. Committee on Internal 
Regulations. 



45 





Physician M ; DE LA VINA 

23- 1856. SSSSSSfAt ^ ° n March 
Manila and obtained n . Ateneo Municipal de 
the University oTslnSom 16 * » 
1878. Appointed De eJrrenr 11 FebrUarv 25 ' 
Occidental. Member "Renting Negros 



MANUEL XEREX BURGOS 

Physician. Nephew of Fr. Jose Burgos. Obtained 
Bachelor of Arts degree from the Ateneo de Manila 
in 1872 and Licentiate in Medicine from the 
University of Santo Tomas. 



■ 



\ 



MIGUEL ZARAGOSA 

Artist-Art Critic. Born in 1849. Studied art at 
the Escuela de Dibujo y Pintura and later at the 
Academia de San Fernando in Madrid. Appointed 
Delegate representing Capiz. Member. Committee 
on Style. 



46 




47 



SEBASTIAN DE CASTRO 

Physician. Appointed Delegate of Pangasinan. 




SANTIAGO ICASIANO 

Physician. Appointed Delegate representing 
Balabac. 



48 



Members (signers) without photos 



1. SOFIO ALANDI 

(Alandy in E. Arnesio Manuel, Dictionary of 
Philippine Biography, Vol. 4, p. 35) 
Lawyer. Born in Tayabas, Tayabas (now 
Quezon Province). Obtained Titulo de 
Agrimensor y Perito Tasador de Tierras from 
University of Santo Tomas, 1884; Bachiller 
en Artes, Colegio de San Juan de Letran, 1887 
and Licentiate in Jurisprudence from the 
University of Santo Tomas, 1891. Elected 
delegate of Tayabas. Member, Committee on 
Message. 

2. RAYMUNDO ALINDADA 

Lawyer. Born in Bagabag, Nueva Viscaya. 
Studied in the Colegio de San Juan de Letran 
and at the University of Santo Tomas where 
he obtained the title of Perito Mecanico and 
Perito Agrimensor in 1888. Also graduated 
with title of Professor and the degree of 
Licentiate of Jurisprudence. Appointed to 
represent Isabel de Luzon (Isabela Province). 

3. MARCIAL CALLEJA 

Lawyer. Born in Malinao, Albay, on August 
22, 1863. Took his Segunda Ensenanza at 
the Seminario de Nueva Caceres; obtained the 
title of Perito Agrimensor from the University 
of Santo Tomas in 1885; completed his 
Licentiate in Jurisprudence in 1894 and 
Licentiate in Law in 1895 from the University 
of Santo Tomas. Elected Delegate of Albay. 

4. SEBASTIAN DE CASTRO 

Physician. Appointed Delegate of Pangasinan. 

5. GRACIANO CORDERO 

Educator. Born in Pagsanjan, Laguna. Took 
and graduated from the course Historia Grat 
y Particular de Apuna in 1870 and the course, 
Analim y Traduccion Latina. Studied medicine 
at the University of Santo Tomas. Elected 
Delegate of Laguna. 



6. VICENTE FOZ 

Lawyer. Born in Vigan, Ilocos Sur on 
September 20, 1834. Took his Bachiller en 
Artes from the Colegio de San Juan de Letran 
and Licentiate in Jurisprudence from the 
University of Santo Tomas in 1896. Member, 
Law Faculty, Universidad Cientifico-Literaria de 
Filipinas. Assistant to Alberto Barretto in the 
course on Roman Law. Appointed Delegate of 
Mindoro. 

7. MARTIN GARCIA 

Elected Representative of Ilocos Norte. 

8. MANUEL GOMEZ MARTINEZ 

Physician. Born in Santa Cruz, Manila on June 
27, 1859. Graduated Bachelor of Arts from 
Ateneo de Manila in 1875 and finished his 
medical course at the University of Santo 
Tomas in 1881. Professor of Medicine, 
Universidad Cientifico-Literaria de Filipinas. 
Appointed Delegate of Bataan, Member, 
Committee on Style. 

9. LUCAS GONZALES MANINANG 

Lawyer. Appointed to represent Romblon. 

10. JAVIER GONZALES SALVADOR 

Physician. Appointed Delegate representing 
Samar. 

11. VICENTE GUZMAN PAGULAYAN 

Lawyer. Obtained the degree of Bachiller en 
Leyes from the University of Santo Tomas in 
1865. Elected Delegate of Cagayan. 

12. NARCISO HIDALGO RESURRECCION 

Lawyer. Completed elementary and secondary 
education at the Ateneo de Manila. Obtained 
law degree in Madrid, Spain. Appointed Delegate 
representing Calamianes. 



49 



13. SOTERO LAUREL 

Lawyer. Born in Tanauan, Batangas on April 
22, 1849. Obtained Licentiate in Jurisprudence 
from the University of Santo Tomas. Appointed 
Delegate representing Bongao. 

14. MARIANO LOPEZ 

Lawyer. Born in Balayan, Batangas. Brother 
of Sixto Lopez, Filipino Diplomat and 
Propagandist and friend of Rizal. Elected 
Delegate representing Batangas. 

15. HIPOLITO B. MAGSALIN 

Lawyer. Born in Tondo, Manila. August 13, 
1850. Earned from the University of Santo 
Tomas the following titles and degrees: Titulo 
de Profesor de Latinidad in 1863; Bachiller en 
Teologia, 1865; Bacheller en Derecho 
Canonigo, 1868; Bachiller en Derecho 1871 
and Licenciadoen Derecho, 1872. Member, 
Law Faculty, Universidad Cientifico-Literaria de 
Filipinas. Appointed delegate representing Nueva 
Vizcaya. 

16. JUAN MANDAY GABRIEL 

Lawyer. Born in Iba, Zambales. Obtained from 
the University of Santo Tomas the following 
degrees: Bachiller en Filosofia, 1868; Derecho 
Canonigo, 1871; Bachiller en Derecho Civil, 
1872 and Licenciadoen Jurisprudencia in 
1882. Elected representative of Zambales in 
the Malolos Congress. Member, Law Faculty, 
Universidad Cientifico- Literaria de Filipinas! 
Member, Committee to Draft the Constitution. 

17. JUAN NEPOMUCENO 

Physician. Graduated Bachiller en Leyes in 1868 
and Doctor of Medicine from University of 
Santo Tomas, September 29, 1899. Elected 
Delegate of Tarlac. 

18. LORENZO DEL ROSARIO 

Businessman. Appointed Delegate reprensenting 
Malabang. 



19. SALVADOR V. DEL ROSARIO 

Physician. Born in 1864. Graduated 
Licenciado en Medicina from the University of 
Santo Tomas in 1886. Elected representative 
ofAlbay. 

20. SIMPLICIO DEL ROSARIO 

Lawyer. Obtained from the University of Santo 
Tomas the title of Titulo de Agrimensor y 
Tasadorde Tierras, 1885 and Licenciadoen 
Jurisprudencia in 1891. Appointed Delegate 
representing Leyte. 

21. DOMINGO SAMSON 

Lawyer. Appointed Delegate representing 
Paragua. 

22. JOSE SANTIAGO 

Businessman. Appointed Delegate representing 
Nueva Ecija. 

23. VICENTE SOMOZA 

Businessman. Born in Maragondon, Cavite. 
Appointed Delegate representing Mati. Member, 
Committee on Felicitation. 

24. BASILIO TEODORO 

Businessman. Publisher of Diariong Tagalog. 
Appointed Delegate Representing Tayabas. 
Member Committee to Draft the Constitution. 

25. JOSETUAZON 

Lawyer-Writer. Elected Delegate ofBataan. 

26. JUANTUAZON 

Businessman and art patron. Appointed 
Delegate representing Basilan. Member, 
Committee on Felicitation. 



50 



LA CONSTITUCION DE MALOLOS 

(Official Text) 



Nosotros los Representantes del Pueblo 
Filipino, convocados legitimamente para 
establecer la justicia, proveer a la defensa 
comun, promover el bien general y asegurar 
los beneficios de la libertad, implorando el 
auxlio del Soberano Legislador del Universo 
para alcanzar estos fines, hemos votado, 
decretado y sancionado la siguiente: 

CONSTITUCION POLITICA 

Titulo I. — De la Republica 

Articulo 1 
La asociacion politica de todos los 
filipinos constituye una Nacion, cuyo Estado 
se denomina Republica Filipina. 

Articulo 2 
La Republica Filipina es libre e 
independiente. 

Articulo 3 
La soberania reside exclusivain^nte en 
el pueblo. 

Titulo II. — Del Gobierno 

Articulo 4 

El Gobierno de la Republica es popular, 
representativo, alternative y responsable, y 
lo ejercen tres poderes distintos, que se 
denominan legislativo, ejecutivo y judicial. 

Nunca podran reunirse dos o mas de 
estos poderes en una persona o corporacion, 
ni depositarse el legislativo en un solo 
individuo. 

Tituio III. — De la Religion 

Articulo 5 
El Estado reconoce la libertad e iqualdad 
de todos los cultos, asi como la separacion 
de la Iglesia y del Estado. 

Titulo IV. — De Los Filipinos y sus 
Derechos 
Nacionales e Individuales 



Articulo 6 
Son Filipinos: 

1. Todas las personas nacidas en 
territorio filipino. Una embarcacion con 
pabellon filipino es considerada, para este 
efecto como parte del territorio filipino. 

2. Los hijos de padre o madre 
filipinos, aunque hayan nacido fuera de 
Filipinas. 

3. Los extranjeros que hayan obtenido 
carta de naturaleza. 

4. Los que, sin ella, hayan ganado 
vecindad en cualquier pueblo del territorio 

filipino. u 

Se entiende ganada la vecindad con la 
permanencia durante dos anos, sin 
interrupcion, en una localidad del territorio 
filipino, teniendo casa abierta y modo de vivir 
conocido y contribuyendo a todas las cargas 

de la Nacion. . 

La calidad de filipino se pierde con 

arreglo a las leyes. 

Articulo 7 
Ningun filipino ni extranjero podra ser 
detenido ni preso, sino por causa de delito y 
con arreglo a las leyes. 

Articulo 8 

Todo detenido sera puesto en libertad o 
entregado a la autoridad judicial dentro de 
las veinticuatro horas siguientes al acto de 
la detencion. . 

Toda detencion se dejara sin efecto o se 
elevara a prision dentro de las setenta y dos 
horas de haber sido entregado el detenido al 
Juez competente. 

La providencia que se dictare se 
notificara al interesado dentro del mismo 
plazo. 

Articulo 9 

Ningun filipino podra ser preso sino en 
virtud de mandamiento de Juez competente. 

El auto por el cual se haya dictado el 
mandamiento se ratificara o repondra, oido 
el presunto reo, dentro de las setenta y dos 
horas siguientes al acto de la prision. 



51 



LACONSTITUCION... 

Articulo 10 

Nadie puede entrar en el domicilio de 
un filipino o extranjero residente en Filipinas 
sin su consentimiento, excepto en los casos 
urgentes de incendio, inundacion, terremoto 
u otro peligro analogo o de agresion ilegitima 
precedente de adenedo, o para auxiliar a per- 
sona que desde alii pida socorro. 

Fuera de estos casoa, la entrada en 
domicilio de un filipino o extranjero residente 
en Filipinas, y el registro de sus papeles o 
efectos, solo podran decretarse por Juez 
competente y ejecutarse de dia. 

El registro de papeles y efectos se 
verificara siempre a presencia del interesado 
o de un individuo de su familia y, en su 
defecto, de dos testigos vecinos del mismo 
pueblo. 

Sl , n embargo, cuando un delincuente 
hallado in fraganti y perseguido por la 
autoridad con sus agentes se refugiare en 
su domicilio, podran estos penetrar en el, 
solo para el acto de la aprehension. 

Si se refugiare en domicilio ageno, 
precedera requerimiento al dueno de este. 

Articulo 11 
^"f 1 ! ffli Pino podra ser compelido a 
Z^uSa domicilio 0 de residencia, sino en 
virtud de sentencia ejecutoria. 

E Articulo 12 

abHr 11 mngun caso Podra detenerse ni 
corrl P °I la aut °ridad gubernativa la 
tamnn , 8ncia confiada al correo, ni 

poco detene rse la telegrafica o telefonica. 



en virtud de auto de Juez 



comrjpt f Ti * u ^u ue auto ae juez 
corral V P0dra detenerse cualquiera 
nreLnT 1 !, ? nCia y tambien abrirse en 
eUo^lT PrOCe8ad o la que se dirija por 

Articulo 13 

m nr«H J*"] 0 de pri8ion > d e registro de 
morada o de detencion de la correspondencia 
escrita telegrafica o telefonica, sera 
motivado. 

Cuando el auto carezca de este requisito, 
o cuando los motivos en que se haya fundado 
se declaren, en juicio, ilegitimos o 
notonamente ineuficientes, la persona que 
hubiere sido preea, o cuya prision no se 
hubiere ratificado dentro del plazo senalado 
en el articulo 9, o cuyo domicilio hubiere eido 



allanado, o cuya correspondencia hubiere 
sido detenida, tendra derecho areclamar las 
responsabilidades consiguientes. 

Articulo 14 
Ningun filipino podra ser procesado ni 
sentenciado, sino por el Juez, o Tribunal a 
quien, en virtud de leyes anteriores al delito 
completa su conocimiento y en la forma que 
estas prescriban. 

Articulo 15 
Toda persona detenida o presa sin las 
formalidades legales, fuera de los casos 
previstos en esta Constitucion, sera puesta 
en libertad a peticion suya o de cualqiuer 
filipino. 

Las leyes determinaran la forma de 
proceder sumariamente en este caso, como 
las penas personales y pecuniarias en que 
haya de incurrir el que ordenare, ejecutare 
o hiciere ejecutar la detencion o prisio ilegal. 

Articulo 16 

Nadie podra ser privado temporal o 
perpetuamente de sus bienes y derechos, ni 
turbado en la posesion de ellos, sino en virtud 
de sentencia judicial. 

Los funcionarios que, bajo cualquier 
pretexto, infrinjan esta prescripcion, seran 
personalmente responsables del dano 
causado. 

Articulo 17 
Nadie podra ser expropiado de sus bienes, 
sino por causa de necesidad y utilidad comun, 
previamente justificadas y declaradas por la 
autoridad correspondiente, media nte 
indemnizacion al propietario, con 
anticipacion a la expropiacion. 

Articulo 18 
Nadie esta obligado a pagar contribucion 
que no haya sido votada por la Asamblea o 
por las Corporaciones populares legalmente 
autorizadas para imponerla y cuya exaccion 
no se haga en la forma prescrita por la ley. 

Articulo 19 
Nig nun filipino que se halle en el pleno 
goce de sus derechos civiles y politicoe, podra 
ser impedido en el libre ejercicio de los 
mismos. 

Articulo 20 
Tamposo podra ser privado ningun 



52 



filipino: 

1. Del derecho de emitir libremente sub 
ideas y opiniones ya de palabra, ya por 
escrito, valiendose de la imprenta o de otro 
procedimiento semejante, 

2. Del derecho de asociarse para todos 
los fines de la vida humana que no sean 
contrarios a la moral publica; y por ultimo; 

3. Del derecho de dirigir peticiones, in- 
dividual o colectivamente, a los poderes 
publicos y a las autoridades. 

El derecho de peticion no podra ejercerse 
por ninguna clase de fuerza armada. 

Arituclo 21 
El ejerciciode los derechos expresados 
en el articulo anterior, estara sujeto a las 
disposiciones generales que los regulen. 

Articulo 22 
Los delitos que se cometan con ocasion 
del ejercicio de los derechos consignados en 
este titulo, seran penados por los tribunales 
con arreglo a las leyes comunes. 

Articulo 23 

Todo filipino podra fundar y mantener 
establecimientos de instruccion o de 
educacion, con arreglo a las prescripciones 
que se establezcan. 

La enseiianza popular sera obligatoria 
y gratuita en las Escuelas de la Nacion. 

Articulo 24 
Todo extranjero podra establecerse 
libremente en territorio filipino, con sujeccion 
a las disposiciones que regulen la materia; 
ejercer en el su industria, o dedicarse a 
cualquiera profesion para cuyo desempeno 
no exijan las leyes titulos de aptitud 
expedidos por las autoridades nacionales. 

Articulo 25 
A ningun filipino que este en el pleno 
goce de sus derechos politicos y civiles, podra 
impedirse salir libremente del territorio, ni 
trasladar su residencia y haberes a pais 
extranjero, salvas las obligaciones de 
contribuir al servicio militar y al 
mantenimiento de las cargas publicas. 

Articulo 26 
El extranjero que no estuviere 
naturalizado, no podra ejercer en filipinas 
cargo alguno que tenga aneja autoridad o 
jurisdiccion. 



Articulo 27 
Todo filipino esta obligado a defender la 
Patria con las armas, cuando sea llamado 
por la ley, y a contribuir a los gaetos del 
Estado en proporcio a sus haberes. 

Articulo 28 
La enumeracion de los derechos 
consignados en este titulo no implica la 
prohibicion de cualquiera otro no 
consagrado expresamente. 

Articulo 29 

Noseranecesarialaprevia autorizacion 
para procesar ante los tribunales ordinaries 
a los funcionarios publicos, cualquiera que 
sea el delito que cometieren. 

El mandate superior no eximira de 
responsabihdad en los casos de infraccion 
manifiesta, clara y terminante de una 
prescipcion constitucional. En los demas, 
solo eximira a los agentes que no ejerzan 
autoridad. 

Articulo 30 

Las garantias consignadas en los 
articulos 7.0, 8.o 9.0 10 y 11, y parrafbe Lo y 
2.o del 20 no podran suspenderse en toda la 
Republica ni en parte de ella, sino 
temporalmente, y por medio de una ley, 
cuando lo exija la seguridad del Estado en 
circunstancias extraordinanas. 

Promulgada aquella en el territorio a que 
se aplicare, regira durante la suspension de 
una ley especial, segun las circunstancias 

lo exijan. „ 

Tanto esta como aquella seran votadas 
en la Asamblea Nacional, y en el caso de 
que estuviese cerrada, el Gobierno queda 
facultado para dictarla, de acuerdo con la 
Comision permanente, sin perjuicio de 
convocar a aquella a la mayor brevedad y 
dar cuenta de lo que hubiera hecho. 

Pero ni en una ni en otra ley se podran 
suspender mas garantias que las 
consagradas en el primer parrafo de este 
articulo ni autorizar al Gobierno para 
extranar del pais ni deportar a ningun 
filipino. 

En ningun caso los Jefes militares o 
civiles podran establecer otra penalidad que 
la prescrita previamente por la ley. 



(PI— 9% turn to next pmg%) 



53 



LA CONSTITUCION... 

Articulo 31 
En la Republica Filipina nadie puede ser 
juzgado por leyes privativas ni por tribunales 
especiales. Ninguna persona ni corporation 
puede tener fueros ni gozar emulomentoa que 
no sean compensation de un servicio pub- 
lico y esten fijados por la ley. 
Subsiste el fuero de guerra y marina 
solamente para los delitos y faltas que tengan 
conexion intima con la disciplina militar y 
maritima. 

Articulo 32 
Ningun filipinopodra establecer 
mayorazgos, ni instituciones vinculadoras 
de la propiedad, ni aceptar honores, 
condecoraciones o titulos honorificos y de 
nobleza de las naciones extranjeras sin 
autonzacion del Gobierno. 

Tampoco podra establecer el Gobierno 
6 ™ ^Publica las instituciones senaladas 

con?/ 3 ant6ri0r ' m otor g ar honores, 
condecoraciones o titulos honorificos y de 
nobleza a ningun filipino. 

una L^ i0n - f in embarg0 > P^miara por 
los serv PeClal V ° tada P° r la Asamblea, 

Titulo IV - Del Poder Legislative 

„ Articulo 33 

Asambfea J if**" 86 ejercera * or una 
a de ^Presentantes de la Nacion. 

^1*^ en la 

j Articulo 34 

reprerentran'a'tod" 6 , U J™** 1 ** 
esclusivamen?e a l oa !, * NaCi ° n n ° 
nombraron. 8 elector «a que les 

XT . Articulo 35 

Articulo 36 
La Asamblea se reunira todos los anos 
Corresponde al Presidente de la Republica 
oonvocarla, suspender y cerrar sus sesiones 



y disolveria, de acuerdo con la misma o conla 
Comision permanente, en su defecto, y dentro 
de los plazos legales. 

Articulo 37 

La Asamblea estara abierta al menos 
tres meses cada ano, sin incluir en este 
tiempo el que se invierta en su constitucion. 

El Presidente de la Republica la 
convocara, a mas tardar, para el dia 15 de 
Abril. 

Articulo 38 
En caso extraordinario, podra 
convocarla, fuera del periodo legal,de acuerdo 
con la Comision permanente, y prolongar la 
legislatura, siempre que el plazo no exceda 
de un mes, ni se verifique unas de dos veces 
en la misma legislatura. 

Articulo 39 

La Asamblea Nacional,en union de los 
Representantes extraordinarios, formula las 
Constituyentes para proceder a la reforma 
de la Constitucion y a la eleccion del nuevo 
Presidente de la Republica, convocadas con 
un mes, por lo menos, de anticipaciona la 
terminacion de los poderes de aquel. 

En caso de muerte o de dimision del 
Presidente de la Republica,la Asamblea se 
reunira en seguida por derecho propio ya 
iniciativa de su Presidente, o de la Comision 
permanente. 

Articulo 40 
Interin se procede al nombramiento de 
nuevo Presidente de la Republica, ejercera 
sus funciones el Presidente de la Corte 
Suprema de Justicia, que sera sustituido por 
uno de los miembros de este Tribunal, con 
arreglo a las leyes. 

Articulo 41 
Cualquiera reunion de la Asamblea que 
se verifique fuera del periodo de legislatura 
ordinaria sera ilicita y nula. Exceptuanse 
el caso previsto por el articulo 39, y el en 
que la Asamblea se constituya en Tribunal 
de Justicia,no pudiendo ejercer en este ul- 
timo caso otras funciones que las judiciales. 

Articulo 42 
Las sesiones de la Asamblea seran 
publicas. Sin embargo, podran ser secretas 
a peticionde cierto numerode sus individuos, 
fijado por el Reglamento, decidiendose 



54 



despues por mayoria absoluta de votos de 
los miembros presentee si la discusion sobre 
el mi8mo objeto ha de continuar en publico. 

Articulo 43 

El Presidente de la Republica se 
comunicara con la Asamblea por medio de 
mensajes,que seran leidos en la tribuna por 
un Secretario del Gobierno. 

Los Secretarios de 

Gobiernotendranentrada enla Asamblea con 
drecho a que se les conceda la palabra, 
siempre que la pidan, y podran hacerse 
representar en la discusion de un proyecto 
determinado por comisionados designados por 
decreto del Presidentede la Republica. 

Articulo 44 

Podra constituirse la Asamblea en Tri- 
bunal de Justicia para juzgar los delitos 
cometidos contra la seguridad del Estado por 
el Presidente de la Republica, e individuos 
del Consejo de Gobierno, por el Presidente 
de la Corte Suprema de Justicia, y por el 
Procurador General de la Nacion, por medio 
de un decreto de la misma o de la Comision 
permanente en su defecto, o del Presidente 
de la Republica, a propuesta del Procurador 
General o del Consejo de Gobierno. 

Las leyes determinaran el modo de 
proceder para la acusacion, instruccion y 
remision. 

Articulo 45 
Ningun miembro de la Asamblea podra 
ser perseguido ni molestado por las opiniones 
que esprese, ni por los votos que emita en el 
ejercicio de su cargo. 

Articulo 46 

Ningun individuo de la Asamblea podra 
ser procesado en materia criminal sin 
autorizacion de la misma o de la Comision 
permanente, a la que se dara cuenta 
inmediatamente del hecho, para la 
resolucion que proceda. 

La prision, detencion o aprehension de 
un miembro de la Asamblea no podra llevarse 
a cabo, sin previa autorizacion de la misma 
o de la Comision permanente. Pero una vez 
notificada la Asamblea el auto de prision 
incurrira en responsabilidad si, dentro de 
dos dias siguientes a la notificacion, no 
autorizare la prision o manifestre los motivos 
en que se funde su negativala. 



Articulo 47 
La Asamblea Nacional tendra, ademas, 
las facultades siguientes: 

1. a Formar el Reglamento para su 
gobierno interior. 

2. a Examinar la legalidad de las 
elecciones y la aptitud legal de los individuos 
eligidos. 

3. a Nombraral constituirse su 
Presidente, Vice-Presidente y Secretarios. 

Mientras la Asamblea no sea disuelta,su 
Presidente, Vice-Presidentes y Secretarios 
continuaran ejerciendo sus cargos durante 
las cuatro legislaturas; y 

4. a Admitir las dimisiones presentadas 
por sus individuos y concedaer las licencias 
con sujecion al Reglamento. 

Articulo 48 

Ningun proyecto podra el llegar a ser 
ley sin que antes sea votado en la Asamblea. 

Para votar las leyes se requiere la 
presencia en la Asamblea de la cuarta parte, 
cuando menos del numero total de 
individuous que tengan aprobadas sus actas 
y hayan prestado juramento. 

Articulo 49 
Ningun proyecto de ley puede aprobarse 
por la Asamblea sino despues de haber sido 
votado en su totalidad y despues articulo por 
articulo. 

Articulo 50 
La Asamblea tiene el derecho de censura 
y cada unodesus individuos el ae 
interpelacion. 

Articulo 51 
La iniciativa de las leyes correspond al 
Presidente de la Republica y a la Asamblea. 

Articulo 52 

El Representante de la Asamblea que 
acepte del Gobierno pension, empleo o 
comision con sueldo, se entendera que 
renuncia a su cargo. 

Exceptuanse de esta disposicion el 
empleo de Secretario de Gobierno de la Re- 
publica, y otros cargos senalados en leyes 
especiales. 

Articulo 53 
El cargo de Representante dura cuatro 
anos, y tienen derecho los que lo ejerzan, 

(Please turn to next page) 



55 



LA CONSTITUCION... 

por via de indemnizacion, a una suma 
determinada por la ley, con arreglo a las 
circunstancias. 

No tienen derecho a esta indemnizacion 
lo8 que se ausenten durante toda la 
legislatura; pero recobran el derechosi 
asisten a las siguientes. 

Titulo VI — De la Comision Permanente 

Articulo 54 
La Asamblea, antes de cerrar sus 
sesiones, elegira siete de sus miembros para 
que formenla Comision permanente durante 
el periodo en que este cerrada, debiendo esta, 
en su primera sesion,designar Presidente y 
Secretario. 

Articulo 55 
Son atribuciones de la Comision 
permanente, en defecto de la Asamblea: 

1. a Declarar si ha o no lugar a formacion 
de causa contra el Presidente de la Repub- 
lica, los Representantes, Secretarios de 
Gobierno, Presidente de la Corte Suprema 
de Justicia yProcurador General en los casos 
previstos por esta Constitucion. 

2. a Convocar a la Asamblea a una re- 
union extraordinaria en los casos en que deba 
constituirse en Tribunal de Justicia. 

3. a Dar tramite a los negocios que 
nubieren quedado pendientes para que 
Puedan tomarse en consideracion. 

4. a Convocar a la Asamblea a las 
sesiones extraordinarias, cuando la exigencia 
del caso lademande; y 

5. a Suplir a la Asamblea en sus 
tacultades con arreglo a la Constitucion, 
excepcion hecha de la facultad de hacer y 
votar las leyes. 

La Comision permanente se reunira 
siempre que fuere convocada por el que la 
presida, con arreglo a esta Constitucion. 

Titulo VII - Del Poder Ejecutivo 

Articulo 56 
El poder ejecutivo residera en el 
Presidente de la Republica, que lo ejerce por 
medio de sus Secretarios. 

Articulo 57 
La gestion de los intereses peculiares de 
los pueblos, de las provincias y del Estado 



corresponde, respectivamente, a las 
Asambleas populares, a las Asambleas 
provinciates y a la Administracion activa, 
con arreglo a las leyes, y sobre la base de la 
mas amplia descentralizacion y autonomia 
administrativa. 

Titulo VIII — Del Presidente de la Repub- 
lica 

Articulo 58 

El Presidente de la Republica sera 
elegido, por mayoria absoluta de votos, por 
la Asamblea y los Representantes especiales 
reunidos en Camara constituyente. 

Su nombramiento sera por cuatro afios, 
y sera re-elegible. 

Articulo 59 
El Presidente de la Republica tendra la 
iniciativa de las leyes, asi como los miembros 
de la Asamblea, y promulgara las leyes 
cuando hayan sido votadas y aprobadas por 
esta, y vigilara y asegurara su ejecucion. 

Articulo 60 
La potestad de hacer ejecutar las leyes 
se etxiende a todo cuanto conduce a la 
conservacion del orden publico en el interior, 
y a la seguridad del Estados en el exterior. 

Articulo 61 
El Presidente de la Republica 
promulgara las leyes dentro de los veinte dias 
siguientes al en que le haya sido trasmitida 
por la Asamblea la aprobacion definitiva. 

Articulo 62 

Si dentro de este plazo de fueren 
promulgadas, el Presidente las devolvera a 
la Asamblea con justificacion de las causas 
de su detencion, procediendose en tal caso a 
su revision; y no se entendera que insiste en 
ellas si no las reproduce por el voto de las 
dos terceras partes de los miembros 
presentes de la Asamblea. Reproducida la 
ley en la forma indicada, el Gobierno la 
promulgara dentro de diez dias, haciendo 
constar su no conformidad. 

A lo mismo quedara obligado el Gobierno 
si dejare pasar el plazo de veinte dias sin 
devolver la ley a la Asamblea. 

Articulo 63 
Cuando la promulgacion de una ley haya 
sido declarada urgente por votacion expresa, 



56 



o mayoria absoluta de votos de la Asamblea, 
el Presidente de la Republica podra pedir a 
aquella por un mensaje motivado una nueva 
deliberacion, la cual no podra ser negada, y 
aprobada de nuevo la misma ley, sera 
promulgada dentro del plazo legal, sin 
perjuicio de que el Presidente queda hacer 
constar su no conformidad. 

Articulo 64 
La promulgacion de las leyes se ver 
tificara mediante su publicacion en el 
periodico oficial de la Republica, y tienen 
fuerza de obligar a los treinta dias siguientes 
al de la publicacion. 

Articulo 65 
El Presidente de la Republica dispone 
de las fuerzas de mar y tierra, declara la 
guerra y hace y ratifica la paz, previo acuerdo 
de la Asamblea. 

Articulo 66 
Los tratados de paz no seran definitivos 
sino despues de votados por la Asamblea. 

Articulo 67 
Ademas de las facultades necesarias para 
la ejecucion de las leyes, corresponde al 
Presidente de la Republica: 

1. Conferir los empleos civiles y 
militares con arreglo a las leyes. 

2. Nombrar los Secretarios de Gobierno. 

3. Dirigir las relaciones diplomaticas y 
comerciales con las demas Potencias. 

4. Cuidar de que en todo el territorio se 
administre pronta y cumplida justicia. 

5. Indultar a los delincuentes con arreglo 
a las leyes, salvo lo dispuesto relativamente 
los Secretarios de Gobierno. 

6. Presidier las solemnidades 
nacionalese, y recibir a los enviados y 
representantes de las Potencias extranjeras, 
acreditados cerca de el. 

Articulo 68 
El Presidente de la Republica necesita 
estar autorizado por una ley especial: 

1. Para enajenar, ceder o permutar 
cualquiera parte de territorio filipino. 

2. Para incorporar cualquier otro 
territorio al filipino. 

3. Para admitir tropas extranjeras en 
el territorio filipino. 

4. Para ratificar los tratados de alianza 
ofensiva y defensiva, los especiales de 



comercio, los que estipulen dar subsidios a 
una Potencia^extranjera, y todos aqueUos 
quedan obligar individualmente a los 
filipinos. 

En ningun caso los articulos secretos de 
un tratado podran derogar los publicos. 

5. Para conceder amnistias e indultos 
generates. 

6. Para acufiar moneda. 

Articulo 69 
Al Presidente de la Republica 
corresponde la facultad de dictar 
Reglamentos para el cumplimiento y 
aplicacion de las leyes , previos los requisitos 
que las mismas senalen. 

Articulo 70 

El Presidente de la Republica podra, 
previo acuerdo adoptado por mayona de votos 
de Representantes, disolver la Asamblea 
antes de la expiracion del plazo legal de su 
mandato. s 

En este caso, se convocaran para nueva 
elecciones dentro del termino de tres meses. 

Articulo 71 
El Presidente de la Republica solo sera 
responsable en los casos de alta traicion. 

Articulo 72 • 
La dotacion del Presidente de la Repub- 
lica sera fijada por una ley especial, 
podra variarse sino al fin del p 
presidencial. 

Titulo IX.-De los Secretarios de 
Gobierno 

Articulo 73 , 

El Consejo de Govierno se compone ae 
un Presidente y siete Secretaries, que 
tendran ; su cargo las carteras de: 

Negocios Extranjeros, 

Interior, 

Hacienda, 

Guerra y Marina, 

Instruccion Publica, 

Comunicaciones y Obras Publicas, y 

Agricultura, Industria y Comercio. 

Articulo 74 
Todo lo que el Presidente de la Repub- 
lica mandare o dispusiere en el ejercicio de 
su autoridad, sera firmado por el Secretario 

(Pleas* turn to next page) 



57 



LA CONSTITUCION... 

a quien corresponda. Ningun funcionario 
publico dara cumplimiento a lo que carezca 
de este requisite 

Articulo 75 

Los Secretarios de Govierno son 
responsable solidariamente ante la Asamblea 
de la politica general del Gobierno, e 
individualmente de sus actos personales. 

Al Procurador General de la Nacion 
coresponde acusarlos, y a la Asamblea juzga 
rlos. 

Las leyes determinarian los casos de 
responsalidad de los Secretarios de Gobierno, 
las penas a que estan sujetos y el modo de 
proceder contra ellos. 

Articulo 76 
Para el indulto de estos, si fueren 
condenados por la Asamblea, ha de preceder 
peticion de la mayoria absoluta de 
Representantes. 

Titulo X. — Del Poder Judicial 

Articulo 77 

A los tribunales corresponde 
exclusivamente la potestad de aplicar las 
leyes, a nombre de la Nacion, en los juicios 
civiles y criminales. 

Unos mismos codigos regiran en toda la 
Kepublica, sin perjuicio de las variaciones 
que por particulares circunstancias 
determmen las leyes 

Articulo 78 

T^ 08 t f ribunales no aplicarian los 
Reglamentos generates y municipale, sino 
en cuento esten conformes con las leyes. 

Articulo 79 
En ellos no se establecera mas que un solo 
fuero para todos los ciudadanos en los juicios 
comunes, civiles, y criminales 

Su composicion,organizacionydemas 
atnbuciones se regiran por las leyes 
organicas que se determinen. 

Articulo 80 
El Presidente de la Corte Suprema de 
Justicia y El Procurador General seran 
nombrados por la Asamblea Nacional en 
concurrencia con el Presidente de la Repub- 
lica y Secretarios de Gobierno, y tendra 



absoluta independencia de los poderes 
legislativo y ejecutivo. 

Articulo 81 
Todo ciudadano podra entablar accion 
publica contra los individuos todos del Poder 
judicial por los delitos que cometieren en el 
ejercicio de su cargo. 

Titulo XI. - De las Asambleas Provinciales 
y Populares 

Articulo 82 

La organizacion y atribuciones de las 
asembleas provinciales y populares se 
regiran por sus respectivas leyes. 

Estas se ajustaran a los principios 
siguientes: 

1. Gobierno y direccion de los intereses 
peculiares de la provincia o del pueblo por 
las respectivas corporaciones,siendo el 
principio de eleccion popular y directa el 
fundamento para la constitucion de las 
mismas. 

2. Publicidad de las sesiones de unas y 
otras, dentro de los limites senalados por la 
ley. 

3. Publicacion de los presupuestos, 
cuentas y acuerdos importantes de las 
mismas. 

4. Intervencion del Gobierno y, en su 
caso, de la Asamblea Nacional para impedir 
que las provincias y los municipios se 
extralimiten en sus atribuciones en 
perjuicio de los intereses generates e 
individuales. 

5. Determinacion de sus facultades en 
materia de impuestos, a fin de que los 
provinciales y municipales no se hallen 
nunca en oposicion con el sistema tributario 
del Estado. 

Titulo XII. — De la Administracion del 
Estado 

Articulo 83 

El Gobierno presentara todos los afios a 
la Asamblea los presupuestos de gastos y de 
ingresos, expresando las alteraciones que 
haya hecho en lo del ano anterior, 
acompafiando al mismo tiempo un balance 
del ultimo ejercicio con arreglo a la ley. 

Cuando la Asamblea se reuna, los 
presupuestos habran de presentarse a la 
misma dentro de los diez dias siguientes a 
su reunion. 



58 



Articulo 84 
Ningun pago podria hacerse sino con 
arreglo a la ley de presupuestos \i otra espe- 
cial, en la forma y bajo la responsabilidad 
que las leyes determinen. 

Articulo 85 
El Gobierno necesita estar autorizado 
por una ley para disponer de los bienes y 
propiedades del Estado, y para tomar 
caudales a prestamo sobre el credito de la 
Nacion. 

Articulo 86 

La deuda publica que se contraiga por 
el Gobierno de la Republica, con arreglo a 
esta Constitucion, estara bajo la salvaguardia 
especial de la Nacion. 

No se hara ningun emprestito sin que 
se voten al mismo tiempo los recursos 
necesarios para pagarlo. 

Articulo 87 
Todas las leyes referentes a ingresos, 
gastos publicos o credito publico se 
consideraran como parte de las de 
presupuestos, y se publicaran con este 
caracter. 

Articulo 88 
La Asamblea fijara todos los aiios, a 
propuesto del Presidente de la Republica, las 
fuerzas militares de mar y tierra. 

Titulo XIII. — De la Reforma de la 
Constitucion 

Articulo 89 
La Asamblea, por si o a propuesta del 
Presidente de la Republica, podra acordar la 
reforma de la Constitucion sefialando al 
efecto el articulo o articulos que hayan de 
modificarse. 

Articulo 90 
Hecha esta declaracion, el Presidente de 
la Republica disolvera la Asamblea, y 
convocara la constituyente, que se reunira 
dentro de los tres meses siguientes. En la 
convocatoria se insertara la resolution de que 
hable el articulo anterior. 

Titulo IX. — De la Observancia y 
Juramento Constitucional y de los Idiomas 



Articulo 91 
El Presidente de la Republica, el 
Gobierno, la Asamblea y todos los ciudadanos 
filipinos guardaran fielmente la 
Constitucion; y el poder legislativo 
inmediatamente despues de aprobar la ley 
de presupuestos, examinara si la 
Constitucion ha sido exactamente observada 
y si sus infracciones estan corregidas, 
proveyendo lo conveniente para que se haga 
efectiva la responsabilidad de los infractores. 

Articulo 92 

El Presidente de la Republica y todos los 
demas funcionarios de la Nacion no podran 
entrar en el ejercicio de sus funciones sin 
prestar juramento. 

Este juramento se prestara por el 
Presidente de la Republica ante la Asamblea 
Nacional. 

Los demas funcionarios de la Nacion lo 
prestaran ante las autoridades que 
determinen las leyes. 

Articulo 93 

El empleo de las lenguas usadas en 
Filipinases potestative. No puede regularse 
sino por ley, y solamente para los actos de 
la autoridad publica y los asuntos judiciales. 
Para estos actos se usara por ahora la lengua 
castellana. 

DISPOSICIONES TRANSITORIAS 

Articulo 94 
Interin y sin perjuicio de lo dispuesto 
en el articulo 48 y las comisiones que nombre 
la Asamblea para que redacten y sometan a 
la misma las leyes organicas para el 
desenvolvimiento y aplicacion de los derechos 
otorgados a los ciudadanos filipinos y para 
el regimen de los poderes publicos en el a 
determinados, se consideraran leyes de la 
Republica las que se hallaban vigentes en 
estas Islas antesde la emancipacion de las 
mismas. 

Igualmente se consideran vigentes las 
disposiciones del Codigo Civil respecto al 
matrimonio y registro civil, suspendidas por 
el Gobierno General de estas Islas; la 
Instruccion de 26 de abril de 1888 para llevar 
a ejecucion los articulos 77,78, 79, y 82 de 
dicho Codigo; la Ley del Registro Civil de 17 
de Junio de 1870 a que se refiere el articulo 

(Please turn to next page) 



59 



LACONSTITUCION... 

332 del mismo, .y el Reglamento de 13 de 
Diciembre siguiente para la ejecucion de esta 
Ley, sin perjuicic de que los Jefe locales 
continuen encargados de las inscripciones 
en el Registro Civil e intervengan en la 
celebracion del matrimonio de los catolicos. 

Articulo 95 
Mientras no esten aprobadas y rijan las 
leyes a que se refiere al articulo anterior 
podran modificarse por alguna ley especial 
las disposiciones de las leyes espafioles que 
dicho articulo pone en vigor 
provisionalmente. 

Articulo 96 
Promulgadas las leyes que la Asamblea 
apruebe con arreglo al articulo 9, el Gobierno 
de la Republica queda facultado para dictar 
los decretos y Reglamentos necesarios para 
la inmediata constitucion de todos los 
organismos del Estado. 

Articulo 97 
El actual Presidente del Gobierno 
Revolucionario tomara desde luego el titulo 
de Presidente de la Republica, y ejercera este 
cargo hasta que, una ves convocada la 
Asamblea constituyente, proceda a la 
eleccion del que ha de ejercer el cargo 
definitivamente. 

Articulo 98 
Este Congreso, con los miembros que lo 
componen y vayan veniendo por sufragio o 
por decreto, durara cuatro afios, o sea, toda 
la presente legislatura,empezando esta el 
15 del Abril proximo ve nidero. 

Articulo 99 
No obstante la regla general establecida 
en el parrafo 2.o del articulo 4.o interen tenga 
el pais que luchar por su independencia, 
queda facultado el Gobierno para resolver 
durante la clausura del Congresolas 
cuestiones y dificultades no previstas por las 
leyes, que susciten acontecimiento 



imprevitos, mediante decretos de que dara 
conocimiento a la Comision permanente y 
cuenta a la Asamblea, en la primera reunion 
que se celebre conarreglo a los preceptors de 
esta Constitucion. 

Articulo 100 

Se suspende hasta la reunion de la 
Asamblea constituyente la ejecucion del Ar- 
ticulo 5.o titulo 3.o. 

Entretanto los municipios de los pueb- 
los que requieran el ministerio espiritual de 
algun sacerdote filipino, proveeran a la 
manutencion necesaria del mismo. 

Articulo 101 

No obstante lo dispuesto en los articulos 
62 y 63, las leyes devueltas por el Presidente 
de la Republica al Congreso, no podran 
reproucirse sino en la legislatura del ario 
siguientes, quedando esta suspension bajo 
la responsibilidad del Presidente y su Consejo 
de Gobierno. Hecha la reproduccion en estas 
condiciones, sera obligatoria su 
promulgacion dentro de diez dias, haciendo 
constar el Presidente su no conformidad. 

Si la reproduccion se hiciere en 
legislaturas ulteriores se tendra como ley 
votada por primera vez. 



ARTICULO ADICIONAL 
Se entienden restituidos al Estado 
filipino, desde el dia Mayo ultimo que se ha 
constituido el Gobierno Dictatorial en Cavite 
todas las haciendas, edificios y demas bienes 
que tenian las corporaciones religiosas en 
estas Islas. 

Barasoain, veinte de Enero de mil ocho- 
cientos noventa y nueve. 

El Presidente del Congreso. 
PEDRO A. PATERNO. 



Los Secretarios, 

PABLO TECSON. 
PABLO OCAMPO. 



60 



(English Text) 



TITLE I 
THE REPUBLIC 

Article 1. The political association of all 
the Filipinos constitutes a NATION, whose 
state shall be known as x the Philippine 
Republic. 

Art. 2. The Philippine Republic is free 
and independent. 

Art. 3. Sovereignty resides exclusively 
in the people. 

TITLE II 
THE GOVERNMENT 

Art. 4. The Government of the Republic 
is popular, representative, alternative, and 
responsible, and shall exercise three (3) 
distinct powers: namely, the legislative, the 
executive, and the judicial. 

Any two or more of these powers shall 
never be united in one person or corporation, 
nor the legislative power vested in one single 
individual. 

TITLE III 
RELIGION 

Art. 5. The State recognizes the freedom 
and equality of all religions, as well as the 
separation of the Church and the State. 

TITLE IV 

THE FILIPINOS AND THEIR 
NATIONAL AND INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS 

Art. 6. The following are Filipinos: 

1. All persons born in the Philippine 
territory. A vessel of Philippine registry is 
considered, for this purpose, as part of 
Philippine territory. 

2. Children of a Filipino father or 
mother, although born outside of the 
Philippines. 

3. Foreigners who have obtained 
certificate of naturalization. 



4. Those who, without such certificate, 
have acquired a domicile in any town within 
Philippine territory. 

It is understood that domicile is acquired 
by uninterrupted residence for two years in 
any locality within Philippine territory, with 
all open abode and known occupation, ana 
contributing to all the taxes imposed by the 
Nation. 

The condition of being a Filipino is lost 
in accordance with law. 

Art. 7. No Filipino or foreigner shall be 
detained nor imprisoned except for the 
commission of a crime and in accordance 
with law. 

Art. 8. All persons detained shall be 
discharged or delivered to the jud.cia 
authority within 24 hours following the act 
of detention. 

All detentions shall be without legal 
effect, unless the arrested person is du y 
prosecuted within 72 hours after delivery 
a competent court. 

The accused shall be duly notified of 
such proceeding within the same period. 

Art. 9. No Filipino shall be iwjjjj 
except by virtue of an order by competen 
court. ^ 

The order of imprisonment sha 
ratified or confirmed within? Z 
following the said order, after the 
has been heard. 

Art 10. No one shall enter the dwelling 
house of any Filipino or a foreigner residing 
xn the PhUippines without his consent, 
except in urgent cases of fire, inundation, 
rrthjuake or other similar danger, or by 
reason of unlawful aggression from within 
or in order to assist a person therein who 
cries for help. 

Outside of these cases, the entry into 
the dwelling house of any Filipino or 
foreigner resident in the Philippines or the 
search of his papers and effects can only be 
decreed by a competent court and executed 
only in the daytime. 



61 



The search of papers and effects shall 
be made always in the presence of the person 
searched or of a member of his family and, 
in their absence, of two witnesses resident 
of the same place. 

However, when a criminal caught in 
fraganti should take refuge in his dwelling 
house, the authorities in pursuit may enter 
into it, only for the purpose of making an 
arrest. 

If the criminal should take refuge in the 
dwelling house of a foreigner, the consent of 
the latter must first be obtained. 

Art. 11. No Filipino shall be compelled 
to change his residence or domicile except 
by virtue of a final judgment. 

Art. 12. In no case may correspondence 
confided to the post office be detained or 
opened by government authorities, nor any 
telegraphic or telephonic message detained. 

However, by virtue of an order by a 
competent court, correspondence may be 
detained and opened in the presence of the 
sender. 

Art. 13. All orders of imprisonment of 
search of a dwelling house, or detention of 
written correspondence, telegraph or 
telephone, must be justified. 

whe^El ^ 0rd 7 laCk3 thi8 re( * ui8ite > or 
wnen the ground on which the act was 

S ^enin court to be unlawfuTo 
deta ne ft m ^ ufflcient ' the person to be 
been r^ imprisonment has not 

Art of ed >T lthln the Peri0d bribed in 
Ait 9, or whose correspondence has been 

nr 14 - N ° FiUpino 8hal1 be Prosecuted 

or sentenced except by a judge or court of 
proper jurisdiction and according to the 
procedure prescribed by law. 

Art. 15. Except in the cases provided by 
the Constitution, all persons detained or 
imprisoned not in accordance with legal 
formalities shall be released upon his own 
petition or upon petition of another person. 

The law shall determine the manner of 
proceeding summarily in this instance, as 
well as the personal and pecuniary penalties 
which shall be imposed upon the person who 
ordered, executed or cause to be execute.d the 
illegal detention or imprisonment. 



Art. 16. No one shall be temporarily or 
permanently deprived of rights or disturbed 
in his enjoyment thereof, except by virtue of 
judicial sentence. 

The officials who, under any pretext 
whatsoever, should violate this provision, 
shall be personally liable for the damages 
caused. 

Art. 17. No one shall be deprived of his 
property by expropriation except on grounds 
of public necessity and benefit, previously 
declared and justified by proper authority, 
and indemnifying the owner thereof prior to 
expropriation. 

Art. 18. No one shall be obliged to pay 
any public tax which had not been approved 
by the National Assembly or by local popular 
governments legally so authorized, and 
which is not in the manner prescribed by 
the law. 

Art. 19. No Filipino who is in full 
enjoyment of his civil and political rights, 
shall be impeded in the free exercise of said 
rights. 

Art. 20. Neither shall any Filipino be 
deprived: 

1. Of the right to freely express his ideas 
or opinions, orally or in writing, through the 
use of the press or other similar means. 

2. Of the right of association for purposes 
of human life and which are not contrary to 
public morals; and lastly 

3. Of the right to send petitions to the 
authorities, individually or collectively. 

The right of petition sha 11 not be 
exercised through any kind of armed force. 

Art. 21. The exercise of the rights 
provided for in the preceding article shall be 
subject to general provisions regulating the 
same. 

Art. 22. Crimes committed on the 
occasion of the exercise of rights provided 
for in this title, shall be punished by the 
courts in accordance with the laws. 

Art. 23. Any Filipino may establish and 
maintain institutions of learning, in 
accordance with the laws authorizing them. 

Public education shall be free and 
obligatory in all schools of the nation. 



62 



Art. 24. Foreigners may freely reside in 
Philippine territory, subject to legal 
dispositions regulating the matter; may 
engage in any occupation or profession for 
the exercise of which no special license is 
required by law to be issued by the national 
authorities. 

Art. 25. No Filipino who is in full 
enjoyment of his political and civil rights 
shall be impeded in his right to travel freely 
abroad or in his right to transfer his 
residence or possessions to another country, 
except as to his obligations to contribute to 
military service or the maintenance of public 
taxes. 

Art. 26. No foreigner who has not been 
naturalized may exercise in the Philippines 
any office which carries with it any authority 
or jurisdictional powers. 

Art. 27. All Filipinos are obliged to 
defend his country with arms when called 
upon by law, and to contribute to the 
expenses of the State in proportion to his 
means. 

Art. 28. The enumeration of the rights 
provided for in this title does not imply the 
denial of other rights not expressly 
mentioned. 

Art. 29. The prior authorization to 
prosecute a public official in the ordinary 
courts is not necessary, whatever may be 
the crime committed. 

A superior order shall not exempt a 
public official from liability in the cases 
which constitute apparent and clear 
violations of constitutional precepts. In 
others, the agents of the law shall only be 
exempted if they did not exercise the 
authority. 

Art. 30. The guaranties provided for in 
articles- 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 and paragraphs 1 
and 2 of Art. 20 shall not be suspended, 
partially or wholly, in any part of the 
Republic, except temporarily and by 
authority of law, when the security of the 
State in extraordinary circumstances so 
demands. 

When promulgated in any territory 
where the suspension applies, there shall be 
a special law which shall govern during the 
period of the suspension, according to the 
circumstances prevailing. 



The law of suspension as well as the 
special law to govern shall be approved lay 
the National Assembly, and in case the latter 
is in recess, the Government shall have the 
power to decree the same jointly with the 
Permanent Commission, without prejudice 
to convoking the Assembly without the least 
delay and report to it what had been done. 

However, any suspension made shall not 
affect more rights than those mentioned in 
the first paragraph of this article nor 
authorize the Government to banish or 
deport from the Philippines any Filipino. 

In no case may the civil or military 
chiefs promulgate any penalty other than 
those previously provided by law. 

Art. 31. In the Republic of the 
Philippines, no one shall be judged by a 
special law nor by special tribunals. No 
person or corporation may enjoy privileges 
or emoluments which are not in 
compensation for public service rendered and 
authorized by law. War and marine laws 
shall apply only for crimes or delicts which 
have intimate relation to military or naval 
discipline. 

Art 32 No Filipino shall establish laws 
on primogeniture, nor institutions 
restrictive of property rights nor accept 
honors, decorations or honorific titles or 
nobility from foreign nations without tne 
consent of the Government. 

Neither shall the government establish 
in the Republic institutions ™»f ne *™^ 
preceding paragraph, nor confer honors 
decorations or honorific titles and of nobility 
to any Filipino. 

The Nation, however, may reward by 
special law approved by the Assembly 
conspicuous services rendered by citizens ot 
the country. 

TITLE V 
THE LEGISLATIVE POWER 

Art. 33. Legislative power shall be 
exercised by an Assembly of Representatives 
of the nation. 

This Assembly shall be organized in the 
form and manner determined by law. 



63 



Art. 34. The Members of the Assembly 
shall represent the whole nation and not 
exclusively the electors who elected them. 

Art. 35. No representative shall receive 
from his electors ally imperative mandate 
whatsoever. 

Art. 36. The Assembly shall meet every 
year. The President of the Republic has the 
right to convoke it, suspend and close its 
sessions, and dissolve the same, within the 
periods prescribed by law enacted by the 
Assembly or by the Permanent Commission. 

Art. 37. The Assembly shall be open at 
least three months each year, without 
including in this period the time spent in its 
organization. 

The President of the Republic shall 
convoke the Assembly, not later than the 
15th day of April. 

Art. 38. In extraordinary cases, he may 
convoke the Assembly outside of the period 
fixed by law, as determined by the 
Permanent Commission, and prolong its 
law-making, provided the extended period 
does not exceed one month and provided 
lurtner that such extensions do not take 
place more than twice during the game 
legislative term. 

wt^fu 39 " The National Assembly, jointly 
witn the special Representatives, shall 
oiganize committees for the organization of 
we Assembly and for the election of a new 
form H ° f Re P ubllc > w hich shall be 
PYni *- at leaSt one month before the 

Ren/p T ° f the term of office of the 
Representatives. 

Pr °! Se r ^ f death or resignation of the 
rres dent of the Republic, the Assembly shall 
meet in session by it8 own right or by 
initiative of the President or of the 
Permanent Commission. 

P^A Ft ?!' In the mean time that the new 
President has not been chosen, his functions 
shall be exercised by the Chief Justice of the 
Supreme Court whose office shall be taken 
over by one of the Justices of the Court, in 
accordance with law. 

Art. 41. Any session of the Assembly held 
outside of the period of ordinary legislature 
shall be unlawful and void. The case provided 
for in Art. 30 and in which the Assembly 
has constituted itself into a Tribunal of 



Justice shall be excepted, but in the latter 
case no other functions shall be exercised 
except that pertaining to judicial functions. 

Art. 42. The sessions of the Assembly 
shall be public. However, sessions may be 
held in secret upon petition of a certain 
number of its members fixed by the Rules, 
deciding afterwards by an absolute majority 
of votes of the members present if the 
discussion on the same subject has to 
continue in public. 

Art. 43. The President of the Republic 
shall communicate with the Assembly by 
means of messages, which shall be read by 
a Department Secretary. 

The Department Secretaries shall have 
the right to be heard in the Assembly, upon 
their request, and they may be represented 
in the discussion of certain bills by 
Commissioners appointed by decrees of the 
President of the Republic. 

Art. 44. The Assembly may constitute 
itself into a Tribunal of Justice to hear and 
determine crimes committed against the 
security of the State by the President of the 
Republic and members of the Council of 
Government, by the Chief Justice of the 
Supreme Court, and by the Solicitor General 
of the Nation, by means of a decree 
promulgated by it, or by the Permanent 
Commission, or by the President of the 
Republic upon petition of the Solicitor 
General or Council of Government. 

The law shall determine the mode and 
manner of the accusation, instruction and 
disposition of the proceedings. 

Art. 45. No member of the Assembly 
shall be prosecuted nor held accountable for 
the opinions expressed by him, nor by the 
vote taken by him in the discharge of his 
office. 

Art. 46. No member of the Assembly 
shall be prosecuted criminally without 
authority of the Assembly or of the 
Permanent Commission to which an 
immediate report of the facts shall be made, 
for its proper action. 

The imprisonment, detention, or 
apprehension of a member of the Assembly 
shall not be carried out without the prior 
authority of the same or by the Permanent 
Commission. The moment the Assembly is 



64 



notified of the order of imprisonment, it shall 
incur liability if, within two days following 
the notification, it does not authorize the 
imprisonment or give sufficient reason upon 
which the refusal is based. 

Art. 47. The National Assembly shall 
have the following additional powers: 

1. To approve Rules for its internal 
government. 

2. To examine the legality of the elections 
and the legal qualifications of the elected 
members. 

3. To elect its President, Vice-Presidents, 
and Secretaries. 

Until the Assembly has been dissolved, 
the President, Vice-Presidents and 
Secretaries shall continue to exercise their 
office for the period of four legislative terms; 
and 

4. To accept the resignations of its 
members and grant privileges in accordance 
with the Rules. 

Art. 48. No bill shall become law without 
having been voted upon by the Assembly. 

To approve a bill, the presence in the 
Assembly of at least one fourth of the total 
number of the members whose elections 
have been duly approved and taken the oath 
of office shall be necessary. 

Art. 49. No bill shall be approved by the 
Assembly until after it has been voted upon 
as a whole and subsequently article by 
article. 

Art. 50. The Assembly shall have the 
right of censure, and each of the members 
the right of interpellation. 

Art. 51. The initiative in the presentation 
of bills belongs to the President of the 
Republic and to the Assembly. 

Art. 52. Any member of the Assembly 
who accepts from the Government any 
pension, employment or office with salary, 
is understood to have renounced his 
membership. 

From this shall be excepted the 
employment as Secretary of the Government 
of the Republic and other offices provided for 
by special laws. 

Art. 53. The office of Representatives 
shall be for a term of four years, and shall 



be compensated by a sum fixed by law, 
according to the circumstances. 

Those who absent themselves during the 
entire period of the legislative sessions shall 
not be entitled to any compensation; but they 
may be allowed to recover the right to 
compensation should they attend 
subsequently. 

TITLE VI 
THE PERMANENT COMMISSION 

Art. 54. The Assembly, before 
adjournment, shall elect seven of its 
members to form the Permanent 
Commission during the period of 
adjournment, which shall designate at its 
first session, the President and the 
Secretary. 

Art. 55. The Permanent Commission, 
during the adjournment of the Assembly, 
shall have the following attributes: 

1. Declare if there is sufficient cause to 
proceed against the President of the 
Republic, the Representatives, Department 
Secretaries, the Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court and the Solicitor-General in the cases 
provided by this Constitution. 

2. Convoke the Assembly to a special 
session in the cases where the latter should 
constitute itself into a Tribunal of Justice. 

3. To act upon pending matters which 
require proper action. 

4 Convoke the Assembly in Special 
sessions when the exigencies of the situation 
so demand. 

5. Supplement the powers of the 
Assembly in accordance with the 
Constitution, excepting the act of voting and 
approving laws. 

The Permanent Commission shall meet 
in session whenever convoked by the 
presiding officer, in accordance with this 
Constitution. 

TITLE VII 
THE EXECUTIVE POWER 

Art. 56. The Executive Power shall be 
vested in the President of the Republic, who 
shall exercise it through his Department 
Secretaries. 



65 



Art. 57. The administration of the 
particular interests of towns, provinces, and 
of the State shall correspond, respectively, 
to the Popular Assemblies, the Provincial 
Assemblies, and to the Administration in 
power, in accordance with the laws, and 
observing the most liberal policy of 
decentralization and administrative 
autonomy. 

TITLE VIII 

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC 

Art. 58. The President of the Republic 
shall be elected by absolute majority of votes 
by the Assembly and by the special 
Representatives, convened in chamber 
assembled. 

His term of office shall be four years, 
and may be reelected. 

Art. 59. The President of the Republic 
shall have the right to initiate the 
introduction of bills equally with the 
members of the Assembly, and promulgate 
the laws when duly voted and approved by 
the latter, and shall see to it that the same 
are duly executed. 

Art. 60. The power to execute the laws 
shall extend to all cases conducive to the 
preservation of internal public order and to 
the external security of the State. 

Art. 61. The President shall promulgate 
the laws duly approved by him within 20 

theit traMmiWal 10 him by 

Pr^'^u ! { Within this Period, the 
ll ^T ! h ° Uld fail t0 Promulgate them, 
he shall return them to the Assembly with 
his reasons for the return, in which case 
the Assembly may reconsider same, and it 
shall be presumed that it does not insist in 
^approving them if not repassed by a vote 
of at least two-thirds of the members of the 
Assembly present in a quorum. If repassed 
m man ? er indicated, the Government 
shall promulgate same within ten days, with 
a manifestation of its non-conformity. 

The same obligation is imposed upon the 
Government if it allows twenty days to elapse 
without returning the bill to the Assembly. 

Art. 63. When the promulgation of a law 
has been declared urgent by express will of 



an absolute majority of votes of the 
Assembly, the President of the Republic may 
require of the Assembly to reapprove same 
which cannot be refused, and if the same 
bill is repassed, the President shall 
promulgate it within the legal period, without 
prejudice to his making of record his 
non-conformity with the bill. 

Art. 64. The promulgation of laws shall 
be made by publishing them in the official 
gazette of the Republic, and shall have the 
force of law thirty days following such 
publication. 

Art. 65. The President of the Republic 
shall have at his disposal the army and the 
navy, and may declare war and make and 
ratify treaties with the prior consent of the 
Assembly. 

Art. 66. Treaties of peace shall not take 
effect until voted upon by the Assembly. 

Art. 67. The President of the Republic, 
in addition to his duty to execute the laws, 
shall: 

1. Supervise civil and military 
employees in accordance with the laws. 

2. Appoint the Secretaries of the 
Government. 

3. Direct the diplomatic and commercial 
relations with foreign powers. 

4. See to it that justice is duly and 
promptly administered throughout the 
Philippines. 

5. Grant pardon to convicted criminals 
in accordance with the laws, except any 
special provision relating to the Secretaries 
of the Government. 

6. Preside over all national functions and 
receive ambassadors and accredited 
representatives of foreign powers. 

Art. 68. The President of the Republic 
may be authorized by special law: 

1. To alienate, transfer or exchange any 
portion of Philippine territory. 

2. To incorporate any other territory to 
the Philippine territory. 

3. To admit the stationing of foreign 
troops in Philippine territory. 

4. To ratify treaties of alliance, defensive 
as well a.3 offensive, special treaties of 



m 



commerce, those which stipulate to grant 
subsidies to a foreign power, and those which 
may compel Filipinos to render personal 

service. 

Secret treaties in no case may prevail 
over the provisions of open treaties or treaties 
made publicly. 

5. To grant general amnesties and 
pardons. 

6. To coin money. 

Art. 69. To the President belongs the 
power to issue regulations for the compliance 
and application of the laws in accordance 
with the requisites prescribed in said laws. 

Art. 70. The President of the 
Philippines, with the prior approval by 
majority vote of the Representatives, may 
dissolve the Assembly before the expiration 
of its legislative term. 

In this case, new elections shall be called 
within three months. 

Art. 71. The President of the Republic 
may be held liable only for cases of high 
treason. 

Art. 72. The salary of the President of 
the Republic shall be fixed by special law 
which may not be changed except after the 
presidential term has expired. 

TITLE IX 

THE SECRETARIES OF GOVERNMENT 

Art. 73. The Council of Government is 
composed of one President and seven 
Secretaries, each of whom shall have under 
his charge the portfolios of Foreign Relations, 
Interior, Finance, War and Marine, Public 
Education, Communications and Public 
Works, and Agriculture, Industry and 
Commerce. 

Art. 74. All the acts done by the 
President of the Republic in the discharge of 
his duties shall be signed by the 
corresponding Secretary. No public official 
shall give official recognition to any act 
unless this requisite is complied with. 

Art. 75. The Secretaries of Government 
are jointly responsible to the Assembly for 
the general administration of the 
Government, and individually for their 
respective personal acts. 



Art. 76. In order to exempt them from 
responsibility, when held guilty by the 
Assembly, a petition to this effect approved 
by absolute majority of the Representatives 
is necessary. 

TITLE X 
THE JUDICIAL POWER 

Art. 77. To the Court corresponds 
exclusively the power to apply the laws, in 
the name of the Nation, in all civil and 
criminal trials. 

The same codes of laws shall be applied 
throughout the Republic, without prejudice 
to certain variations according to 
circumstances as determined by law. 

In all trials, civil, criminal, and 
administrative, all citizens shall be governed 
by one code of laws of procedure. 

Art. 78. The courts of justice shall not 
apply general local regulations, except when 
they conform to the laws. 

Art. 79. The exercise of judicial power 
shall be vested in one Supreme Court and in 
other courts established by law. 

Their composition, organization, and 
other attributes shall be determined by the 
laws creating them. 

Art. 80. The Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court and the Solicitor-General shall be 
chosen by the National Assembly in 
concurrence with the President of the 
Republic and the Secretaries of the 
Government, and shall be absolutely 
independent of the Legislative and Kxecutive 
Powers. 

Art. 81. Any citizen may file suit against 
any member exercising the Judicial Power 
for any crime committed by them in the 
discharge of their office. 

TITLE XI 

PROVINCIAL 
AND POPULAR ASSEMBLIES 

Art. 82. The organization and attributes 
of provincial and popular assemblies shall 
be governed by their respective laws. 

These laws shall conform to the 
following principles: 

67 



1. The government and management of 
the particular interests of the province or 
town shall be discharged by their respective 
corporations, the principle of direct and 
popular elections being the basis underlying 
each of them. 

2. Publicity of their sessions, within the 
limits provided by law. 

3. Publication of all appropriations, 
accounts and agreements affecting same. 

4. Government interference and, in the 
absence thereof, by the National Assembly, 
to prevent provinces and municipalities 
exceeding their powers and attributes to the 
prejudice of the interest of individuals and 
of the nation at large. 

5. Power of taxation shall be exercised 
to the end that provincial and municipal 
taxation do not come into conflict with the 
power of taxation of the State. 

TITLE XII 
ADMINISTRATION OF THE STATE 

Art. 83. The Government shall submit 
every year to the Assembly a budget of 
expenditures and income, indicating the 
changes made from those of the preceding 
S^Tr^ the 8ame with a bal *nce 
law He ° f ^ year ' in aCC ° rdance 

As JiJki bUd ! e u. 8haU be fitted to the 
Assembly within ten days following the 

commencement of its session. 

Art 84 No disbursement of funds shall 
be valid unless made in accordance with an 
appropriation law, or with a special law in 
the torm and manner prescribed by the same. 

Art. 85 The Government, in order to 
dispose of the property and effects of the 
State, and to borrow money secured by 
mortgage or credit of the Nation, must he 
authorized by special law. 

Art. 86. Public debts contracted by thfe 
Government of the Republic, in accordance 
with the provisions of this Constitution, shall 
be under the special guaranty of the Nation. 

No debt shall be contracted unless the 
means of paying the same are also voted 
lapon. 



Art. 87. All laws relating to income, 
public expenses or public credits shall be 
considered as part of the appropriation and 
shall be published as such. 

Art. 88. The Assembly shall determine 
every year, upon.the recommendation of the 
President of the Republic, the military forces 
by land and sea. 

TITLE XIII 

AMENDMENT 
OF THE CONSTITUTION 

Art. 89. The Assembly, on its own 
initiative or that of the President of the 
Republic, may propose amendments to the 
Constitution, indicating what article or 
articles are to be amended. 

Art. 90. This proposal having been made, 
the President of the Republic shall dissolve 
the Assembly, and shall convoke a 
Constituent Assembly which shall meet 
within three months. In the decree 
convoking the Constituent Assembly, the 
resolution mentioned in the preceding article 
shall be inserted. 

TITLE XIV 

CONSTITUTIONAL OBSERVANCE, 
OATH, AND LANGUAGE 

Art. 91. The President of the Republic, 
the Government, the Assembly and all 
Filipino citizens shall faithfully observe the 
provisions of the Constitution; and the 
Legislative Power, upon approval of the 
Appropriations Act, shall examine if the 
constitution has been strictly complied with 
and whether violations, if any, have been 
duly corrected and those responsible for the 
violations duly held liable. 

Art. 92. The President of the Republic 
and all other officials of the Nation shall not 
enter into the discharge of their office without 
having taken the prescribed oath. 

The oath of the President of the Republic 
shall be taken before the National Assembly. 

The other officials of the Nation shall 
take their oath before the authorities 
determined by law. 

Art. 93. The vise of languages spoken in 
the Philippines shall be optional. Their use 



m 



cannot be regulated except by virtue of law, 
and solely for acts of public authority and in 
the courts. For these acts the Spanish 
language may be used in the meantime. 

TRANSITORY PROVISIONS 

Art. 94. Meanwhile and without 
prejudice to the provisions of Article 48 and 
to the acts of the commissions designated 
by the Assembly to translate and submit to 
the same the organic laws in the development 
and application of the rights granted to 
Filipino citizens and for the government of 
public powers therein mentioned, the laws 
of the Republic shall be considered those 
found existing in these Islands before the 
emancipation of the same. 

The provisions of the Civil Code relating 
to marriage and civil registry, suspended by 
the Governor General of these islands; the 
Instructions of April 26, 1888 to carry into 
effect Articles 77, 78, 79, and 82 of said Code; 
the law on civil registry of June 17, 1870 
which refers to Article 332 of the same, and 
the Regulation of December 13 following for 
the enforcement of this law, without prejudice 
to the Chiefs of towns continuing to be in 
charge o£ inscriptions in the civil registry 
and intervening in the celebration of 
marriages between catholics, shall also be 
deemed in force and effect. 

Art. 95. In the meantime that the laws 
referred to in the preceding article have not 
been approved or enforced, the Spanish laws 
which said article allows to be enforced 
provisionally may be amended by a special 
law. 

Art. 96. Once the laws approved by the 
Assembly have been promulgated in 
accordance with Article 94, the Government 
of the Republic shall have the power to issue 
decrees and regulations necessary for the 
immediate organization of the various 
organs of the State. 

Art. 97. The present President of the 
Revolutionary Government shall assume 
later the title of President of the Republic 
and shall discharge the duties of this office 
until the Assembly when convoked proceeds 
to the election of one who shall definitely 
exercise the duties of the office. 

Art. 98. The present Congress, composed 
of members by suffrage or by decree, shall 



last for four years, or for the duration of the 
present legislative term commencing the 
15th of April of next year. 

Art. 99. Notwithstanding the general 
rule established in paragraph 2 of Article 4, 
in the meantime that the country is fighting 
for its independence, the Government is 
empowered to resolve during the closure of 
the Congress all questions and difficulties 
not provided for in the laws, which give rise 
to unforeseen events, by the issuance of 
decrees, of which the Permanent 
Commission shall be duly apprised as well 
as the Assembly when it meets in accordance 
with this Constitution. 

Art. 100. The execution of article I, Title 
III shall be suspended until the constituent 
Assembly meets in session. 

In the meantime, municipalities which 
require spiritual ministry of a Filipino priest 
may provide for his necessary maintenance. 

Art 101. Notwithstanding the 
provisions of Articles 62 and 83. bills 
returned by the President of the Republic to 
the Congress may not be repassed except in 
the legislature of the following year, this 
suspension being under the responsibility ol 
the President and his Counci oi 
Government. When these conditions have 
been fulfilled, the promulgation of said laws 
shall be obligatory within ten days, witnou 
prejudice to the President making of record 
his non-conformity. 

If the reapproval is made in subsequent 
legislative terms, it shall be deemed law 
approved for the first time. 

ADDITIONAL ARTICLE. All the 
estates, edifices and other property possessed 
by the religious corporations in these islands 
shall be deemed restored to the Philippine 
State as of May 24, 1898 when the Dictatorial 
Government has been constituted in Cavite. 

8ARAS0AIN, the 20th day of January, 
1899. 

The President of the Congress 
—PEDRO A. PATERNO 



The Secretaries, 
PABLO TECSON 
PABLO OCAMPO 



69 



Membeirs of the Cabinet 




General EMILIO AGUINALDO 

President of the First Philippine Republic. 





APOLINARIO MABINI 

President of the Council of Ministers 
and Secretary of Foreign Affairs. 



TEODORO SANDIKO 

Secretary of Interior 





MARIANO TRIAS y CLOSAS BALDOMERO AGUINALDO 
Secretary of Finance GRACIO GONZAGA Secretary ° f War 

Secretary of Fomento 
(No photograph) 



71 




72 



Append in A 



Address of General Emilio Aguinaldo, President of the Republic, 
on the inaugural session of the National Assembly, at the Barasoam 
Church, Malolos, Bulacan, September 15, 1898. (Tagalog) 



Manga Guino6: 

Tua co'y lubhang malaqui na 
maihahalimbau& sa isang nasa Langit; 
ngayong namamalas niyaring mga mata 
ang daquilang catipunan ng mga bayaning 
magsasangalang sa capahamacan nang 
Inang Filipinas; at sa pananalaya ng 
bumugsong lugod sa aba cong catauohan, 
ay nauumid yaring dila na sumambit ng 
catagang salita. 

Gayon may nagpipilit, upang 
maipatanto sa mga camahalan ninyo ang 
sa una't magpangayo'y sacbibi sa isip. 
Nacatulog tila ang nacacatulad co mula ng 
icatatlong puo't isa ng buan ng Agosto ng 
taong isang libo ualong daan at siyam na 
puo at anim hangang sa panahong ito, sa 
mayuming banig ng malaquing pag ibig sa 
Inang Filipinas at boong boo cong iniasa sa 
maauaing Langit ang gauang pagliligtas sa 
nasabing Ina sa pagcacaalipin sa duhaming 
castila; at ngayong maguising ay aquing 
namamalas ang daquila nating Kalayaan, 
na namulaclac nang masaganang bango, 
nag buco at catapustapusay namunga. 

Cayo nga't dili iba mga iguinagalang 
cong capatid na pangulong bayang Filipinas, 
ang masamiyong bulaclac, buco at bunga 
na aquing nabanguit; cayo nga't dili iba ang 
pinili nang matatapang, mahinahon at 
matiising mga anac nang bayan na inihatid 
dito na paua ring capatid nila at capatid co; 
cayo nga't dili iba ang magpipisan at 
magcacatipon dito't yayari nang ating 
catipunang panganganlang Sangunian (6 
Congreso) na siyang mag bibigay nang lubos 
na catibayan nang ating calayaang sinabi 
co na. 

Dahil dito'y umaapao sa dibdib ang 
masimbuyong galac at siyang 
pinagbubuhatan ng mairog cong bati na 
jsalamat na ualang catapusan! i salamat na 
inuulit ulit co sa iniyong camahalan at 
cayo'y nagloalhating dumating at dumulog 
ng boong nais sa paquiquilaquip sa 
Katipunang ito at cayo nga ang lubhang 
cailaegae ! 



Sa ganitong paraa'y masasabi co na sa 
panahong ito'y natapus na ang ating 
panghihimagsic; ibig co bagang isaad, ay sa 
piling ng ating caquilaquilabot na Hocbo na 
mapagligtas na ualang caparis ng tapang 
at mapagtiis sa lahat ng cahirapan; ay 
namamalas na ng iba't ibang nacion ang 
marangal na Katipunan (Congreso) at 
mapagquiquilala nila mula sa panahong ito, 
na sa bayang Filipinas ay natatatag na ang 
Hocbo, Katipunan at Pamahalaan , (Ejercito, 
Congreso y Gobierno); tatlong bagay na 
inadhica nating lahat na pauang cuta ng 
catibayan; at ito rin naman ang aquing 
inadhica mula nang isaisip' ang pagbpol at 
pag-gunao sa capangyarihan nang castiia 
dito sa ating mahalagang bayan. 

Alam nga natin at nang sinomang 
nacababasa nang Historia nang ««•'*■ 
panahon ngayon, na "lang- capuluan o 
bayang guising sa dunong na di ^amit 
nang nasabi cong tatlong bagay. Siya ngang 
natatanao ngayong panahong ito sa w 
mararangal na naciong America, Franaa 
at Inglaterra, na pauang nangungulo sa 
kalayaan, carunungan at cayamanan, dam 
sa canilang pagcacaisang loob. 

Datapua't nabubusog man ang aquing 
loob sa galac at catuaan, ay bumabahid din 
sa isip ang di masauatang P an * la0 ' , 
nangingilalim sa caibuturan ng puso, at itoy 
dapat cong ipahayag sa *nyong mga 
camahalan, na siya co ngang 
ipinanganganib. 

Mayroong patriota sa salita lamang: 
may roon din namang anexionista, ang 
bagay na ito'y malaquing casiraan sa ating 
Nacion; caya ipinamamanhic con magisang 
loob tayo, sa pagca't ang .sang ™patiualag 
ay malaquing caculangan, lalong lalo na ang 
isang marunong na siya cong iguinagalang 
at ipinagmamalaqui sa mga extranjero. 
Mayroong marunong na ang caniyang 
carunungan ay ayao itulong dito sa 
Revolucion, cun di nagaantay pang 
tumahimic muna; at ito'y dahil sa 
carunungan. Maraming umuupasala sa 
Gobierno ng sabing hindi dapat; nguni't sila 



73 



sana'y ucol dumamay dito sa mga 
mangmang, at huag pulaan: at huag 
pagpula ang canilang gamitin; sa pagca't 
ualang ibang magcacapatid cun di tayo-tayo 
rin. Mayroong ayao mag lingcod sa ating 
Gobierno cung ualang macatatapat ang 
caniyang capagalan; nguni't talastasin ng 
lahat na ang ating Gobierno'y batang bata 
pa na di mahahanapan agad ng maraming 
lacas, dapua't cailan ma'y di malilimutan 
ng bayan ang mga nag gugol ng pagod sa 
camya at tuloy cacamtan nila ang 
icahhgayang higuit pa sa pinuhunang pagod 
Upang huag sapitin ang icapupula ng 
capua, lalong-lalo na ang mga extranjeros 
.hahna cayo iguinagalang cong 
marurunong! jacbayan natm at pag-tiisang 
pamulatin ang msa „«u t , g 
u i u , ga nabubulaean 

hahmbaua ma't ualang cargo oficial na 

rnan g y: H hlndi cang no pa 

man, cun di sa mahalagang bayan at 
mnanasang calayaan! y n at 

Ang mga bagay na binanguit sa it... 
ay huag isasaquit ng loob „„? 
smabi co lama'ng yaon * ZS£T* 
dao mangisangisang gumagaufn yr °° n 
bagay mayroon na^ 
ating Gobierno ng palhTnT 8 "* P3 83 
autonomy at iba pa lt a * " g anexion > 
ang na 13 „ g ^ B P *~ta sana 

maqU18ama ^ -alubos angcalfbayl: 



lisanin ang ugaling orgullo at favoritismo 
na itinuro sa atin ng castila at ang di 
pagcacaisang loob at iba pa. 

Mayroong matatacuting labis na di 
magcasiya sa canilang sarili ang sariling 
pagcatacot at nanghihicayat pa sa iba at 
sinisira ang loob, lalo na ang ilan sa 
mayaman, dahil nga sa canilang cayamanan 
na di ibig magambala, nguni't nagcacamali; 
cung ang canilang guinagaua ay linulubos 
ang pag-damay sa ating Gobierno, marahil 
ay macaaagap naman tayo ng lalong 
icalalacas, gaya nang mga armamentos sa 
guerra at iba pa, at cung ganito'y matatapus 
agad ang caguluhang hinaharap: caya 
jhalina cayong mayayaman dito sa 
Filipinas! damayan natin ang caauaauang 
caual na nagtangol ng bayan hangang sa 
huling tiboc ng caniyang buhay, na di 
inaalintana ang mapait na camatayan. 
Caauan na ninyo't cayo nga ang aming 
inaasahan at cung magcagayon ay di 
malalaon at mapalalayas nating agad-agad 
ang lahat na caauay. Lubos cong sinisisi, 
sa pagca't cun sa unang daco cayo'y 
dumamay disin, sa mga panahong ito'y 
nagtatapus na sana sa pulo ng Bisayas at 
Mindanao, caya tayo'y magcusang 
magdalidali. 



NA UICA CO NA 



74 



Appendix B 



(Message read by General Aguinaldo at the opening session of the National Assembly on 
September 15, 1898, held in Malolos, Bulacan.) 

MENS A JE 

LEIDO POR EL PRESIDENTE DEL GOBIERNO REVOLUCIONARIO DE FILIPINAS, DON 
EMILIO AGUINALDO Y FAMY, EN LA APERTURA DE LA ASAMBLEA NACIONAL 
CELEBRADA EN MALOLOS (BULAKAN) EL DIA 15 DE SETIEM1BRE DE 1898. 



SENORES REPRESENTANTES: 

Coronada felizmente la obra de la 
Revolucion y firmemente consolidada la 
reconquista de nuestro territorio, es llegado 
el momento de declarar que la mision de las 
arma8, brillantemente realizada por nuestro 
her6ico ejercito, pide una tregua para hacer 
plaza 6 lo8 consejos que el pais pone al 
servicio del Gobierno, para auxiliar a este 
en el desarrollo de su propia libertad y 
justicia, mensaje divino escrito en las 
ensenanzas del campo revolucionario. 

Tarea grande y gloriosa, siquiera 
empresa al aleance de toda clase de patriotas, 
esta de guerrear y romper lanzas con tropas 
indisciplinadas por la misma injusticia de 
que defienden. Pero no es todo. 

Quedan todavia por resolver los graves 
y transcedentales problemas de la paz, para 
los que la patria misma que demando de 
nosotros el sacrificio de nuestra sangre y de 
nuestras fuentes de riqueza, reclama 
tambien a la hora presente, solemne 
documento, expresivo de las altas 
aspiraciones del pais rodeado con todos los 
privilegios y todas las grandezas de la raza 
filipina, para saludar con el a la majestad 
de las naciones que conciertan en los altos 
fines de la civilizacion y del progreso. 

A esas naciones grandes, naciones 
amigas, cuya libertad gloriosa cantada por 
la Historia, fue santa evocacion que 
acompano a nuestra empresa en sus 
increibles esfuerzos, a esas naciones dirige 
cordial salutation de alianza inquebrantable, 
el pueblo filipino. 

Al abrirse para nosostros el templo de la 
ley, yo bien s6 como ha de acudir el pueblo 
filipino, el pueblo sensato por excelencia. 

Purgado de sus antiguos errores, con el 
olvido de tres siglos de afrenta, abierto el 
corazon a todas las mas nobles expansiones, 
y en el alma la ventura de ser libre; 



complacido en sus virtudes, e inflexible con 
sus propias flaquezas, aqui en la iglesia de 
Barasoain, santuario un tiempo de plegarias 
misticas, templo muy augusto y severo del 
dogma de nuestra independencia, aqui viene 
a recoger en nombre de la paz, tal vez 
cercana, los sufragios de nuestros pensadores 
y de nuestros politicos, de aguerridos 
defensores del patrio suelo y de profundos 
psicologos del verbo tagalo, de inspirados 
artistas y poderosas figuras de la alta banca, 
para escribir con estos votos el libro inmortal 
de la Constitucidn Filipina como suprema 
expresion de la voluntad nacional. 

Manes ilustres de Rizal, de Lopez Jaena, 
de [Marcelo] Hilario del Pilar: sombras 
augustas de Burgos, Pelaez y Panganiban: 
genios guerreros de Aguinaldo y Tirona, de 
Natividad y Evangelista: surgid un momento 
de vuestres ignoradas tumbas: ved como el 
legado historico que por juro de heredad 
pasara de vuestras manos a las nuestras; 
vedlo centuplicado y crecido hasta lo 
inmenso, hasta lo infinito por el esfuerzo 
gigante de nuestras armas, y mas que por 
las armas, por la eterna sugestion divina de 
libertad, prendiendo como llama sagrada en 
el alma filipina ! j Ni Dios, ni la patria nos 
otorguen el triunfo, sino a condition de 
compartir con vosotros los laureles de 
hazaiiosa pelea. 

Y vosotros los Representantes de la 
soberania popular, volved los ojos al alto 
ejemplo de tan esclarecidos patriotas. 

Sea este ejemplo y su venerado recuerdo, 
a la vez que la generosa sangre derramada 
en estos campos de batalla, poderoso 
incentivo que despierte en vosotros noble 
emulation para dictar con la alta sabiduria 
que exige vuestro prestigioso mandato, las 
leyes que en era venturosa de paz han de 
regir los destinos politicos de nuestra Patria. 

HE DICHO. 



75 



Appendix C 

(Speech of President-elect Pedro A. Paterno 
session on September 17, 1898). 

HONORABLE REPRESENTANTES: 

Vuestros votos tienen fuerza de ley; y 
pues que de nada han valido mis excusas 
fisicas y razonamientos de insuficiencia para 
que los hermanos y amigos retiraran mi 
candidatura presidencial, deber mio de 
manifestaros con since ridad/ que mis fuerzas 
corporales como espirituales son debilisimas 
e insuficientes para empresa tan ardua y 
magna cual la recibida, no ciertamente por 
merecimientos propios, sino solo por vuestra 
excesiva benevolencia. A esta bondad sin 
limites debeis ajustar la medida corres- 
pondiente de mi profundisimo 
agradecimiento. Sin embargo de lo hecho y 
dicho y a pesar de mi pequefiez espero 
serviros con mi mayor buena fe y con toda 
mi alma, ya que vuestros sufragios me 
prestan esa autoridad suprema de la 
soberania popular. 

De la grande calma y serenidad; de la 
proverbial prudencia y cultura del pueblo 
filipino hemos de valernos todos para 
nuestros actos y decisiones. Millares 
milliones de hombres, el mundo civilizado 
entero nos contempla. Nuestras palabras 
seran apuntadas y comentadas; nuestras ac- 
ciones senaladas y criticadas, escudrifiando 
la intencion y el remoto pensamiento. 

Respeto todas las fuerzas vivas del pais; 
respeto todas las opiniones; mas rogando se 
encaucen al fin supremo de nuestra 
independencia y unidad que a costa de tanta 
sangre y lagrimas hemos conquistado. 

En este sentido me siento aqui Ha largo 
tiempo que en el mundo politico he tornado 
la voz del amor y de la harmonia, de la 
conciliacion y de la paz. 

Al elegirme vuestras senorias, 
colocandome en este altisimo sitial, 
comprendo que de la diversidad de medios 
precisos para conseguir el fin, buscais todos 
la unidad. La diversidad debe armonizarse 
con el fin, asi para las naciones como para 
los individuos. 

Cada pueblo tiene una existencia indi- 
vidual, con caracter especial; una civilization 
particular; pero el desarrollo se enlaza con 
la marcha general de la humanidad. Las 
naciones tienen su individualidad y tan 
sagrada, como es la de los hombres, puesto 
que una y otra vienen de Dios. 

Fueron irremediables la division y la 



)f the Malolos Congress, upon declaring open the 

hostilidad de los pueblos antiguos; porque 
no se elevaron nunca a la idea de la unidad 
del genero humano. 

Afortunadamente, todos los filipinos nos 
creemos uno en Dios, asi como tenemos un 
pueblo con libertad e independencia. 

Saludamos a todas las naciones libres e 
independientes, declarando que nuestro lema 
no es de domination sino de fraternidad. 

Hay un regimen providencial en las 
cosas humanas. Los antiguos no conocieron 
la intervention de la Providencia en la vida 
de los pueblos. Y sin embargo Dios dirigia 
los destinos humanos. Creo que los hombres 
como los pueblos son autores de sus propios 
destinos, bajo la mano de Dios. 

La action de la Providencia, bien lejos 
de destruir nuestra libertad, le sirve de 
auxiliar y todo lo hace menos descargarnos 
de la responsabilidad de nuestros actos. 

Comun es advertir y ciertamente 
providencial todo lo que ocurre en la actual 
revolution filipina; pero el que un hecho sea 
providencial, no por ello se encuentran 
justificados los hombres que en el 
desempenaron papel mas 6 menos 
importante; su responsabilidad se 
determina, no segun los designios de Dios, 
sino segun la ley del deber. 

Cumplamos la mision de reorganizar 
politicamente nuestro pueblo: sigamos 
nuestro destino con viva fe y confianza en 
Dios; llenemos el espacio con actos dignos de 
la humanidad; inclinemos hacia nosotros con 
obras generosas el juicio de la conciencia 
general de las naciones y obtendremos 
seguramente el favor de la opinion publica 
universal y el apoyo de la divina Providencia. 

Mas Dios solamente apoya a los que a si 
mismo se apoyan; es preciso por esto 
mantener alta y firme nuestra bandera tri- 
color una, libre, e independiente; es 
necesario luchar en el terreno de la doctrina, 
como en el de las armas; y aun con mas 
espiritu y energia en el de las ideas: porque 
al fin y al cabo las ideas deciden y vencen; 
no la fuerza, sino las ideas son las que 
gobiernan el mundo. 

Gloria al Senor que nos ha conducido 
por los caminos de la victoria. !Ojala que 
pronto nos conceda ver y disfrutar el triunfo 
de nuestros ideales ! 

HE DICHO. 



76 



Appendix D 

List of names of the Members of the Malolos Congress 
certified by President Pedro A. Paterno 

PROVINCIAS DE TERMINO 

REPRESENTANTES 

MANILA Sr. Teodoro Gonzales Leano 

— 44 Felix Ferrer y Pascual } Por sufragio 

— " Arsenio Cruz Herrera 

— 44 Mariano Limjap 

BATANGAS Sr. Mariano Lopez 

— " Gregorio Aguilera \ Por sufragio 

— " Eduardo Gutierrez 

— " Ambrosio Flores 

BULACAN Sr. Ambrosio Rianzares Bautista j p or sufragio 

— " Mariano Crisostomo ' 

— " Pedro Serrano Tarlac 

— 44 Trinidad Icasiano S. Rafael 

CAVITE Sr. Jose Basa ) 

— - Hugollagan Por sufragio 

— 44 Jose Salamanca ) 

44 Severino de las Alas Tarlac 

AMBOS CAMARINES Sr. Justo Lucban j p or 9U f ra gio 

— 44 Tomas Arejola j 

— " Valenano Velarde Tarlac 

— 44 Mariano (illegible) Id. 

ILOCOS SUR Sr. Mariano Fos I Por sufragio 

— M l^nacio Villamor ' 

— " Krancisco Tongson \ Por decreto 

— " Mario Crisologo J 

ILOCOS NORTE Sr. Gregorio Aglipay ( Ror sufragio 

44 Martin Garcia j 

— " Pio Romero 
" Jose Luna 

" Primitivo Donato 

" Pedro A. Paterno 

LAGUNA Sr. Higinio Benitez j por gufragl0 

" Graciano Cordero ) 

_ " Manuel Sityar Tarlac 

" Mauricio Ilagan 

PAMPANGA Sr - Joac l uin Gonzales | Por sufragio 

_ " Jose R. Infante ' 

— " Ramon Henson Angeles 

— " Enrique Macapinlac Porac 

PANGASINAN Sr - Vicente del Prado j Por sufragio 

— " Antonio Feliciano 

— " Sebastian de Castro— Tarlac ) p 0 r sufragio 

— " Adriano Garces — Dagupan 



77 



ILOILO 



CEBU 



LEYTE 



Sr. Esteban de la Rama 
Melecio Figueroa 
Venancio Concepcion — Tarlac 
Tiburcio Hilario — Concepcion 

Sr. Ariston Bautista 

" Trinidad P. de Tavera 

" Felix David— Porac 

Francisco Macabulos Soliman 

. Sr. Simplicio del Rosario 
Rafael Guierrero 
Marciano Zamora — Concepcion 
Lucio Navarro 



Por decreto 



Por decreto 



Por decreto 



Por sufragio 



ALBAY Sr. Salvador V. del Rosario 

— " Marcial Calleja 

— " Pantaleon Garcia — Tarlac 

— " Honorato Agrava — Id. 

— " Aguedo Velarde — Id. 

DE ASCENSO 

CAGAYAN g r Vicente Guzman Pagulayan) Por Sufragio 

Pablo Tecson — Tarlac — Por decreto 
Anastacio Francisco — Id. 

Sr. Jose Tuazon — Por sufragio 
Pedro Teopaco — Pampanga 
Hermogenes Marco — Bataan 



BATAAN 



ISABELA DE LUZON . 



UNION 



NUEVA ECIJA . 



TAYABAS 



TARLAC. 



ZAMBALES 



r. Eustacio del Rosario 
Raymundo Alindada 
Abelardo Guzman 



Por decreto 
Por sufragio 



Sr. Joaquin Luna — Por sufragio 

Mateo del Rosario — Tarlac — Por decreto 
Miguel Paterno — Id. 

Sr. Jose Santiago — Por sufragio 
Epifanio Santos 
Gregorio Macapinlac — Porac 

Sr. Sofio Alandy — Por sufragio 
Basilio Teodoro— Por decreto 
Jose Espinosa — Tarlac 

Sr. Juan Nepomuceno — Por sufragio 
Victoriano Tanedo — Tarlac 
Julian Carpio — Camiling 

Sr. Juan Manday Gabriel — Por sufragio 
Alejandro Albert— Tarlac 
Felix Bautista— Por decreto 
SORSOGON g r Manuel Xerez BurgQ8 _ 

— u Pedro Lipana— Tarlac 
— , " Maximino Hizon— Id. 

NEGEOS OCCIDENTAL .............. Sr. Jose M. de la Vina-Por decreto . 

Antonio Montenegro — Dagupan 

— " Juan Benson — Id. 



78 



NEGROS ORIENTAL Sr. Pio del Pilar— Por decreto 

— " Luciano San Miguel — Zambales 

— " Mariano Oirola — Tarlac 

SAMAR Sr. Javier Gonzales Salvador— Por decreto 

— " Servillano Aquino 

— " Juan Tongco — Rosales 

CAPIZ Sr. Miguel Zaragoza — Por decreto 

— " Mariano Bacani — (Pampanga) 

— " Juan Baltazar — (Union) 

ANTIQUE Sr. Ariston Gella — Por decreto 

— " Vicente Lopez 

— " Eusebio Natividad— (Tarlac) 

BOHOL Sr. Pedro Liongson— Por decreto 

— " Tranquilino Arroyo — (Candaba) 

— (Illegible) Labio ( ?) Pinson 

ZAMBOANGA Sr. Felipe Buencamino— Tarlac— Por decreto 

— " Tomas Mascardo — Pampanga 

— " Lazaro Tanedo — Gerona 

MISAMIS Sr. Teodoro Sandico — Por decreto 

— " Apolonio Mercado 

— " Gracio Gonzaga— Cabanatuan, Tarlac 

DE ENTRADA 

MORONG Sr. Jose F. Oliveros— Por sufragio 

— " Marcelo Mesina — Angeles 

LEPANTO Sr. Raymundo C. Jeciel — Por sufragio 

— " Antonio Rebello 

— " Leon Apacible 

CALAMIANES Sr. Narciso Hidalgo Resurreccion— Por decreto 

* Norberto Cruz Herrera— Cabanatuan, 

S. Isidro 

MASBATE Y TICAO Sr. Alberto Barretto— Por decreto 

— " Maximo Cabigting (Arayat) 

MINDORO Sr. Antonino Constantino— Por sufragio 

_ " Perfecto Gabriel —Por decreto 

— " Arturo Dancel 

BATANES Sr - Daniel Tirona — Porsufragio 

_ " Vito Belarmino —Por decreto 

CATANDUANES Sr. Marcelino Santos — Tarlac 

— " Jose Alejandrino — Dagupan 

NUEVA VIZCAYA Sr - Evaristo Panganiban— Por sufragio 

_ " Hipolito Magsalin —Por decreto 

ABRA.. Sr. Isidro Paredes— Por sufragio 

— " Juan Villamor 

BORONGAN Sr - Juan de Castro 

— M Enrique del Rosario 



79 



MAASIN Sr. Juan Arceo— Bayombong 

— " Ladislao Jose 

TARLAC VIEJO Sr. Gabino Calma 

— " Isidro Montoya 

ROMBLON Sr. Lucas Gonzales Maninang 

— 11 Cirilo Canizares — Nueva Ecija 

SURIGAO Sr. Tomas G. del Rosario— Por decreto 

— M Timoteo Paez — Tarlac 

DAVAO Sr. Leon Guerrero— Por decreto 

— " Ceferino Pantoja — Bayombong 
COTABATO Sr Jose M Le rma _p or decreto 

— " Pedro Layug Villaluz— Porac 
ISABELA DE BASILAN Sr. Juan Tuason-Por decreto 

— " Jamiano Bautista — Tarlac 
DAPITAN Y LAL-LO Sr. Joae Albert-Por decreto 

— " Julio Ruiz — Cabanatuan 

PARAGUA Q i. o ^ J 

or. relipe Calderon — Por decreto 

— " Domingo Colmenar 

PADRE BURGOS jr. Joaqu.n Baltazar-Por sufragio 

— 11 Sixto Zandueta 

— 41 Ceferino de Leon— Por decreto 
AMBURAYAN g r Mateo Gutierrez y Ubaldo— Por sufragio 

Jose Coronel 

TIAQ AN.... Q T AU 

or. l^no Abaya — Por sufragio 

— " Fernando Ferrer — Vigan 

or. Benito Legarda— Por decreto 

— " Victor Papa— Tarlac 

BALABAC m q . . . n J 

Santiago lcasiano — Por decreto 

~ " Jose Zulueta— Bayambang 

ISLAS PALA09 

Sr. Isidoro Tongco— Por decreto 

— M Alfonso Ramos— Tarlac 
LABOC q p A . , 

or. Ramon Arnola 

— " Manuel Aldeguera —Tarlac 

MATTI 

Sr. Vicente Somosa — Por decreto 

— " Urbano Morales — Tarlac 

MALABANG Q r ■ , 0 „ J 

or. Ix)renzo del Rosario — Por decreto 

— 11 A^ripino Atienza 

Sr. Telesforo Chuidian — Por decreto 

— " Juan Santos— Tarlac 
SIA SSI... 0 T _ _ 

or. Jose Hernandez — Por decreto 

— " Alejandro Avecilla— Tarlac 

™ Sr. Manuel Gomez Martinez — Por decreto 

— " Luis Avecilla— Tarlac 
BONGAO gr Sotero Laurel _ Por decreto 

— " Jacinto Vega — Tarlac 



80 



BURIAS Sr. Maximino Paterno — Por decreto 

— " Sinforoso Vitan — Tarlac 

— " Patricio Baylon 

BARAS Sr. Arcadio del Rosario — Por decreto 

— " Andres Tirona — Tarlac 

BUTUAN Sr. Santiago Barcelona — Por decreto 

— " Alfonso (Illegible) 

— " Ambrosio Delgado 

BONTOC Sr. Fernando Canon— Por decreto 

— 11 Mariano Nable Jose 

PRINCIPE INFANTA Sr. Pablo Ocampo— Por decreto 

— " Regino Garcia 

CONCEPCION Sr. Mariano V. del Rosario— Por decreto 

— " Vicente Genato 

MARINDUQUE Sr. Ricardo Paras— Por sufragio 

— " Julio Ruiz — Cabanatuan 

El Congreso Revolucionario, constituido conforme el decreto de fecha 23 de Junio del 
presente ano, tiene el honor de poner en conocimiento del Gobierno Revolucionario que han 
sido elegidos por sufragio, para formar mesa los senores Representantes que a continuacion 
se expresan: 

Presidente: D. Pedro A. Paterno. 
Vice-Presidente: D. Benito Legarda 
Secretarios: Gregorio Araneta y D. Pablo Ocampo. 
Barasoain, a diez y seis de Septiembre de mil ochocientos noventa y ocho. 

El Presidente, 

(Fdo.) PEDRO A. PATERNO. 

HONORABLE SR. PRESIDENTE DEL GOBIERNO REVOLUCIONARIO DE FILIPINAS 



31 



Appendix E 



Message of General Aguinaldo on the 
Proclamation of the Republic, January 23, 1899. 

MENSAJE DEL HONORABLE PRESIDENTE DE LA 
REPUBLICA AL CONGRESO EL 23 DE ENERO DE 1899 



Sefiores Representantes: 

Felicito a W. por haber terminado la 
obra constitucional. De hoy en adelante Fili- 
pinos tienen un Codigo Nacional, a cuyos 
justos y sabios preceptos todos, 
absolutamente todos, debemos cumplida e 
inescusable obediencia y cuyos liberales y 
democraticas garantias alcanzan tambien a 
todos. 

De hoy mas Filipinos cuenta con una 
ley fundamental que enlaza a nuestro pueblo 
con las demas naciones por medio de la mas 
fuerte de las solidaridades, cual es solidaridad 
de la justicia, de la ley, y del derecho, 
verdades eternas, que son la principal base 
de la dignidad humana. 

Felicitome tambien por ver premiados 
mis afanes y esfuerzos de siempre, desde que 
empujado por impulsos providenciales, me 
anze a campo con mis valientes paisanos 
los cavitenos al igual que hicieron nuestros 
hermanos en otras partes sin mas armas 

oZZ m °' \ P r d f COn le *itimo orguHo 
eoSiS la J aZ del Unive ™° el tan 
FILIPINA. n ° mbre de RE PUBLICA 

Ya no somos insurrectos, ya no somos 
revolucionarios, es decir, somos desde hov 
ZZ Can °t eSt ° es ' h ^bres de dereS 

cariiio. Nada falta m,« y reci P roco 

hbre e independiente. ^acion 

iAh sefiores Representantes! iCuantos 
dolores y amarguras acusan en la memoria 
aquellos pasados dias de esclavitud e^paTola 
y cuantos Venturas y alegrias despiertan en 
e alma los presentes momentos de la libertad 
filipina! 

Grande es este dia; gloriosa es esta fecha; 
y sera eternamente memorable el momento 
este en que se eleva nuestro amado pueblo a 
la apoteosis de la Independencia. El dia 23 
de enero sera para Filipinos de hoy en 
adelante dia de fiesta nacional, como el 4 de 



julio lo es para la nacion norte-americana. 
Y asi como en el siglo pasado Dios ayudo a la 
debil America, cuando luchaba contra la 
poderosa Albion, por reconquistar su libertad 
e independencia, tambien nos ayudara hoy 
en esta nuestra identica empresa, porque los 
derroteros de la justicia Divina son 
inmutablemente los mismos en rectitud y 
sabiduria. 

Gracias mil, sefiores Representantes, 
por vuestra labor parlamentaria, quo 
enaltece y acredita por manera publica y 
fehaciente que somos un pueblo culto a la 
par que valiente, digno por tanto de merecor 
franca entrada en el concierto de las 
Naciones libres. 

Habeis merecido justamente la gratitud 
de la Patria y del Gobierno, al demostrar a 
los ojos de todo el mundo con nuestra 
sabiduria, sensatez y prudencia, que, en esta 
remota y hasta hoy mal conocida parte del 
mundo, los principios de la civilizacion 
europea y americana son sabidos y mas quo 
sabidos; que aqui hay inteligencias y 
corazones que se compenetran perfectamente 
con las inteligencias y los corazones de los 
pueblos mas cultos; y que no obstante la 
calumniosa voz de nuestros eternos 
detractores, hay aqui, en fin, alma nacional, 
que une y fundo todos los corazones filipinos 
en una sola idea y en una sola aspiracion. 
VIVIR INDEPENDIENTE DE TODO 
YUGO EXTRANJERO BAJO LA 
DEMOCRATICA SOMBRA DE LA REPUB- 
LICA FILIPINA. 

Por eso yo, al observar consagrados en 
nuestra obra constitucional los eternos 
principios de autoridad, de libertad, de orden 
y de justicia, que se profesan entre si todas 
las Naciones civilizadas como la mas per- 
fecta garantia de su actual solidaridad, me 
siento fuerte, orgulloso, enaltecido, y 
sinceramente impulsado para lanzar, 
sefiores, desde el fondo de mi alma los gritos 
de 

VIVA LA REPUBLICA FILIPINA. 

VIVA LA CONSTITUCION. 

VIVAN SUS ILUSTRES AUTORES, 
LOS REPRESENTANTES DEL l.er 
CONGRESO FILIPINO. 

HE DICHO. 



82 



Appendix F 

Official protest against the Paris Peace Treaty by Felipe Agoncillo, December 12, 
1898. (Spanish text) 

PROTESTA OFICIAL 
CONTRA EL TRATADO DE PAZ DE PARIS. 

PARIS, 12 De Diciembre De 1898. 

Excmos. Sres. Presidentes y Delegados de la Comision Americo-Espanola de la Pa/, en Paris, Excmos. 
Sres. 



Muy Sefiores Mios: — 

El muy noble e invicto General Emilio 
Aguinaldo, Presidente de la Republica 
Filipina, y de su Gobierno, se sirvio 
honrarme con el cargo de su Representante 
oficial cerca del muy honorable Presidente y 
del Gobierno de la Republica de los Estados 
Unidos de Norte America, confiriendome, al 
propio tiempo, el encargo de protestar contra 
los acuerdos lesivos a la soberania de aquel 
pais, que pudiera adoptar la Comision de la 
Paz, reunida en Paris. 

Esta ha terminado ya su cometido; y sus 
acuerdos no pueden ser aceptados como 
obligatorios por mi Gobierno, desde el 
momento que la Comision no ha oido y 
asociado en sus deliberaciones al pueblo 
filipino, que tenia un derecho incuestionable 
a intervenir en ellas por lo que pudiesen 
afectar a su vida futura. 

Cumplo, por lo tanto, con mi deber, al 
protestar, como lo hago en la mas solemne 
forma, en nombre del Presidente y Gobierno 
Nacional de Filipinas, contra los acuerdos 
tornados en la Conferencia de la Paz en Pans, 
en tanto se desconozca con ellos la 
personalidadjuridica-politica-independiente 
del pueblo filipino, y se pretenda en cualquier 
forma, imponer a aquellos habitantes 
soluciones que no han sido sancionadas por 
sus Poderes Publicos, unicos que pueden 
legalmente decidir sobre su porvenir en la 
historia. 

Espana carece absolutamente de 
personalidad y de facultades para dictar 
acuerdos de ningun genero en el orden 
mencionado. 

La union de Espana y Filipinas se 
fundaba solo en dos hechos historicos, en los 
que se reconocia implicitamente el derecho 
esclusivo de los filipinos para resolver sus 



destinos: 

Primero: el Pacto de Sangre del 12 de 
Marzo de 1565, celebrado entre el Adelantado 
Don Miguel Lopez de Legazpi y el Soberano 
filipino Sikatuna pacto que se ratifico y se 
confirmo de un lado, por el Rey de Espana, 
Felipe II, y del otro por los Monarcas do 
Mindanao, Bisayas y Luzon y por el Jefo 
Supremo de aquella confederacion, el Sultan 
Lacandola; proclamandose en su 
consecuencia la nacionalidad autonoma del 
"Reyno de Nueva Castilla", que lo formaban 
las Islas Filipinas, bajo el cetro del Rey de 
Espana. 

Segundo: la llamada Constitucion de 
Cadiz, en cuya discusion, votacion, 
promulgacion y ejecucion tomaron parte 
activa los Diputados y el pueblo filipino; y 
por cuya Constitucion se hizo efectiva la 
nacionalidad de "Las Espanas". 

Pero desde el momento en que los 
Poderes Publicos Peninsulares intentaron 
imponer a las islas su soberania absoluta, 
los filipinos protestaron energicos con las 
armas en la mano; y desde la primera 
tentativa en 1814, la lucha en defonsa de su 
personalidad politica quedo planteada. Al 
consumarse en 1837 el despojo violento de 
sus derechos, los filipinos protestaron de 
nuevo, sosteniendo Espana contra ellos una 
lucha fratricida e inhumana que ha durado 
desde entonces hasta nuestros dias. 

La falsia, con que procedieron siempre 
las autoridades peninsulares, oculto 
constantemente al mundo aquella situacion 
de fuerza, que ha durado casi un siglo. 

Al cabo, en las postrimerias del presente, 
las fuerzas espanolas han sido derrotadas 
por completo por las de los naturales; y ya 
no puede alegar Espana ni siquiera la 
posesion de las islas, por que no constituyen 



83 



tal derecho la permanencia de un punado de 
soldados peninsulare8 (400 proximamente) 
que viven sitiados en una 6 dos fortalezas, 
en el Sur del Archipielago. 

El Gobierno Espanol ha cesado en su 
dominio de hecho y de derecho; y la unica 
autoridad, que alia existe y conserva el orden, 
es la constituida por los filipinos, con la 
sancion solemne de sus votos, unica fuente 
legal del derecho positivo moderno. 

En tales condiciones, los Comisionados 
Espanoles en Paris no han podido, dentro de 
los principios del derecho de gentes, ceder ni 
otorgar lo que, si alguna vez tuvieron, habian 
perdido totalmente antes de firmarse el 
Protocolo de Washington, y de fijarse los 
terminos del Tratado de Paz en Paris. 

El pueblo filipino que consentio el "Pacto 
de Sangre" y la Constitucion de 1812, por 
razon de la falta de cumplimiento por parte 
de Espana, anulo aquellas convenciones y 
recupero su soberania, con la proclamacion 
solemne de la Republica Filipina en 1° de 
Agosto de 1898, y con el establecimiento de 
un Gobierno y una Administration regular 
y ordenada, creados por el voto decisivo de 
sus naturales. 

Si algun juridico puede atribuirse a la 
accion espanola en el Tratado de Paz, dentro 
de los principios del derecho internacional 
es la renuncia esplicita de toda pretension 
futura sobre un suelo, cuyo dominio y cuya 
posesion tenia perdidos, y por lo tanto solo 
sirve para hacer efectivo el reconocimiento 
de la personalidad del pueblo filipino y el del 
derecho que asiste a este para disponer 
soberano de sus nuevos destinos. 

Los Estados Unidos de Norte America a 
su vez no pueden alegar mejor derecho para 
constituirse en arbitros del provenir de las 
Filipinas. 

Por el contrario, las exijencias del honor 
y de la buena fe les imponen el 
reconocimiento esplicito de la personalidad 
politica del pueblo, que, leal a sus 
convenciones, rue aliado devoto de sus fuerzas 
en los momentos del peligro y de la lucha. 

El noble General Emilio Aguinaldo y los 
otros Jefes filipinos fueron solicitados, para 
que al frente de los hijos sufridos y heroicos 
de aquel pais, luchasen contra Espana, y 
secundaran la accion del bravo y habil 
Almirante Dewey. 



Al pedirseles su cooperacion armada, lo 
mismo el Comandante del "Petrel," que el 
Capitan Wood en Hong Kong, antes de la 
declaration de guerra; que los Consules 
Generales Americanos Mr. Pratt en 
Singapore, Mr. Wildman en Hong Kong y 
Mr. Williams en Cavite, obrando como 
Agentes internacionales de la Gran Nacion 
Americana, en momentos de gran ansiedad, 
ofrecieron reconocer la independencia de la 
nacion filipina, una vez obtenido el triunfo. 

Bajo la fe de tales promesas, se puso a 
disposition de dichos Jefes un buque de 
guerra Americano, el "McCulloch," que les 
llevo a las playas natales; y el mismo 
Almirante Dewey, al mandar el buque, al 
no negar al General Aguinaldo y a sus 
companeros la exactitud de sus promesas, 
cuando se le presentaron en su buque 
insignia en la bahia de Manila; al recibir a 
dicho General Aguinaldo antes y despues de 
sus victorias y notables hechos de armas, 
con los honores debidos al General en Jefe 
de un Ejercito aliado y Jefe de un Estado 
independiente; al aceptar la cooperacion 
efectiva de ese Ejercito y de esos Generales; 
al reconocer la bandera filipina y permitir 
que se izase en tierra y en mar, consentiendo 
que sus buques navegasen con dicha bandera 
dentro de los lugares que tenia bloqueados; 
al recibir notificacion solemne de la 
proclamacion formal de la Republica Filipina 
sin protestar contra ella, ni oponerse en 
manera alguna a su existencia de hecho; al 
entrar en relaciones con esos Generales y 
con las autoridades nacionales filipinas, 
recientemente establecidas, reconocio 
indiscutiblemente la personalidad y 
soberania autonoma del pueblo, que acababa 
de romper sus cadenas y de emanciparse a 
impulso de su propio esfuerzo. 

Y ese reconocimiento, no puede negarlo 
hoy el pueblo honrado y serio de los Estados 
Unidos de Norte America, que no debe 
desconocer ni discutir la palabra dada por 
sus oficiales y representantes en aquella 
region, en momentos tan solemnes por su 
gravedad para la Republica Americana. 

Pretender poner ahora en tela de juicio 
las atribuciones de tales funcionarios 
publicos, despues del peligro, seria un acto 
de notoria injusticia, que no pueden 
consentir los que tienen el deber includible 
de conservar incolume la brillante 
reputation de los hijos de la gran nacion que 



fundara el inmortal Washington, cuya 
primer gloria fu6, y ha sido eiempre, el 
cumplimiento constante de su palabra de 
honor. 

Procede recordar aqui que los filipinos 
no peleaban como asalariados 6 soldados 
mercenarios de America. A su arribo 
recibieron solo un reducido numero de 
armas, de que se les hiciera entrega por orden 
del Almirante Dewey. Las armas, 
municiones y provisiones con que los filipinos 
han sostenido despues de la guerra contra 
las fuerzas espanolas, fueron adquiridas, 
unas, con su valor, y gestionadas otras con 
sus recursos propios, proporcionados estos 
exclusivamente por los patriotas filipinos. 

Y no seria noble negar ahora, despues 
de haberlo utilizado, la alianza, el valor, la 
lealtad y la nobleza de las fuerzas filipinas, 
al pelear al lado de las tropas americanas, 
prestandolas un apoyo decidido, entusiasta 
y eficaz. 

Sin su cooperaci6n y sin el sitio previo; 
hubieranse acaso posesionado los americanos 
tan facilmente, de Ja ciudad murada de 
Manila. Pudieron, quien lo duda? destruirla 
con un bombardeo, pero sin los anteriores 
hechos de armas sin el cerco rigoroso en que 
se le encerr6 al ejercito espanol, era 
totalmente irrealizable el simulacro que se 
verifico de su ataque y rendition. 

El General Dewey destruyo 
gloriosamente la escuadra espanola; pero 
careria de fuerzas de desembarco, y no podia 
disponer inconsideradamente * de sus 
municiones de guerra y de sus provisiones; 
y en tales condiciones el apoyo que, como 
companeros de armas, le prestaron los 
Generales y fuerzas filipinas, es de positiva 
e innegable ventaja. Sin ellos, las tropas del 
General Anderson y las que luego siguieron 
desembarcando, no hubieran probablemente 
podido llegar a Manila, antes de la suspension 
de hostihdades y de la firma del Protocolo de 
Washington. La verdad y la sinceridad en 
su lugar. 

Ahora bien: si los espanoles no han podido 
transmitir a los americanos derechos de que 
carecian; si estos no han conquistado 
militarmente posiciones en Filipinas; si la 



ocupacion de Manila fue un suceso 
consiguiente y preparado por los filipinos; si 
los oficiales y representantes internacionales 
de la Republica de los Estados Unidos del 
Norte de America ofrecieron reconocer la 
independencia y soberania de Filipinas 
solicitaron y aceptaron su alianza; como 
pueden estos constituirse ahora en arbitros 
del Dominio, Administration y Gobierno 
futuro de las Islas Filipinas? 

Si en ese Tratado de Paris se hubieran 
simplemente declarado la retirada de los 
espanoles y la cesacion de su dominio legal 
si lo tuvo, sobre el territorio filipino: si 
America, al aceptar la paz, hubiese firmado 
el Tratado sin perjuicio de los derechos de 
Filipinas y de entenderse despues con el 
Gobierno Nacional Filipino existente, 
reconociendo asi la soberania de este, su 
alianza y los compromisos de honor, con el 
mismo, claro es que no procederia la protests 
contra sus actos. Pero dados los terminos 
del Articulo 3° del Protocolo, dado el proceder 
de los Comisionados Americanos, y ante la 
necesidad imperiosa de salvaguardar los 
derechos nacionales de mi patria, consigno 
esta protesta, que hago estensiva por las 
razones espuestas, y con las salvedades de 
derecho que corresponden, contra la accion 
y los acuerdos tornados en la Conferencia de 
la Paz en Paris y en el Tratado firmado por 
los Comisionados de America y Espana. 

Y al hacer esta protesta, reclamo en 
nombre del pueblo filipino, del de su 
Presidente y de su Gobierno, el cumplimiento 
de la declaration solemne hecha por el muy 
ilustre William MacKinley, Presidente de la 
Republica de los Estados Unidos de Norte 
America, de que, al ir a la guerra, no le 
guiaba intento alguno de engrandecimiento 
y estencion del territorio nacional, sino solo 
el culto a los principios de humanidad, el 
deber de libertar a pueblos tiranizados y el 
deseo de proclamar los derechos inalienables, 
con la soberania propia, de los paises 
libertados del yugo de Espana. 

Dios guarde a V.V.E.E. muchos anos, 

Excmos. Sres. 

- FELIPE AGONCILLO 



85 



Official protest against the Paris Peace Treaty, December 12, 1898. (English 
text) 



PARIS, 12th of December, 1898. 

Their Excellencies, the Presidents and Delegates of the Spanish American Peace Commission, 
Paris. 



The very noble and gallant General 
Emilio Aguinaldo, President of the 
Philippine Republic, and his Government 
have honoured me with the post of Official 
Representative to the very Honourable 
President and Government of the United 
states of America, devolving on me, at the 
same time, the duty of protesting against 
any resolutions contrary to the independence 
M that country which might be passed by 
the Peace Commission in Paris. 

and Jhl 5 ^ 3lready ter minated its sessions, 
as oblw S U u 0nSpassedcann °tbe accepted 
Comm at Zn^ myG u °~n t, since the 
wise adm f neither heard - nor in ^y 
Phihppin tt6d ■? US deliberations, the 

^sUable^Veh?; ?° Held 

ln relation, l ght to int ervene in them, 

I fulf W might 3ffeCt thGir fUtUre - 
Prote s t U as 1 I 1 ' d there u fore - my dut y. when I 
in the nam ° l r most solemn manner, 
NaU onal G n l the President and the 
a B«nst anv Vl ? ment ° f the Philippines, 
Peac e ConLencr-nP agreed Up ° n at the 

0f the Pili* ' "dependent personality 
unrecogni Zed P '7 n People is entirely 
torm to in,'" ' luatte mpts are made in any 
resolution „ hi ? , 0n these inhabitants, 
by their pukl™ have not been sanctioned 

" an legally dL^ Wer8 ' the onl y one s who 
history. 6cide as to their future in 

Spa ' 

P°wer to de c ^ 1Utely devoid of a status and 
af °rementioned !° 3 " y sha P e or form, the 
and the p hili ^. mat ter. The Union of Spain 

tw o historical fi, f 8, Was fou nded solely on 
ri e h t of the pi T ' ln which the exclusive 
destiny was ; J , Plnos to decide their own 

Sangre) of the 1 2 S A Com P act " (Pacto de 

into between the p March > 1565 » entered 
General Don Miguel Lopez 



de Legazpi and the Filipino sovereign, 
Sikatuna, a compact which was ratified and 
confirmed on the one side, by the King of 
Spain, Philip II, and, on the other side, by 
the Monarchs of Mindanao, Bisayas and 
Luzon and by the Supreme Chief of that 
Confederation, the Sultan Lacandola; 
proclaiming as a consequence, the 
autonomous nationality of the Kingdom of 
"New Castile", formed by the Philippine 
Islands, under the sceptre of the King of 
Spain. 

Second: — The so-called "Constitution of 
Cadiz", in the discussion, vote, promulgation 
and execution of which the Deputies and 
Filipino people took an active part; and by 
which Constitution the nationality of "The 
Spains" was made effective. 

But from the very first moment in which 
the Peninsular Public Powers attempted to 
impose their absolute sovereignty on the 
Islands, the Filipinos protested energetically 
by force of arms, and from the first attempt 
in 1814, the struggle in defense of their 
political personality was implanted. 

When, in 1837, the violent deprivation 
of their rights was consummated, the 
Filipinos again protested Spain sustaining 
against them a fratricidal and inhuman 
struggle, which has lasted from that time 
onwards up to the present day. 

Falsehood, which always characterized 
the actions of the Peninsular authorities, 
constantly hid from the world the fact of the 
real situation of force, which has lasted 
almost a hundred years. 

At length, at the end of the present 
century, the Spanish forces have been 
completely routed by those of the natives, 
and Spain cannot now even allege the 
possession by her of the Islands; because the 
permanency of a handful of Peninsular 
soldiers, (approximately 400) who are holding 



86 



out, besieged in one or two fortresses in the 
south of the Archipelago, cannot constitute 
such a right. The Spanish Government has 
ceased to hold any dominion by deed and by 
right; and the only authority which exists 
there and preserves order, is that constituted 
by the Filipinos, with the solemn sanction 
of their votes, the only legal fount of positive 
modern power. 

Under such conditions, the Spanish 
Commissioners in Paris have not been able, 
within the principles of the law of nations, 
to give up or transfer what, if they ever had, 
they have totally lost before the signing of 
the Protocol of Washington and the 
arranging of the terms of the Peace Treaty 
in Paris. 

The Filipino people who consented to the 
"Blood Compact" and the "Constitution of 
1812," annulled those conventions, by reason 
of Spain not complying with her 
undertakings, and renewed their sovereignty 
by the solemn proclamation of the Philippine 
Republic on the 1st of August, 1898, and by 
the establishment of a Government and a 
regular and well-ordered administration, 
created by the decisive votes of the natives. 

If any juridical effect can be attributed 
to the Spanish action in the Peace Treaty, 
within the principles of International Law, 
it is the explicit renunciation of all future 
pretention over the land, the dominion and 
possession of which she has lost, and 
therefore is only of use to make the 
recognition of the corporate body of the 
Filipino nation, and that of their rights to 
rule effectively in respect of their future. 

The United States of America, on then- 
part, cannot allege a better right to 
constitute themselves as arbitrators as to 
the future of the Philippines. 

On the contrary, the demands of honour 
and good faith impose on them the explicit 
recognition of the political status of the 
people, who, loyal to their conventions, were 
a devoted ally of their forces in the moments 
of danger and strife. The noble General 
Emilio Aguinaldo and the other Filipino 
Chiefs were solicited to place themselves at 
the head of the suffering and heroic sons of 
that country, to fight against Spain and to 
second the action of the brave and skillful 
Admiral Dewey. 



At the time of imploring their armed 
co-operation, both the Commander of the 
'Petrel' and Captain Wood, in Hong Kong, 
before the declaration of war, the American 
Consuls General Mr. Pratt, in Singapore, 
Mr. Wildman, in Hong Kong, and Mr. 
Williams, in Cavite, acting as international 
agents of the great American nation, at a 
moment of great anxiety, offered to recognize 
the independence of the Filipino nation, as 
soon as victory was attained. 

Under the faith of such promises, an 
American man-of-war, the 'McCulloch' was 
placed at the disposal of the said leaders, 
and which took them to their native shores; 
and Admiral Dewey himself, by sending the 
man-of-war; by not denying to General 
Aguinaldo and his companions the exacting 
of his promises, when they were presented 
to him on board his flagship in the Bay of 
Manila; by receiving the said General 
Aguinaldo before and after his victories and 
notable deeds of arms, with the honours duo 
to the Commander-in-Chief of an allied 
Army, and Chief of an independent State, 
by accepting the efficacious cooperation of 
that Army and of those Generals; by 
recognizing the Filipino flag, and permitting 
it to be hoisted on sea and land, consenting 
that their ships should sail with the said 
flag within the places which were blockaded, 
by receiving a solemn notification of the 
formal proclamation of the Philippine 
nation, without protesting against it, nor 
opposing in any way its existence; by 
entering into relations with those Generals 
and with the national Filipino authorities 
recently established, recognized without 
question the corporate body and autonomous 
sovereignty of the people who had just 
succeeded in breaking their fetters and 
freeing themselves by the impulse of then- 
own force. 

And that recognition cannot now be 
denied by the honourable and serious people 
of the United States of America, who ought 
not to deny nor discuss the word given by 
their officials and representatives in those 
parts, in moments so solemn in gravity for 
the American Republic. 

To pretend to put now in question the 
attributes of such public funcionaries, after 
the danger, would be an act of notorious 
injustice, which cannot be consented to by 



87 



those who have the unavoidable duty of 
preserving unstained the brilliant 
reputation of the sons of the great nation 
founded by the immortal Washington, whose 
first glory was, and has always been, the 
constant fulfillment of their word of honour. 

It must be remembered here that the 
Filipinos did not fight as paid troops or 
mercenaries of America. On their arrival, 
they only received a reduced number of arms 
which were delivered to them by the order 
of Admiral Dewey. The arms, ammunition 
and provisions, with which the Filipinos have 
since sustained the war against the Spanish 
forces, were acquired, some by their 
gallantry, and others bought with their own 
hinds, these latter being exclusively provided 
oy the Filipino patriots. 

And it would not be noble to deny now, 
3^ ^ed the alliance, the courage, 

SS i 6 8lde ° f the Ame "can troops, 
lending them a decided support, both 

enthusiastic and efficacious. 

the Slf th6ir C0 -°P erati °n and without 
Sve beIn Z 81ege ' W ° Uld the Africans 

desJoy/d r b vb 0 Wh h ° T lt? haVe 

the fo~ B oil y bo ° b /«iment, but without 

rigoroS S armed deeds ' and wi thout the 

w enclosed e tn : ^ Spani3h ar ^ 

surrender ? 6 P retence of the attack and 

«JSL*S£r could " ot 

inconsiderately dZIeVh * „ n °' 

their fn r^o • mpino Generals and 

tfteir forces, is a positive and undeniable 
advantage. Without them, General 
Anderson', troops and those wh o 
afterwards were disembarked, probably 
would not have been able to have arrived at 
Manila before the suspension of hostilities 
and the signing of the Protocol of 
Washington. 

Now, if the Spaniards have not been able 
to transfer to the Americans the rights which 
they did not possess; if the former have not 



militarily conquered positions in the 
Philippines; if the occupation of Manila was 
a resulting fact, prepared by the Filipinos; 
if the international officials and 
representatives of the Republic of the United 
States of America offered to recognize the 
independence and sovereignty of the 
Philippines, solicited and accepted their 
alliance, how can they now constitute 
themselves as arbiters of the control, 
administration and future government of the 
Philippine Islands? 

If in the Treaty of Paris, there had 
simply been declared the withdrawal and 
abandonment by the Spaniards of their 
dominion — if they ever had on — over the 
Filipino territory; if America, on accepting 
peace, had signed the Treaty, without 
prejudice to the rights of the Philippines, 
and with the view of coming to a subsequent 
settlement with the existing Filipino 
National Government, thus recognizing the 
sovereignty of the latter, their alliance and 
the carrying out of their promises of honour 
to the said Filipinos, it is very evident that 
no protest against their action would have 
been made. But in view of the terms of the 
3rd Article of the Protocol, the proceedings 
of the American Commissioners, and the 
imperative necessity of safeguarding the 
national rights of my country, I make this 
protest, which I wish to comprise for the 
aforementioned reasons, but with the 
corresponding legal restrictions, as against 
the whole actiorUaken and the resolutions 
passed by the Peace Commissioners at Paris, 
and in the Treaty signed by them. And in 
making this protest, I claim, in the name of 
the Filipino nation, in that of their President 
and Government, the fulfillment of the 
solemn declaration made by the illustrious 
William McKinley, President of the Republic 
of the United States of North America, that, 
on going to war, he was not guided by any 
intention of territorial expansion, but only 
in respect to the principles of humanity, the 
duty of liberating tyrannized people, and the 
desire to proclaim the unalienable rights of 
sovereignty of the countries released from 
the yoke of Spain. 

God keep your Excellencies many years. 

— FELIPE AGONCILLO 



88 



Appendix G 

Official Directory of 
THE REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENT OF 
THE PHILIPPINES 

1898-1899 

President: Don Emilio Aguinaldo y Famy 

Department of War: 

Secretary: Don Baldomero Aguinaldo Baloy 
Director: Don Antonio Luna 

Generals of Division: 

Don Artemio Ricarte 

Don Vito Belarmino 

Don Emiliano Riego de Dios 

Brigadier Generals: 

Don Pantaleon Garcia 
Don Tomas Mascardo 
Don Mariano Llanera 
Don Mariano Noriel 
Don Isidoro Torres 
Don Miguel Malvar 
Don Paciano Rizal 
Don Pascual Alvarez 
Don Jose Ignacio Pawa 
Don Pio del Pilar 
Don Gregorio del Pilar 
Don Francisco Macabulos 

Department of the Interior: 

Secretary: Don Leandro Ibarra 
Director: Don Severino de las Alas 

Department of Foreign Affairs: 

Secretary: Don Cayetano G. Arellano 
Director: Don Trinidad H. Pardo de Tavera 
Director of Marine: Don Pascual Ledesma 
Director of Commerce: Don Esteban de la Rama 



89 



Department of Finance: 

Secretary: Don Mariano Trias y Closas 
Director: Don Benito Legarda 
Treasurer General: Don Silvestre Legaspi 

Department of Justice: 

Secretary: Don Gregorio Araneta 
Director: Don Jose M. Basa Enriquez 
Director of Registry: Don Juan Tangco 

Department of Fomento: 

Secretary: Don Felipe Buencamino Sr. 
Director of Public Instruction: Don Arsenio Cruz Herrera 
Director of Public Works: Don Fernando Canon Faustino 
Director of Agriculture & Industry: Don Jose Alejandrino 

Chairman of the Council of Government: Apolinario Mabini 
(later succeeded by Pedro A. Paterno) 

Chief Justice of the Supreme Court: Gracio Gonzaga 



90 



I 



