AiuERICAN RED CROSS MET 'S SERVICE 



PARIS 



September 13, 1919 



S1255-; 70RK OF THI3 nIJBRICAN RE3 CROSS IN EUROPE. 

Paris. 

Tbo work of tho ApToric.oi Red Cross in Europe during the pact eight months 
has been done through eighteen different commissions and unite, as follows; 



Albania 

Bosnia 



Greece 

Germany 

Italy 

liontonogr# 
North Russia 
Palestine 



Poland 

Roumania 

Serbia 

South Russia 
Switzerland 
Westorn Russia 



Budapest & Vienna 
C r ec ho- Slovakia 
Franca 

Great Britain 



Tho total value of reliof material distributed in Franco, mainly in tho 
dovastatod districts, sinco tho armistice, is now about 125,000,000 franco. In tho 
samo period other European countries have received more than 200,000,000 francs' 
worth of similar supplies, including not only modical and surgical material, but 
also clothing, food, barracks, etc. 



third was 3et aside for distribution in the devastated districts of France. The 
distribution of this matorial i3 3till continuing and trill continue for months to 

• t 

come, whilo tho shipments of relief matorial to tho commissions in Eastern Europe 
are on a constantly increasing scale and will continue thus for cany months. In 
the meantime the ahipmont of further relief material from the United States continue 
in a large way, and more than 40,000,000 francs' worth of such matorial ie either 
on route to the Rod Cross in Europo or awaiting early shipment. 



and Amgust amounted to more than 100,000,000 francs. During the past month, the 
American Army has turned over to tho Red Cross for free distribution about 90,000,000 
franc3' worth of medical and surgical supplies, which in the course of the new few 



i ut to ugo in hospitals throughout Europe through the existing Rod 



Of all tho matorial in the American Red Cross warohoueoo on May 1, one- 



Tho value of Red Cross reliof material distributed in Europe during July 




Records compiled at Paris headquarters show that a majority of the male 
./orders 110 J operating in the outlying commissions have seen service in the 
Amerxaan Expeditionary Forces. The proportion of Army men in the Red Cross service 
xook a deciaod jump with the demobilization, the Army authorities pursuing a liberal 
policy in the matter of releasing men in Franco for the purpose of taking service 
with the Rod Cross. The army complexion of the Red Cross was further emphasized 

by the coming in large numbers of nurses who had seen service in the base hospitals 
of the military service. 

The following is a brief summary of the vroik which has been deno sinco the 
armistice by the various commissions ; 

ALBANIA 

American personnel, abcut Bo, under Lieut, -Col. william Warfield , of N Q w 
York. Hospitals, dispensaries, dental stations, child wOlfare, civic hygiene 
general relief. Headquarters at Tirana, with branch stations at various ppints. 

• A recent report says: "Albania presents a problem somewhat different from 

that o: other Balkan. states. Its civilization is primitive, and its people have 
never . known what it is to have assistance from ourside sources. They are most re- 
sponsive to any suggestion for the improvement - of their living conditions. Ai 
present our personnel is operating in three distinct units because of difficulties 
of transport and communication. 

"Perhaps at no poiht in the Balkans is finer work being done than in 
Albania. Toe results are abundantly evidenced in the pathetic gratitude of the 
3imple people who have been so neglected in the past that it is ‘.difficult for them 
to understand that anyone should take an unselfish interest in their welfare." 

Anti-tuberculosis work is a prominent feature of the Red Cross program. 

In spite of the outdoor life led by the mountaineers, it is estimated that 9o per 
cent of the country's sick are victims of some form of tuberculosis. 

The first American flag ever officially flung to the breeze in Albania 
was hoisted over the headquarters building of the American Red Cross in Tirana, on 
March 5, 1919. With Tirana, Scutari, Durazzo and Elbasan as permanent bases, the 
American Red Cross has sent out itinerant medical units into all the mountain country. 

... The typical unit consists of a doctor, two nurses, an interpreter, and such 
native help as the occasion requires. It travels either by camion, cart or horse- 
back, and many of these units have penetrated to neighborhoods which hav§. never 
known a doctor, where Americans had never been seen, where the sight of a woman 
ministering to the sick and wounded was strange enough to hold a crowd of simple 
mountaineers spellbound for hours. 

The first sewing machines ever seen in Albania are those imported from 
Amorica for the Red Cross workrooms in Tirana. 

tfomon proponderago in the Albanian Commission, and among the othor Balkan 
commissions it i3- called the "Women's Unit." American women have found that they 
are jusit as safe among the rugged mmxrjt Albanian mountaineers as among their own 
neighbors at home. The work they are doing is moreover helping groatly to raise 
the position of their sox in Albania. Anyone who has any doubts as to the effic- 
iency and all-around capacity of the American woman doctor should visit Albania. 



-3- 



BOSNIA. 

f T^l 1 »»« of^orican workers, under Major f. C. Thwaits, of Milwaukee 
Ja. -ont into Bosnia during the oarly summer of 1919, to cooperate with the American 
Relief Administration in the v/orfc of child feeding* The unit has continued this 
program, and has also undertaken a considerable amount of supplementary work in 
supplying much needed medical and surgical requisites to the local hospitals in 
_osnia and Herzegovina, now part of the new Jugo-Slav state. 

f 11 * he of th;5 -s unit have just been decorated by the Serbian 

^ h8 Ci ^ tl0n readin g: "These unselfish American officers and nurses, 

coming far across the ocean to an almost unknown country, went among our wounded 
and afflict.*, braving contagion, renting long hours, enduring setere terIeMp.1 
They have shown a devotion and tenderness to their patients that is deserving of 
the highest praise of government and people. 1 ’ ° 

,, . . T ^® headquarters cf the uait is at Sarajevo, the scene of the pistol shot 

uhac set off the world war. “The help brought to us America at a most critical 
time gave us net; hope,” declared the provincial governor in av/arding the decora- 
tions. . “They opened up soup kitchens and filled the stomachs of the starving. 

They distributed clothes to the needy. They encouraged the farmers to plant big 
crops. They brought to our hospitals the supplies for v/ant of which they were 
almost on the point of closing.” 

A report of Dr. Lily Taylor, of Vassar College, a member of this unit, 
gives some interesting 3ide-lights on the work in Bosnia. She says, for instance; 

“The most striking impression which comes to the American visitor in 
Bosnia is the remarkable prestige of America in thi 9 corner of the world. American 
relief has had an enormous effect on public opinion, which looks upon these efforts 
as an evidence of the good-v/ill and interest of the American people. 

“An important Red Cross work here has been to counteract And dispel cer- 
tain native customs and habits which are detrimental to health. Modern teachings 
regarding care of tables and children are received with quiet and earnest consid- 
eration. Our work ought to do much to reduce the awful infant mortality which has 
prevailed among these people for many years. 

“Only the women of the Red Cross unit are permitted to visit the Turkish 
harems. The harems we saw did not conform to our expectations in one important 
respect. There vras only one wife. Polygamy has not been practiced among the Turks 
of Bosnia for many generations. 

“Our most valued gifts to these people were the American layettes for 
babies. They have gone to the homds of all creeds and races and havo had a far- 
reaching influence on the women of the country. 

BUDAPEST AND VIENNA . 



The first units of American Red Cross workers to be established in Austria- 
Hungary are just being sent out in response to urgent appeals for hospital assist- 
ance. The first special train to Budapest will carry about thirty carloads of med- 
ical and surgical supplies, which will be distributed by a unit of a dozen American 
Red Cross officers* A similar special train has also been ordered for Vienna. The 
official reports reaching Red Cross headquarters show that conditions in the hos- 
pitals in both Vienna and Budapest are very serious , owing principally to the lack 
cf essential drugs, surgical dressings and soap.. Both cities are seriously over- 
crowded and there is a large sickness rate from diseases due to malnutrition. 

An Amorican Red Cross ambulance unit with ten ambulances visited Budapest 
during the latter part of August, coming frem Bucharest with ths Roumanian army, _ 
and another small Red Cross unit from Belgrade visited Budapest aboux the same time 
to make a survey of the needs of tho city. 



-4- 



CZECHQ-SLOVAKIA . 

1 ' 



f v f ! h American Red Cross in Czocho-Slevakia, under Kajcr 
Herbert S. Johnson,. of Boston, has varied from ton to fort£ persons. It v/as sent 
into Czechoslovakia cluing the early summer of 1919 to cooperate with the 'merican 
Relie. Administration in the Hoover child-feeding program. The unit has continued 
this program and has gradually spread out into work which includes distribution of 

the W h ° SpltelS ' “e, and genera! 

^ the ^ peak ci the child-f oeding program more than 400,000 meals per day 
were served, mainly through the organization of local committees. Sc successful was 
this work that the authorities requested the American Red Cross to remain for some 
longer in erdor to direct and assist tho govornmont in a gonoral health cam- 

+ " Y °!f 'v°A k r r5 ha r * ccom ? dispensable,'* was tho official message sont irem 
Prague to the Red Cross headquarters in Paris. B 



Under American suporvision the Czechoslovak paoplo havo taken a groat in- 
terest m health work and the newly organized Czechoslovakia Rod Cross has gained 
strength and .prestige. It is planned that this organization shall gradually take 
ever the work begun by tho Americuna. 

One of the happiest days in Prague was that on which the first shipment of 
American second-hand clothing, fifteen carloads, arrived at Red Cross headquarters. 

The groat clothing shortago in C zee ho -Slovakia i3 due to several causes, but primarily 
to lack of wool. 



Tuberculosis is one of the greatest post-war problems in Cz echo- Slovakia , and 
a recent Bed Cross report from Prague estimates that 50 per eont of the people in 
industrial districts of Moravia are tubercular. It is expected that many of the 
children will be saved by moans of a comprehensive child-feeding program. Two out 
of every three -^babies born in certain districts of Czecho-Slovtkia last year died 
from ailments caused by underfeeding. 

At the request of the Czocho-Slovak government, the American Rod Cross 
loanod several experts to take charge of the various largo Jaygienic and health 
problems. Among. these experts wero Major B. E, Holden, who has been chosen by the 
Czechs to have general supervision of building and construction plans of the new 
republic, and Captain Prod Wolp, who is reorganizing the Czech warehousing system. 

The Junior Rod Cross contributed monoy to eond 500 boys and girls from 
C zee ho- Slovakian cities on a vacation into tho country. The children were selected 
from among those whoso undernourishod condition made them most likely to succumb 
to the heat and disease of tho city. Their vacation was spent in a mountain camp 
at smokovic , where they ’.re re in charge of three American women. 

One of the most notable servicea performed by the Red Cross to Czecho- 
slovakia, aiming the past f6w months has been the convoying of a large number of 
Czech veterans from Siberia. American Red Cross workers accompanied the wounded 
Czechs, 2,000 in number, all the way on their 15,000 mile trip from Russia. 



FRANCE. 



The personnel of the American Red Cross in Franco has diminished rapidly 
during the past few months with the gradual closing up of most of the relief acti- 
vities. The principal work 7/hich will continue during the next . few months is that 
of the distribution ox relief material in the devastated districts. 

Other departments of the work in France which are still active are the 
Heme Service, Graves Photography, Stars and Stripes Bureau of French Orphans, 
Studio of portrait i&sks and the Junior Rod Cross. 



Red Cross^FraSc^^incp 1 !, bri6f Sp ^ Ce t0 SUrr ' raarize adequately the work of the 
_ . , . * "^ ne armistice. \7hat it has meant to France v/as recently 

summarized m a lecture delivered by more than 20,000 French officers to their 

•* + 3 ? le ° tures are a regular weekly feature of training in the French army. 

r T 6 TC ° Uy lMtura ar0 E “ l0 ' t0<1 hy *“ 89»erel »taff and a sylllbL 
tolled Lillet ° Ut if the fcrm of a "^ 8kly "ullotin." one of the Xeoturee 
i s th ? mcnth Cf July ' yas dsvoi;ed to a discussion of the work of the 
. . A r ^!u ln /Tf nCe * ^ 9 ^ a dls were given of the personnel, the system of 

' v R, ana . 8 strength cf the various departments. An outline was given 

f j ‘ . ™ or ^ lv ’^ :Lari relief, assistance to refugees and repatries, the 

^ ^ S , ^ vGrculosxs, the protection of children, the reeducation of mutilos, 

iimpricflr^ni'^oM 11 °r devastated regions and homo service for French ’.vivos of 
Sd h™ , In co f ialusiOK the lecture said; "The relief work of the Amorican 

Red vross has made us realize more than anything elso the cooperation of the United 
States. It nas been not merely , the association of two armies but of two peoples, 
it is n 0 t only xho American soldier coming to the aid of his French comrade. It is 
squally the American women coning to ihe aid of the French woman andthe American 
child assisting the French child. Those who, whether French or American, have workdfi 
side by side in all of these fields of effort have learned to appreciate the dif- 
ferent qualities employed during a common purpose and are constituted a sacred guard- 
ianship over Franc o-Amcrican friendship." 

A distinguished French waiter, Uadame Andre D’Alix, in a recent bock says; 
"The American Red Cross is the most perfect charitable organization of the twen- 
tieth century and the most unsullied 'weapon of brotherhood between the nations." 



Earon B'Anthouard, head of the French Red Cross, said recently; "There is 
no one in Franca who is not aware of the work of the American Red Cross in our coun- 
try, no one who does not feel deeply appreciative of the efforts of this organiza- 
tion." b 



GREAT BRITAIN . 

The work cf the Commission for Great Britain began in the early days of 
the war, through the agency of the London chapter. It owed a great deal of Jits 
efficiency to the large number of Americans resident in Great Britain who aated 
as volunteers. At one time the rolls of the American Red Cross in Great Britain 
carried the names of nearly 2 ,OCO workers. The work was largely with and for 
American soldiers, but it also inci.udoa a considerable amount of assistance to 
various British organizations, such as the: British Red Cross, the Scottish T/omen’s 
Hospitals, the British child welfare societies and hundreds of British hospitals. 

Since the armistice hundreds of gifts of supplies have boon mado to 
t^ese same agencies, and the work of the American Red Cross in Great Britain will 
be continued on a pea^a-time basis through the reorganization of the London chap- 
ter. The most important work now under way in Great Britain is that of the Home 
Service Department, which finds a large field ox activity among the Irish, Scot- 
tish and English dependents of American soldiers. The Junior- Rod Cross is also 
preparing to undertake a considerable program of work for children. 



GREECE* 



# of tho American Rod Cross in Greoco has boon undor tho direction 

of Col, Sdvrard R. Capps, of Princoton Universijry* It has boon devoted largely to 
care of children in devastated areas of western and oastern Macedonia, refugoo work 
in Macedonia and tho Greek Islands, assisting civil and military hospitals , con- 
catting typhus and other diseases, child welfaro work, survey and improvement of 
agricultural conditions, establishment of a factory for tho manufacture of arti- 
ficial limbs and similar enterprises.. 

In the tarritory of eastern Macedonia about 50,000 refugees were carod 
for. Canteens and workrooms we re opened and special attention was given to the 
care of children. A serious epidemic of typhus developed and the American Red Cross 
in cooperation with C-reek .physicians succeeded after a vigorous carqpaign, in check- 
ing the further spread of the disease, 

1 3ith the completion of this first phase of the American relief work , the 
Red Cross turned its energies to a constructive program for assisting the author- 
ities in the establishment oh a sound, permanent basis of its schemes for hygienic 
and child welfare, the prevention of epidemics, the care of orphans and the train- 
ing of nurses. 

Two American agricultural experts completed agricultural surveys of the 
farming possibilities of Greece and the island of Crete, and the result of their 
efforts is expected to furnish a basis for the whole future development of agricul- 
ture in this country. 

The Mss eager, an Athens newspaper, said a few days ago: "No work of bro- 

therhood and charity which we have ever known has compared with that of the American 
Red Cross in Greece, The Americans have accomplished a notable work. Two million 
pounds of foodstuffs have been given out, and the total number of articles of cloth- 
ing distributed has reached 2§6,000. The Red Cross made generous gifts to the 
hospitals in Ka valla, Serres and Drama." 

On a recent occasion members of the Greek royal family sent an urgent re- 
quest to the American Cross for the services of a physician to treat King 
Alexander who had been severely bitten by a dog. A doctor was immediately dispatched 
to the jalace and cauterized the wound 6f the young monarch, who made an excellent 
recovery. 

The city of Kavalla is preparing to erect a memorial to the American people 
in recognition of the work of the Red Cross in that district. 



GERM ANY. 

One of the most notable tasks undertaken by the Red Cross. during the 
post-armistice period v/as the sending of a commission into the Russian prison camps 
of Germanj. The work of this commission 7/aa closed on September 1st, with the. 
withdrawal of fche Interallied' Board and the turning over of the work of repatriation 
to the German authorities. 

The Red Cross accomplishment in Germany was mainly the care of the. Russian 
prisoners during the most critical period; namely, the time betv/sen the armistice 
and the date 7 /hen tho blockade v/as raised and Germany was able to carry on the work 
without outside assistance*. The Red Cross work consisted principally of the fol- 
lowing: distribution 0 f clothing to the prisoners; distribution of medicines, 

hosDital supplies and supplementary foods to the camp hospitals; and the handling 
ft foodstuffs for the Interallied Board from tho point where tney woro dolivorod 
in Germany to tho various prison camps. 



I 



** dd lt f® n thl9 » th « Cross Commission was consulted by the Inter- 

charifd^+h a11 raatt0rs rslati ng to the repair Lut»;.on of the prisoners, and was 
g d qL th L iirra ? S !! nent ° f travel nation: for ,45 CDO repatriated prisoners, 
the p«h extent of the work may b.- gained from the fact that 

clea'of eT«+M«i pri301 ? ere in tho cat ’ 33 ^ver 600,000 different arti- 

, xn *> 9 ? nd billed frow its medical department at Berlin 266 wholesale 

^or U tS B Tnt^illiM n n t0nS ofmrtdical and 8 «rgical supplies. It handled • 

Lately 7, 360^ons 6f°f cod! S ^ r ° C ° ivinS Stations and warehouses approx- 



I ITALY 

, , ^?; ng thG past six friths the American Rod Cross in Italy has gradually 

contracted the enormous work of civilian relief which it undertook there during the 
mr, and at the present timo a porsonnol of about 25 persons is conducting a lim- 
lxod program of anti- tuberculosis, nurses' training and homo seance work. 

, . ln Juljr tile Commission to Italy, under Lieut.* Col. S.. 0. Bartlett, 

found a notable opportunity for emergency relief work on the occasion of the Hugello 
earthquake. The, American Red Cross immediately made a large subscription of money 
and supplies to the Italian relief committees; Col. Bartlett and his staff estab- 
lished a base near the scene of the disaster, and two trainloads of barracks, tents, 
food and clothing v/ere forwarded from Paris-. 

The Italian authorities have decided to re-name one. of the quake-ruined 
villages "America" in recognition of the prompt assistance rendered by the Red Gross. 
A considerable number of the earthquake sufferers are .now housed in long steel bar- 
racks which were formerly the homes of American doughboys on the Western Front. 

The work of the home service department in Italy will not be concluded 
before the late autumn. A large number of allotment checks from the Italian-American 
soldiers are still being received in Italy. Some of the addresses are 'wrong and 
must be corrected after a Red Cross investigation, and in very many cases the nature 
of 'the check itself is not understood by the people' who hold them. The home ser- 
vice work in Italy offers a great variety of interesting problems and it- has been 
of great service to the people of that country. * 

Sig. Giovanni Ciraolo , the new president of the Italian Red Cross, re- 
cently said; "I am deeply grateful for the cooperation and encouragement of th<S 
American Rod Cross. I shall bring to my work a renewed admiration for tho American 
people. le can surely do no better than to emulate the enthusiasm and work of our 
sister organization, the American Red Cross." 

During the recent labor troubles in Florence, tho American Red Cross was 
one organization that even the unruly mob .rejected and spared. During the looting 
of suburban villas in tho noighbo - hood of Florence, a large mob visitod the resi- 
dence of an officer of the American Red Cross, Only a caretaker was at the house 
whon the mob approached, but the caretaker, an accomplished- speech maker, addressed 
the mob, describing the work of tho American Rod Cross in Italy. Then the ring- 
leader, himself something of an orator, al 60 addressed his iollowors, dwelling on 
tho great good dono in Italy by tho Rod Cross: "There is no ono in Italy who does 

not know of the work of these Americans," ho said. "There is no one who does not 
admiro and respoct them." At tho conclusion of his speech he exchanged formal 
salutations v/ith tho carotakor and proceodod at the houd of his raon .to tho next 
villa. 



MONTSIGG RO . 

Lieut. -Col. K. R. Fairclough of Loland Stanford Univnrsit*', i 3 tho hand 
pt tho Unit of fifty American Red Cross workers in Montenegro, '/.'here the need has 
beon vary ^ groat and the necessity for nodical assistance most urgent. The Rod Cross 
operated four hospitals at central points, rune, a number of dispensaries, canteens 
and dental clinic;, and htu- introduced .U-iorican method.*: of health improvement and 
sanitation. ."The rosultfi have been most satisfactory," writes Gol. Fairclough. 
"While the strictly tenpornry relief work ’.Till be gradually discontinued, it is 
mat desirable that certain medical units should be maintained and an effort made - 
to enable the people to improve living conditions." 

Malaria and tuberdulosio have boon the chief oneraios of the Red Cross 
doctors in this country. Child- ’elf are work and ' v crk among mothers had brought 
excellent . results. 

Conditions in Montenegro are extremely primitive. The country has no 
railroads, ho automobiles, for/ v/agone and at the present tirae comparatively fee./ 
horses or other boasts of burden. VJith a population loss than that of Jersey City 
and an area smaller than that of the state of Connecticut, . Montenegro has suffered 
severely from the war, and has not been able to make as rapid a post-war recovery 
as some o? its larger neighbors. The Rod Cross has distributed considerable quan- 
tities of food and clothing, but at presont tho most pressing nnod in Montenegro 
is medical holp. Most sections of tho country have no physicians or surgeons, and 
when tho Rod Cross arrived thoro was not a singlo hospital available for the civil- 
ian population. 

The Red Cross has treated many cobos of typhua and recently tho government 
has arranged an infectious disease hospital which is operating under the supervision 
of the Red Cross. 

atoach of the Red Cross hospitals intelligent Montenegrin v/omon are being 
trained in nursing and sanitary work. During tho next year it is planned to con- 
centrate tho medical work along constructive linos to tho ond that on tho retire- 
ment of the American Red Cross every Montenegrin city will be so qquippod and 
schooled that the work of the past year will hoc one permanent. 



NORTH RUSSIA . 

\ 

The commission to Archangel under Major D , 0. Livoly, of San Francisco, 
has just completed its work, retiring with the last members of tho American 
Expeditionary Force. It has, however, built up a largo local organization and has 
turned ovor to this organization a sufficient quantity of supplioe to insure the 
continuance of its work there throughout the winter. 

Tho work of tho Red Cross in North Russia ftas not confined to service 
for the ,»morican soldiors. There was also a largo work for the civiliun population 
and particularly for school children. During a period of a fow months, 2,000,000 
hot lunches were distributed to 300 schools with 2o,000 pupils. To tho civilian 
population the Rod Cross in tho seine period distributed 10,000 pounds of cocoa, 
20,000 pounds of sugar, 38,000 cans of milk and similar quantities of other sup- 
plies. Tho local hospitals and tho district zomstvos received various articles 
of' hospital equipment and tho asylums and refugees got warm clothing, food and 

other necessities. ’ 

In an official citation, Brigadior Gonorul Richardson, of tho American 
Expeditionary Force, said; "Major Livoly has boon in ehargo of allRod Gross work 
in North Russia. Ho organized and equipped tho Rod Cross hospital in Archangol 
and assistod in its operation for tho bonofit of American woundod. In close cooper- 
ation with tho Army nodical corps, ho kept up a constant flow of Rod Cross articles 



3y til cnortv fr °f d ° spito «f climto and transport. 

tainin/co^fiAl Sd frtLS? 11 ? !“ sy ? p * thy ho assisted in building ue and train- 
AmcricSns!^ 1 * friondly rolatlen6 bot ™ cn the civilian population and the 

-U^i ^? rica “ Rod Cross hospital at Archangol has been turned ovrr to the 

local government to be used as a base hospital for the Russian army. 

^ r °P°^t on the child t;o 1 faro work in Archangel says; "probably no relief 
~ . r ° Vcr undcr ‘ tako « ha* not '.7ith such inriodiatc.* and satisfactory results." The 

??5 Sv°^+SL r r ar - C ? ly by th ° rosults * but a grovring interest in America 

+h d nld rythi ”S Awarxean. Delegates representing 20,000 school children visited 

Rusin to vs hard^^r 0 ^’ “J d ° Jf ttl0 3 P Q ° chos «f appreciation and loft behind 

“childAn of Zrict.”» ° " S ° th0r S ° UTOnir6 t0 f ° rmrd0d t0 th ° 

****** nilitary attache in Archangel recently said in an interview; 
Even in the most remote villagos, America has become the topic of foremost interest 
among the Russian peasants, for in some incredible way tho conviction that America 
will be the savior of Russia has spread to every sector in tho north. It is true 
beyond a douct that to tho American Rod Cross and its thorough work in North Russia 
chiofiy boiongs the credit for having won the friendship of tho Russian people. In 
these times of neree factional hatred and partisanship, those people have been' 
particularly impressed by an organization which has fed them and cured them of 
disease regardless of religion, race or politics* 1T 



PALESTINE . 

The large commission which tho American Rod Cross sent to Palestine A 
year ag# under Lieut. —Col. Robert II. Finley of New York, has been gradually with- 
drawn during the past throe months after accomplishing a wide and varied work. 

A considerable number of its personnel has been retained by the American Commis- 
sion for Relief in the Near East, and will carry Qn the work which tho Rod Cross 
turned over to that organization. 

Among the various activities undertaken in Palestine were the following: 
Refugee relief, orphanages, child-feeding, hospitals, dispensaries, agricultural 
training, workrooms and repatriation of Armenian refugees. 

In ten months time nearly 3,000 x babies ftereccared for in one Red Cross 
clinic. In Jerusalem 1,750 women were given employment in the industrial work- 
shops. Similar workshops in Jaffa manufactured quilts and bedding for 5,000 
refugees. An orphanage at Damascus , one of a chain of similar institutions, sup- 
ported 26o Armenian children. Anti- typhus and anti-malaria work was effectively 
done at Tiberius and Jerusalem. 

The Patriarch of Jerusalem on the occasion of a recent celebration of a 
church festival said; "I avail myself of this opportunity to express my high appre- 
ciation and great admiration of the work accomplished by the American Red Cross. 

It has accomplished many valuable philanthropic services in these most critical 
days to the suffering population of the Holy City and of Palestine without any self- 
interest* I convey to its workers our many thanks and gratitude to the glorious 
American nation." 

The commanding officer of the British forces in Palestine , said : "Please 
accept my most sincoro thanks for the great and successful efforts made to help 
in the recovery and regeneration of this country. You have tended and nursed tho 
sick, provided for the widows and fatherless, and found work fornthe poor and needy. 
You have gained the respect, friendship and admiration of all of us who have been 
associated mn your work with you." 



E1255 



-1C- 

PQUND 

Tho largest of tho American Rod Cross commissions in Europe is that at 
v/ork in Poland under Lieut.- Col* A. J. Chosloy. With a total personnel of about 
100 Americans, it is engaged in a very largo and important,, work , mainly in Eajrtom. 
Poland v/hcro a million refugees must be reestablished in ‘their devastated homos. 
Some conception of the reconstruc tion problem facing this now ’republic can bo 
gained from tho statomont that nearly 750 ; 0C0 houses have toon destroyed* For a 
time the campaign against typhus* was tho most important and vital task facing the 
new government, but gradually this situation is being surmounted and at the pres- 
enorgies of the Rea Cross are being devoted to a broader program of 
civilian and medical relief in tho devastated districts. 

iho Red Cross has shipped m several thousand tons of clothing and medi- 
cines, hospital equipment and supplementary food supplies. Poland lacks every sort 
of medical and hospital material and without continued American assistance, it 
would be helpless to cope with tho situation in its devastated areas. The Red Cross 
found .the plight of the children of Poland worse than in any other war- stricken 
country. 

The chief of staff of the Polish army recently wrote to the Red Cross 
Commissioner: "Please accept these few words, of appreciation which only inadequately 
express our feelings, but which will aid in the continuation of tho 15o years of 
friendship between Poland and the United States* You came to us as the represen- 
tative of your groat humanitarian agoncy, tho American Red Cross, at a time when 
Poland was entirely without medical supplies and was suffering from groat shortage 
of food. You, with tho splendid cooperation of your personnel, '.yore the first to 
give aid $££ in stamping out contagious diseases by the distribution of drugs and 
clothing and by establishing hpspitals and warehouses x hn d by giving rolief in such 
.an efficient and gonorous way that thousands of lives havo been saved.. The v/onder- 
ful work of tho American Red Cross in Poland has been constructive and full of 
the spirit of organization, it has shown us the way for our future work of re- 
construction. n 

One of the problems which the American Rod Cross has taken in hand on be- 
half of tho Polish government is that of water supply. American experts are now 
surveying tho whole country and helping to formulate a water supply and public 
health program which is bound to raise the health level and reduce mortality to 
a marked degree. 

ROUMANIA . 

Immediately after tho armistice the American Red Cross sent a large 
commission into Roumania under Lieut. -Col* Gideon Wells. The situation which 

was encountered m this country called for speed al treatment* Roumania was devas- 
tated to an unusual degree, owing to the occupation of the German armies in tho 
south and the Russians in the north. Russian soldiers stripped the country tare 
when their army dissolved in 1917 and 1918, Roumania had been, cut off from tho 
world for four years J and the crop of 1918 was a complete failure. Tho entire 
transport system was broken down. When the Gormans retired in 1918 they took with 
them all the necessities of life- The peasams were v/ithout cattle or seed, and 
during the following year there was a great shortage of wheat and maize. Roumania 
Iosd ten per cent of its population in 3 91? and 1918 from war and disease. The Red 
Cross found people living on roots and grass m many parts of Roumania. 

To deal with , these conditions tho Rod Cross established relief units in all 
important towns and cities in tho needy areas where it operated cantoen^, dis- 
tributed food and clothing and provided medical relief. Workrooms were established 
for tho manufacture of clothing for the. poor and these workrooms wore provided with 
more than 6 q 0 American sowing machines. 



Buch diocases gi3 typhus, smallpox, tufcorculosis , jqfphilis *oro rife, 
and the health and sanitary conditions were nuch in need of attention. The sup- 
ply of doctors s&8 very inadequate, and the f ovr doctors t/ho remained were hampered 
by lack of medical supplies and bad transport facilities* 

In tho prosecution of its work tho Roumanian Commission conquered mny 
obstacles connected with the scarcity of shipping and transport facilities. It ha 3 
to eqploy alnoot every form of conveyance — steamships, ooioi cars, railroado, 
ox-carts, pack horses, nulo trains and personal carriages. Tho effect upon the 
pooplo in these war devastated areas cannot be measured. Thousands of lives were 
saved and millions of people in a destitute condition and discouraged by hopeless 
outlook woro assisted and induced to begin life anew. 

Tho morale of the pooplo, broken by long yours of warfare with intense 
sufferings and hardships, was re-established ay to a certain extent, iiovomonts for 
tho aid of children and the improvement of living conditions wore startod, v/hich 
will bo carried forward and will boar fruit in the years to conic. 



SERBIA - 

The Commission to Serbia has teen from the start in some respects the 
largest and most important of tho commissions in the Balkans. At ono time it 
had an American personnel of over 170 porsons, chiefly doctors and nurses. The 
problem of medical relief has been and still romaln3 the most serious hindrance to 
tho effective reconstruction of Serbia, and the no- commissioner, Lieut. -Col. E. E. 
Rumo, has laid out his program for tho immediate future on a basis nt± which con- 
sists almost entirely of medical relief. Only about a hundred doctors remain in tho 
rholo of Serbia to care for a population of 4,000,000 people. At tho present time 
- the Red Gross has 3o doctors, 5o nurses aitf 5 dentists at work in various parts of 
tho country. Small hospitals have boon established at important points, and public 
dispensaries opened. Stops have boon taken to check and prevent epidemics of 
typhus and ether disoasos. 

Distributions of food and clothing on a large sculo were necossary during 
the euriy months of the Red Cross work, and those still continue on a gradually de- 
creasing scale* Workrooms for the making of garments for tho poor have been 
inaugurated and more than 500 American sowing machines have been provided. 

In cooperating with the Serbian govornnont stops have boon taken for the 
re-equipment and improvement of all tho local Serbian hospitals and orphanagos, 
and tho development of industrial work suitable for women and children All of this 
work has boon diroctod to tho idea of helping tho pooplo to help themselves and to 
reestablish and improve tho normal living conditions. 

A rcoent Red Cross roport says tho wolfuro of the country is seriously 
threatened by the growth of tuberculosis, syphilis, pellagra and other disoasos. 
Provision must also bo mado for largo numbers of war orphans and destitute chil- 
dren. The government of Serbia is fully alive to those conditions, but it is°im-. 
poverishod by long warfare that it is unable to cope with them except through assist?* 
anco frem outside, YJhilo seme parts of tho American Rod Cross emergency relief rcay 
be discontinued , . it* is niost desirable that certain tranches of the work should bo 
carried on. It has boon decided that snail medical units consisting of ono or two 
doctors and a few nurses shall bo maintained at certain centers to aid in tno care 
of tho dostituto population, in the improvement of sanitaijc c onditions , and in 
dovelieping constructive health purk; at least until, tho armies can oe completely 
demobilized and more doctors made availablo. 



E1255 



- 12 - 



SOUTH RUSSIA . 

During the latter part of Juno, the African Red Cross sant a new com- 
mission under Ljajor E. G. Dexter to the Russian Caucasus-, to work in the rear of 
General Denekino's army. Supplies ilxxisxxx valued at nearly ^2,300.000 wore sent 
with the commission to Novorosissk on the B-'.ack Sea, and this material iu now being 
distributed to the refugees in four small Caucasian republics and to the units - of 
the Denakine army, Another shipload of supplies with additional personnel is ex- 
pected to leave France in a few days? 

A p^ess dispatch from the Caucasus town of Ekatarinodar says; 

"The largest sxnglo shipment of American made goods which has ever ar- 
rived in the Caucasus reached here today in 103 freight cars, sonnignod uo_the 
American Red Cross. Twenty cars are for the hospitals and asjlums of the Terek 
Cossacks, 24 tor the Kuban Cossacks, 29 cars for the Dor Cossacks, end the remainder 
for the Volunteer Army. The departure of the four trams will be made the subject 
of a great demonstration. The territory of the Cossacks has been shut off from the 
world for three years and the arrival of these iaxg much needed supplies wa3 an 
event of enormous importance. The presidents of the three CossoPk states gave a 
dinner to the Americans who are delivering the supplies, at which eacn statesman 
referred to Russia's ambition to become a federation of states patterned upon the 
American union. "The United States of Russia'! was the favorite toast, 

2 *? 

SW I TZ ERLAND . 

The work of the American Red Cross Commission to Switzerland under Lieut. 
Col. J. PJi - -Mercer is now being finally liquidated. The most important work of 
this commission was its service to American prisoners of war in Germany during the 
period prior to the armistice and its assistance in the work of repatriating Amer- 
ican prisoners immediately after the armistice. This work was conducted on an 
enormous scale, but the commission was also ahle to devote a part of its energies 
to work among AJlied prisoners of war and among repatries of all nations passing 
through Switzerland.. The commission was also of great service to the Swiss people 
during the epideaiic of influenza there and in various other Local — emergencies « 

ASTERN RUSSIA. . 

The Commission to West-era Russia and the Baltic Startes under - Liewt-— Col. 
Edward Tf. Ryan, has recently established its headquarters at Riga, and has inaugu-. 
rated a work which embraces Esthonia, Lithuania, Courland and various parts of the^ 
Russian frontier. It has furnished large quantities of needed hospital supplies, 
surgical instruments and drugs, clothing, soal and other materials to \ 

scores of hospitals throughout these countries. 

In Esihonia the new !; E&thonian Red Cross'' has been assisted with generous 
donations of supplies, and also with American personnel to act in an advisory and 
executive capacity. In Lithuania an American Red Cross physician has been^ given 
general supervision over the Lithuanian hospital serwoc. in Esbhonia, a oureau 
of public health, the first institution of its kind in any of the new Baltic states, 
has been organized under the sx’pe" vLs r an of the Amor.. can Red Cross. 

In a recent letter to the Red Cross, Minister. President Otto Strandman of 
the Republic of Eethonia says; 

"To the United States end' its generous Red Cross the new RepuD_ic of Ss- 
thonia already owes a gieat deal, When the weight of care for our sick and poor 
bore us down in the months that followed our revolution against fche Soviet govern- 
ment, it was the Red Cross that brought help wc our disabled hospitals end new . 
hope for the future. Today we still face a crisis, and we look again to our friends 

in America for help." 



ur _ p + v„ + + ! i u 1 f Minister-President Charles Ulnanis of Lotto nia 

. .S!^- 1 ? lp °J. th0 V ncrican Rcd Cross vi -l to noedod this v.int '.r to tide 

Stat^iMt°af * C * lS Vall ’ 1y For S--" Having known the United 

Sta. s nrot ds ( a refuge-'. iron Russian oppression and later as a teacher in the 

w V hI 31 + 7 °* -innssotappresident Ulnanis appeals to Anerieu us one who knows 
her netirt. Alreaay, he.sayd, America through the Red Cross has brought timely 
aid to the young republic, but un even more critical period will corie with the 
winter. "The republic of Lettonia," he says, "seeks an honorable place among the 
lixxle nations and wants to be a burden cn nobody. But today it must a3k for help. 
So I rake this new appeal to the American Red Cross confident that it will not 
go unanswered and that the Red Cross in planning its program of relief for the 
coning winter will not forget its little sister republic on the Baltic » " 



