January 19, 1937 



IKMr'HA.NDUM for 
The Military Adviser 

The list as composed involves only one change in relative 
rank. The officer so changed la First lieutenant Jaime C. Velas- 
ques, who is promoted out of turn to the grad© of Captain. 

This promotion and change in relative ran!: are made for 
eopelling reasons, which are as follows: 

1. Lieut. Velas uez graduated from the United states 
Military Acsde y in 1931. He was Kc. 17 in his class. 

Since the date of his graduation, he hoc *oeon continuous- 
ly in the military service of the Philippine Government.. 

The rational kofence Act provides that officore of the 
United rtates Aniy transferring to the Fhilip; ine Amy 
shall be given credit for all servioes performed in the 
thited states Army, including that as cadet. The ori- 
ginal position accorded Lieut. Velasquez on the promo- 
tion list was determined without the benefit of this 
provision of law,. Manifestly, to. maintain hin in his 
present position is not only an injustice to him but a 
violation of the spirit of the law und<r which the 
Philippine Amy is being organized. 

d. This prosotion is further justified by the re- 
markable record of efficiency established by Lieut. 
Velasquez in the . Philippine Army. is universally 
recognized as one of the most outstanding o ficers 
of his grade, and the board has every confidence that 
this particular promotion will create nc resentment or 
ill-feeling of any sind anywhere ir the Amy. 

3. As a final reason It is to be noted that u va- 
cancy ir; the grade of captain is being reserved for 
en officer of the Philippine 'couts who graduated from 
Vast oiat two years subsequent to Lieut. Velasquez, 
ve cannot afford so to constitute our promotion list 
so as to penalize any man for continuous anc brilliant 
service in the Philippine Amy. 



- 2 - 

coMposmcM op ms i,iar 

This list has been mde bp by applying to the authorized 
ninber of officers, which is 716 under tho provisions of the 
Budget justification presented by the President to the National 
Assembly, the maximum percentages by grade prescribed in the 
National Defense Act. ~ 

Under this process, the- number of authorized vacancies 
is as follows: 

• General officers ........ 0 



Colonels ........... 100 

Lieut. -Colonels ....... .18 

Majors ......... .... 69 



Cap tains ... ........ 216 

•3elovr the grade of Captain the percentage ryetem 
does not apply, .and promotion is made according 
to length of service. 

The departures from these authorized strength are aa fol- 
lows: 

(c) He hi'. vc o ly five general officers ana we are therefore 
entitled to three additional colonels, or t total of IS. 

The attached list shows 12 officers of the line in this 
grado, while one Colonel is commissioned in the iedical 
Corps. 

(b) The list shows 16 officers of the line in the grades 
Of Lieutenant Colonel while two are comiseioneu in the 

v Medical Corps. 

(c) The list chows 45 in the grado of major of tho line 
and 12 majors connisaioned in the iedical Corps. !i» addi- 
tional 32 vacancies in the line are unfilled because of the 
lack of qualified officers in the grade next below. In 
other words, after every qualified officer in the grad 0 °f 
captain has been promoted to the grade of major, there 
still remain 12 unfilled vacancies. 

(d) The authorized number of captains is 216. At the bottom 
of the list are reserved 88 vacancies because of lack of 
qualified first lieutenants. These vacancies remain after 
every qualified first lieutenant, consaissioned as such prior 
to 1936, has been promoted. Hone of the vacancies Just dis- 
cussed include those reserved for officers of the Philippine 
Ac out s expected to transfer to the hilippine Army within 
the period permitted them by law. 

D. D. KISBiilDlBi 

Lieut. -Colonel, A. A. 

DDB-jg Assistant 




