V 

\ 




JKspuMtc of tire plrilippmes 
^public trf % |3[]tltpptnes 



30 |un£ 1092 
Ihttbam (Snm&stattl* 
Jitzal |3ark 
fflttu of iW'tmla 



Inauguration 
of 

His Excellency 

Fidel V. Ramos 

as President of the Republic of the Philippines 

and 

The Honorable 

Joseph E. Estrada 

as Vice President of the Republic of the Philippines 



30 June 1992 
Freedom Grandstand 
Rizal Park 
City of Manila 




His Excellency 

3HM ft iRamns 

President 
Republic of the Philippines 



GIrp $ve%xbmi 



]fxbel tittdbez iRnnuis 

8th President of the Republic 

he unassuming soldier who fashioned the military part of the EDSA 
Revolution. The Chief of Staff, later Secretary of National Defense, who res- 
cued a newly reborn Philippine democracy from six rightist coup attempts. 
The popular and credible cabinet member steadfast in defending the security 
of the nation in the face of threats from military rebels, communist insurgents 
and other hostile groups. 

Fidel Valdez Ramos is all that, and more: Korean War hero. Father of 
the Special Forces. Vietnam war veteran. A leader. 

Yet all these constitute a poor one-dimensional portrait of the man who 
likes to be called simply Eddie Ramos. The real Fidel "Eddie" V Ramos is a 
well-rounded man. To start with, the ambition of his youth was to be a builder 
- which he is, being a licensed civil engineer. His friends know of his passion 
for physical fitness, but few know he plays a mean game of chess, and was a 
secretary of the West Point Chess Team. 

In the family circle, he is a doting grandfather. 

lb the Filipino people, he is probably known as the passionate advocate 
of a social philosophy called PEOPLE EMPOWERMENT. 

That means the ordinary people should take on more of the responsibility of 
community development and thereby enjoy a larger share of the fruits. 

The idea of PEOPLE EMPOWERMENT may be new, but in the mind 
of Eddie Ramos, the heartfelt dialectics of it is early vintage. 

Eddie Ramos was born on March 18, 1928 in Lingayen, Pangasinan. He 
was three years old when the Colornm Revolt flared in Tayug in the same 
province. He was a toddler in Lingayen at the time and saw none of the ter- 
rible carnage of socially aggrieved peasants battling the disciplined Philippine 



3 



Constabulary, But his father, the young lawyer and crusading journalist Nar- 
ciso Ramos covered the battle on the spot for the Manila Daily Bulletin. The 
experience seared the mind of Narciso Ramos, and while he had resisted the 
urging of friends to go into politics, now he was determined to seek office in 
the legislature and work for social reform in the countryside. 

In the next provincial convention of the Nacionalista Party, he sought 
nomination for the sixth congressional district of Pangasinan. In the voting he 
came out ahead by two votes. That was not enough to give him the nomina- 
tion, however, and in the ensuing caucus of party leaders, a veteran politician 
was named in his place. Feeling cheated, he ran anyway and was the surprise 
winner by a large margin. 

In politics, Narciso Ramos had a secret weapon: the crowd-drawing elo- 
quence of his wife, the former Angela Valdez, a daughter of the Valdez and 
Marcos clans of Ilocos Norte. Angela had a flair for language, a fondness for 
literature and the arts. So great was her love for poetry that she nicknamed 
her only son after the most popular versifier at that time, Eddie Albert Guest, 
whose poems celebrated the simple folk virtues of frugality, solidarity, and 
love of God. Always helped by his wife's literary eloquence, Narciso Ramos 
would run for the legislature three more times, and win comfortably each time 
against formidable opponents. 

Eddie Ramos and his sisters Leticia and Gloria grew up in a people- 
oriented atmosphere. If they did not yet fully absorb the meaning of the 
poetry recitations and the political talk about them, they were already being 
called on to make sacrifices for family acquaintances among the simple folks 
of rural Pangasinan. These were people from the other towns who would 
come to Lingayen, the capital, for some urgent purpose and, not having 
finished their business at the end of the day, had to spend the night at the 
rented nipa hut of the Ramoses. 

To these many overnight guests, Eddie and Letty often had to yield their 
beds, and even their sleeping mats. There were occasions when they slept on 
the pages of the Pangasinan News, the newspaper that Narciso founded and 
edited, so their young bodies were literally cradled by their father's fierce 
editorial advocacy. 



4 



In school in Lingayen, Eddie was shy and quiet, but was consistently at 
the top of his class. He finished grade school as valedictorian. Then he 
joined his parents in Manila and enrolled at the UP High School where 
among his classmates were a boy from the South named Rafael Salas, and a 
wisp of a girl named Amelita "Ming" Martinez, who turned out to be the 
daughter of the family next door to their rented apartment on Padre Faura. 

They were in second year when World War II broke out. Eddie and Ming 
spent much of the following months helping their mothers who busied them- 
selves tending to the food and medical needs of the Filipino prisoners of war 
in Capas. Many of the POWs were his uncles, relatives and family friends. 

The war did not stop Eddie from indulging in sports: he bowled at the 
Ermita bowling alley, and he boxed at the YMCA. Once he was overmatched 
by an opponent 15 pounds heavier than him. Eddie blocked a flurry of 
punches with his left shoulder, but these were so powerful that his arm bone 
was wrenched from its socket, and he lost consciousness. He soon recovered 
and had this fixed, but he would always have that trick shoulder. 

Later, while Japanese soldiers patrolled the city, Eddie, only 12 years old 
but already proficient in stenography and typing, took down the war news 
aired by the Voice of America from San Francisco via shortwave radio. He 
would then type up his notes and turn them over to an uncle for dissemination 
in the underground resistance network. His father, who had refused to serve 
in the Japanese-sponsored government, was by then one of the leaders of the 
guerilla group founded by Eddie's second cousin, Ferdinand Marcos - the 
Maharlika. 

In 1944, the Ramoses moved to Eastern Pangasinan where they con- 
tinued their guerilla activities. Eddie, however, spent the rest of the war 
planting vegetables, engaging in sports activities, and serving as a courier for 
various guerilla units. After the war, he came back to Manila to finish high 
school at the Centro Escolar University. 

The sight of the smouldering ruins of Manila's once-famous buildings 
made Eddie resolve to be a civil engineer in order to help rebuild his war-torn 
country. He was taking an engineering course at the National University 
when he learned from a friend that competitive examinations were being held 



5 



for the lone Philippine slot at the United States Militaiy Academy at West 
Point- Eddie saw this as a way of fulfilling his dream of becoming a civil en- 
gineer; he promptly applied, and topped the examinations. 

Eddie made good at West Fbint. In his fourth year, while under treat- 
ment for pneumonia, it was found that one of his kidneys was badly infected 
with tuberculosis- That kidney had to go, Surgeiy was postponed so he could 
graduate. After that, he took another year to work on his masters degree in 
Civil Engineering at the University of Illinois before he came back to the 
Philippines. 

He had hoped to work with the Corps of Engineers, but the country had 
bigger problems than reconstruction. A communist insurgency was knocking 
at the doors of Manila, and the military establishment was reorganizing and 
revitalizing itself in response to the threat. To the infantry went the young 
second lieutenant, where he commanded a heavy-weapons platoon in one of 
the newly organized Battalion Combat Teams. In a few months, he would 
leave this assignment to fight in Korea where the Philippine Expeditionary 
Force (PEFTOK) was engaged in some of the fiercest fighting against 
Chinese Communist forces. 

In the spring of 1952, a hill called Eerie had become a big tactical prob- 
lem to the UN forces in Korea. No matter how many casualties they took, the 
enemy stubbornly kept control of the hill. 

Temporary First Lieutenant Fidel V Ramos was chosen to lead a final at- 
tack that would permanently deny that hill to the enemy. The assault was a 
classic: planned by then-Major Felizardo T&nabe, it was executed by Ramos 
and the reinforced platoon he led. The enemy was routed; the Filipinos suf- 
fered no casualties. 

Back in the Philippines, his thoughts turned to marriage. He and Ming 
Martinez had seen each other a few times while they were studying in the 
United States, but that was all. He now resumed the courtship in earnest, and 
they were married on October 8, 1953. 

They now have five children all girls, and all a credit to their clan and country. 



6 



Soon after marriage, he took a short leave from his military duties to 
review for the board exams for civil engineers. An old classmate from his Na- 
tional University days, Isidro Carino, topped the exams, Eddie placed 
eleventh. 

The AFP then sent him to Fort Benning, Georgia where he honed his in- 
fantry officer's skills, finishing second in a batch of 109 officers from the US 
and allied armies. When he returned to the Philippines, he took on a series of 
assignments in the Laguna-Quezon area at a time when the Huk rebels were 
most active. He rose to the rank of captain, and ended the 1950s serving as 
senior aide to the Chief of Staff. 

Nineteen-sixty found him taking the Special Forces course at Fort Bragg, 
home of the famous 82nd Airborne Division and the "Green Berets," where 
he graduated at the top of the class. Captain Ramos then organized the first 
Special Forces company in the Philippines: soldiers who can be deployed 
quickly in small groups behind enemy lines, experts in unconventional fighting 
techniques and capable of rallying local forces to work or fight on their side. 
This concept is the basis of the anti-insurgency efforts of the New Armed For- 
ces of the Philippines- 

His next major assignment was Vietnam where he was the operations of- 
ficer and later, Chief of Staff of the Philippine Civic Action Group to Vietnam 
(PHILCAG-V), which won unprecedented honors and goodwill for the 
country. Here, he was truly in his element, for the PHILCAG's mission was 
not to destroy but to build, not to fight but to win hearts and minds. He served 
in Vietnam from 1966 to 1968, when he became Presidential Assistant on 
Military Affairs. 

Now a full colonel, he worked for a while reorganizing military intelligence 
before his assignment to command the 3rd Infantry Division based in Cebu. 

On 21 December 1970, he received his first star. He served for a while as 
Deputy Chief of Staff for Home Defense until he was surprised with an as- 
signment as Chief of the Philippine Constabulary on 14 January 1972. 

He moved at once to improve the facilities and the plight of the Filipino 
constable, and recapture the original luster of the unit's reputation. Later that 



7 



year, martial law was declared and it became his task to hold many opposition 
leaders in custody — as best as he could, he made every effort to ensure they 
were well treated. A separatist rebellion broke out in Mindanao and Maj. 
Gen, Fidel V Ramos himself participated in the Battle of Marawi on the 
second day of intense fighting, on 22 October 1972, 

During the martial law years, Maj, Gea Ramos spent a great deal of time 
building up the fighting capabilities of the Philippine Constabulary, and turning 
out better constables through value formation activities. He was, however, himself 
beginning to suffer a twinge of disillusionment as the gap between the rhetorics of 
the Marcos administration and the harsh realities of its rule widened. 

Yet he did not gripe when he was bypassed in the appointment of a new 
Chief of Staff in 1978, even when he was the most senior and most qualified 
for the position. He became acting Chief of Staff during the snap presidential 
elections in 1986 only because the incumbent Chief of Staff (Fabian Ver) had 
so thoroughly lost credibility due to his implication in the murder of the late 
Senator Benigno Aquino, Jr, 

By then, the chain of command had been distorted, as a powerful clique 
held sway in the military. It seemed that Lt, Gen. Ramos would merely get the 
title without the authority to tackle the tremendous peace and order problems 
attendant to the election. People wondered aloud why he remained with the 
Marcos administration even as his sister, then-Ambassador Leticia Ramos 
Shahani, repudiated the Marcos government, and declared support for then- 
presidential candidate Cory Aquino. 

At the time, Lt, Gen, Ramos was in the depths of personal grief. Eight 
years before, he had lost his mother, the golden-tongued Angela, Now his 
father, Narciso, who had served as the Secretary of Foreign Affairs, passed 
away on February 4, 1986, 

It was not this, though, that weighed down his mind, but the thought of 
what would happen to the more than 100,000 officers and men of the PC-INP, 
if he did anything rash at the time, Mrs, Ramos would later say this was an un- 
happy period for the General: "If I resign," he told her, "what will happen to 
the professionals? They [Marcos and Ver's men] might go after them," He 
went about his tasks with his usual meticulous diligence. 



8 



He would act when the time was right. 

It came when a RAM-plotted coup d'etat attempt was foiled and ex- 
posed, and the plotters had decided to make their last stand at Camp Aguinal- 
do. Then-Defense Secretary Juan Ponce Enrile, who had led the frustrated 
plot, put a call to General Ramos at his residence, and asked if he would join 
them. Eddie Ramos said he would, but first he had to finish a dialogue with 
some Cory supporters who were picketing his house. Later that afternoon at 
Camp Aguinaldo, he joined Secretary Enrile in announcing to the country and 
the world their breakaway from Marcos. 

The rest is history. 

Since then Fidel V Ramos has remained loyal to the democratic institu- 
tions he helped restore, defending them, even against those who stood with 
him in the four-day struggle against Marcos. As Secretary of National Defense 
in the Aquino Cabinet he fashioned a strategy that has, for the first time in 
two decades, forced the communist insurgency to retreat. He has accepted the 
surrender of the first organized and armed secessionist group in Mindanao, 
the Bangsa Mora Liberation Organization. The rightist military rebels are still 
around, but they lead an isolated, hunted life. Yet, Defense Secretary Ramos 
knows only too well there are no military answers to the problems of the 
country. 

The solution, he believes, lies in the empowerment of all the Filipino 
people, so that each individual Filipino may have an equal chance to attain his 
full potential as a human being. Profit sharing must be promoted as a basis of 
relationship between labor and capital. Access to education must be opened 
to more people, while the quality of education must improve. 

Economic policy must be arrived at through open consensus, with every 
sector of the nation participating in the process. Power and resources must 
flow to the communities via the local government. 

The bureaucracy must be revitalized, and the government must get out of 
business in favor of the free market. 

We must acquire the discipline not only to obey the laws, but on our own, to 



9 



assume a lifestyle that is respectful of our human and natural environment It 
takes character to do that, so there must be 'a strengthening of our cultural 
values. 

Eddie Ramos believes that the government must have a bias for the poor, 
because government is a form of tyranny, Government policy must therefore 
have a bias for labor-intensive enterprises, and where warranted, may engage 
in emergency job-generating programs, particularly those that will restore the 
country's ecology. 

He also believes that in a world virtually without national boundaries, no 
national economy can prosper by isolating itself, i( I stand for a strong 
economic, cultural, and political cooperation with our neighbors in East Asia 
and the Pacific/' he says. But he hastens to add, "We must be self-reliant. Only 
Filipino hands can make this economy run and prosper," 

Our goals are attainable, he firmly believes, if we arrive at a national con- 
sensus as to what they are, and if we are willing to make sacrifices for the sake 
of these goals. That, to his mind, was what EDSA was all about- It is no easy 
endeavor. But, as he so often stresses, "There are no shortcuts to develop- 
ment and deliverance," 

It was in pursuit of the dream of PEOPLE EMPOWERMENT that he 
made a firm decision to seek the presidency. On 19 July 1991, he resigned as 
Secretary of National Defense to pursue his vision of PEOPLE EMPOWER- 
MENT It was, as he said, "one of the most difficult experiences of my life," 

On 11 May 1992, the people trooped to the polls to elect a president. 
Today, June 30, 1992, Fidel V. Ramos will be sworn in as the 8th President of 
the Republic of the Philippines, 

The new president's deep commitment to help deliver good government 
and stability to the people is backed by knowledge earned through three 
masteral degrees. Aside from the Masters in Civil Engineering from the 
University of Illinois, he also holds a Masters in Business Administration from 
the Ateneo de Manila, as well as a Masters in National Security Administra- 
tion from the National Defense College, He is also a member of the Phi 
Kappa Phi Honor Society (West Point Chapter), 



10 



This knowledge is backed by a wealth of experience gained from more 
than 41 years of military service where his leadership skills were honed from 
platoon to service-level command, his administrative capabilities tested by a 
balanced pattern of field commands and staff assignments, as well as the 
whole span of time spent in daily contact and service to the people. 

Fidel V. Ramos, whose prominent role in the People Power Revolution 
of February 1986 influenced many to support it, is also actively committed to 
civic affairs. He is deeply involved in several fraternal, sports, veterans and 
humanitarian organizations. He is one of six lifetime members of the Boy 
Scouts of the Philippines, and is especially proud of being twice a galloneer of 
the Red Cross Blood Program, 

He keeps himself physically fit for the severe demands of public service 
through a variety of sports activities. Aside from his known fondness for jog- 
ging, golf and weight-lifting, he is an AFP Master Parachutist, having made 
165 parachute jumps throughout his career. The new president has made 
more than 160 deep water dives which earned him the PC Underwater 
Operator's Badge. He has been a First Vice President of the Philippine Olym- 
pic Committee, a past President of the Philippine Badminton Association - 
and even holds a Motorcycle Officer's Badge. 

Fidel V. Ramos brings a wealth of knowledge, experience, skills and 
capabilities to the highest office in the land. 




li 



(Up fcmbmV % Qfettj af ©f f in> 



/ do solemnly swear that I will faithfully and 
conscientiously fulfill my duties as President of 
the Philippines, preserve and defend its 
Constitution, execute its laws, do justice to every 
man, and consecrate myself to the service of the 
nation. So help me God. 




}ffcrmnumpa ng fangulo 

Mataimtim kong pinanunumpaan na tutuparin 
ko nang buong katapatan at sigasig ang aking 
mga tungkulin bilang Pangulo ng Pilipinas, 
pangangalagaan at ipagtatanggol ang kanyang 
Konstitusyon, ipatutupad ang mga batas nito, 
magiging makatarungan sa bawat tao, at 
itatalaga ang aking sarili sa paglilingkod sa 
bansa. Kasihan nawa akongDiyos. 




13 



The Honorable 



dJoseplj 3E. Estrada 

Vice President 
Republic of the Philippines 



Wxce ftesxbmi 

Joseph Marcelo Ejercito Estrada was born on April 19, 1937 in Tondo, 
Manila, His parents, Emilio Ejercito and Maria Marcelo, moved to San Juan 
where he grew up. He studied at the Ateneo de Manila University and the 
Mapua Institute of Technology- 
He became a movie actor in his early twenties and has since established 
himself as a living legend in local filmdom. He is a five-time awardee for Best 
Actor and repeated the feat by winning the Best Picture Award for an equal 
number of times thus earning a niche in the much sought-after FAMAS Hall 
of Fame in 1981 and 1984, respectively. 

He entered politics in 1967, was elected and reelected mayor of the 
Municipality of San Juan which he served with dedication and distinction for 
more than 16 continuous years. He had an enviable public service record 
which he had to regretfully leave in the aftermath of the EDSA revolution in 
1986. When he stepped down as Mayor, he left a huge amount of P24 million 
as savings in the Municipal Treasury- 
He was adjudged one of the Ten Outstanding Young Men (TOYM) in 
Public Administration for 1972 by the Philippine Jaycees, He was also voted 
Outstanding Mayor and Foremost Nationalist by the Inter-Provincial Infor- 
mation Service in 1971 and was awarded the coveted title Most Outstanding 
Metro Manila Mayor the following year by the Philippine Princeton Poll 

His administration of San Juan was marked by unequalled accomplish- 
ments in infrastructure development. This includes the establishment of the 
first San Juan Municipal High School, Agora Complex, a modern slaughter- 
house, a sprawling Government Center with a Post Office, mini-park and the 
concreting of 98 percent of San Juan's roads and alleys. 

He paid particular attention to the elementary education of school-age 
children by improving/renovating schoolbuildings and constructing additional 



15 



school structures, health centers, barangay halls and playgrounds for the dif- 
ferent barangays and providing artesian wells to areas with low water supply. 
He relocated some 1,800 squatter families out of San Juan to T&ytay, Rizal at 
no cost to them. He was also the first mayor to computerize the assessment of 
the Real Estate Tax in the Municipal Assessor's Office. 

He established the MOWELFUND which has now become a robust or- 
ganization that provides industry workers with financial and professional as- 
sistance. His efforts to upgrade and professionalize the film industry have 
resulted in substantial benefits to movie personnel, from directors and actors 
to the lowest crewmen. He is the Founder and President of the ERAP Para sa 
Mahihirap Foundation, the San Juan Progress Foundation, the San Juan 
Police and Fire Trust Fund and the Friends of Joseph Estrada which offers 
free burial assistance for the poor folks of San Juan, 

In 1987, he decided to run for the Senate and handily garnered a seat. 
He was appointed Chairman of the Committee on Cultural Communities, the 
Committee on Rural Development and the Committee on Public Works. He 
was Vice-Chairman of the Committees on Health, Natural Resources and 
Ecology and Urban Planning, 

In 1989, the Free Press cited him as one of the Three Outstanding 
Senators of the Year, and in 1990, the University of Pangasinan conferred on 
him the degree of Doctor of Humanities, Honoris Causa. 

Estrada is married to Dr. Luisa Pimentel by whom he has three children, 
namely, Jinggoy, who is the Mayor of San Juan, Jacqueline and Jude. 




16 



OFFICIAL PROGRAM 



Of The Ceremonies Attending The 
Inauguration Of 

FIDEL V. RAMOS 

as President of the 
Republic of the Philippines 

and 

JOSEPH E. ESTRADA 

as Vice President of the 
Republic of the Philippines 



Tuesday, the thirtieth of June 
nineteen hundred and ninety two 



Freedom Grandstand 
RizalPark 
Manila 



17 



Arrival of the Presidential Party 
Tuesday, 30 June 1992 

11:00 A.M. 

Arrival of President Corazon C. Aquino and President- 
elect Fidel V, Ramos 

11:05 A.M. 

Arrival honors for President Corazon C. Aquino 



18 



MILITARY - CIVIC PARADE 



11:12 A.M. 

A bugle call will signal the start of the parade to be reviewed by 
the President and the President-elect of the Republic, 

ORDER OF UNITS 
THE ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES 

1. 21 — Motorcycle Unit 

2* Parade Marshal 

3* Troop Commander and Staff 

4. PMAR Drum and Bugle Team 

5. 1st Brigade Commander and Staff 

a< Philippine Military Academy Band 

b. 1st Philippine Military Academy Battalion 

c. 2nd Philippine Military Academy Battalion 

d. 3rd Philippine Military Academy Battalion 

e. Philippine Merchant Marine Academy Battalion 

6. 2nd Brigade Commander and Staff 

a- Philippine Army Band 
b- Special Forces Battalion 
a Scout Ranger Battalion 
d* Philippine Marine Battalion 
e. Philippine Air Force Battalion 

7. 3rd Brigade Commander and Staff 

a. Philippine Air Force Band 

b. Foot Doctors 

c. Ambulances 

d. libreng Sakay 

e. Amphibian 

£ Engineering Equipment 



19 



PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE 

8. Commander and Staff 

a. Cadets/EHG/WPS 

b. Special Action Force Battalion 

c. Mobile Cars 

CIVIC 

9. Floats 

a. Unity/Solidarity/Teamwork 

b. Hope 

c. Progress 

10. Flags/Colors 

a. Philippine Flags (by PMMA Gala) 

b. Philippine Air Force Band 

c. AFP Colors (by GHQ and HSC) 

d. Philippine National Police Color (by PNP) 

e. Veterans Colors 

f. Philippine Navy Band 

g. Line Agencies 

h. Provincial and City Colors 

L Non-governmental Organizations 
j. Business Agencies Colors 
k. Philippine Air Force Band 



20 



INAUGURAL CEREMONIES 



11:50 AM. 

National Anthem 



Ecumenical Prayers 

11:55 AM. 

Administration of the Oath of Office to Honorable Joseph E. 
Estrada, Vice President-elect of the Republic of the Philippines 
by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, the Honorable 
Andres R. Narvasa. 



12:00 NOON 

Administration of the Oath of Office to Honorable Fidel V. 
Ramos, President-elect of the Republic of the Philippines by 
the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, the Honorable Andres 
R. Narvasa. 

Inaugural Address by His Excellency, Fidel V. Ramos, Presi- 
dent of the Republic of the Philippines. 

Departure honors for the President. 

"FVR March" by National Artist Professor Lucio San Pedro. 

t (The public will rise and will remain standing throughout the oath-taking 

ceremonies of the Vice President and the President. The public will be seated upon 
the commencement of the President's Inaugural Address). 



21 



1992 Inaugural Day Ceremonies 

SCHEDULE OF EVENTS 
Tuesday, 30 June 1992 

6:00 — 9:00 AM Prayer services by different Religious Faiths 

throughout the Philippines. 

9:30 AM Assembly of the general public at Rizal Park. 

Arrival of officials and distinguished guests at 
the Freedom Grandstand, 

10:00 AM Officials and distinguished guests with assigned 

seats will occupy their respective places at the 
Freedom Grandstand 

10:20 AM Arrival of Mrs, Joseph E, Estrada at the 

Freedom Grandstand, 

10:40 AM Arrival of Mrs. Fidel V Ramos at the Freedom 

Grandstand. 

10:50 AM Arrival of Vice President-elect Joseph E. 

Estrada at the Freedom Grandstand, 

11:00 AM Arrival of President Corazon C. Aquino and 

President-elect Fidel V Ramos, 

11:05 AM Arrival honors for President Corazon C 

Aquino. 

11:10 AM Civic-Mili taiy Parade 

11:50 AM National Anthem 

Ecumenical Prayer 



22 



11:55 AM Administration of the Oath of Office to Vice 

President-elect Joseph E. Estrada by the 
Honorable Andres Narvasa, Chief Justice of 
the Supreme Court, 

12:00 NN Administration of the Oath of Office to Presi- 

dent-elect Fidel V Ramos by the Honorable 
Andres Narvasa, Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court, 

12:10 PM Inaugural Address of President Fidel V 

Ramos, 

Departure honors for President Fidel V 
Ramos. 




23 




In a moment 



of triumph during the EDSA revolution 



Pinning a mec 
Hospital, 1986 



President Fidel V. Ramos poses with family at home. In photo (from left, front row) are youngest daughter Margie, First LadyAmelita 
"Ming", daughter Jo; (from left, second row) son-in-law Freddie Jalasco, daughter Cristy, daughter Chula and husband Alex Sembrmo, 
eldest daughter Angel and husband Mormon Jones, together with grandchildren. 




Ef^l 



The First Lady 

Ameiita iflt Santas 



The Second Lady 

lira. Euxsn Estrada 



National Inaugural Committees 



29 



NATIONAL INAUGURAL COMMITTEE 

1992 



Co-Chairmen 



Hon. Franklin M. Drilon 



Hon, Roberto F. De Ocampo 



Co-Vice Chairmen 



Hon. Cesar N. Sarino 



Ms, Patricia C. Sison 



Members 



Hon, Aniceto M, Sobrepena 

Hon. Tomas R. Padilla 

Hon, Ramona L, Ty 

Hon. Ma, Lourdes M. Siytangco 

Hon, Miguel Perez-Rubio 

Secretary-Member 

Col, Voltaire Gazmin 



Hon. Narcisa Escaler 
Ms, Ma. Beatriz P. Tesoro 
Ms, Marianne B, Hontiveros 
Ms, Ma. Lourdes Alejandro 
Gen, Rene F. Cruz (Ret.) 



30 



Sub-Committees 



Inaugural Program and Parade Sub-Committee 
Committee Heads 

Hon, Cesar N, Sarino Ms. Patricia C, Sison 

Members 

Hon. George Walter M. Misa Ms, Pacita A. Montinola 

Brig. Gen. Clemente Mariano Ms, Ma, Lourdes Alejandro 



Attendance Sub-Committee 
Committee Heads 

Hon. Franklin M, Drilon Ms, Ma, Lourdes Alejandro 

Members 

Hon, Cesar N, Sarino Ms, Milagros Fausto 

Hon. Aniceto M. Sobrepena Ms, Charito Munoz 

Hon. Jose T. Tale 

Hon, Dionisio C Dela Seraa 

Hon, Mary Ann G Fernandez 

Hon. Nicanor L, Torres 



Sub-Committee on Protocol and Invitations 
Committee Heads 

Hon. Miguel Perez-Rubio Hon, Narcisa Escaler 

Members 

Mr. Joven Hernandez Ms. Rosie M, Castro 

Ms, Lourdes Evangelista 



31 



Sub-Committee on Finance 
Committee Heads 



Hon. Romeo Q. Solis 



Hon, Roberto R De Ocampo 



Members 



Ms, Celeste B. Payot 
Ms. Beverly Galmesa 



Sub-Committee for Transportation and Accommodations 
For Foreign Delegations 

Committee Head 

Hon. Tomas R. Padilla 

Members 

Hon, Tomas R, Syquia 
Hon, George Reyes 
Hon. Marciano Paynor, Jr, 

Inaugural Grandstand Sub-Committee 
Committee Heads 



Hon, Jesus P, Camayo 



Ms, Ma. Beatriz P, Tesoro 



Members 



Engineer Jose T. Agustin 
Engineer Enrico Yuson 
Mr. Demetrio Razon 



Dr. David Baradas 
Hon. Joaquin Teotico 



32 



Media Relations Sub-Committee 
Committee Heads 



Hon, Ma. Lourdes M, Siytangco Ms. Marianne B, Hontiveros 

Members 

Hon, Maria V, Montelibano Mr. Ramon Diez 

Hon. Eduardo M. Varona Ms, Katherine G. Fernandez 

Ms- Trinidad Fernandez 

Security and Traffic Sub-Committee 
Committee Heads 

Dir. Gen. Cesar P, Nazareno Gen, Rene F, Cruz (Ret,) 

Members 

Col. Voltaire Gazmin Mr. Noel Onate 

CoL Angelito Hernandez Mr, Aba Matute 

Chief Supt, Wilfredo Reotutar 
Supt Reynaldo V, Velasco 

Special Events Sub-Committee 
Committee Heads 

Hon, Ramona L. Ty Ms. Ma. Beatriz P, Tesoro 

Members 

Hon. Elizabeth Nelle Ms. Pearl Viernes 

Mr. Benito Benzon Jr. Mr, Conrado Escudero 

Mr, Ernesto Malay Jr, 



33 



Secretariat 
Hon. Miguel Perez-Rubio 

Dr. Serafin Quiason 
Gen, Gaudencio V, Tobias 
Hon. Esperanza H. Quillopo 
Hon, Leonardo C. M acariola, Jr. 
Mr. Joven Hernandez 
Ms. Zenaida Villamieva 
Mr, Leonardo Acosta 




34 



r 




President Corazon G Aquino with incoming President Fidel K Ramos 



LUPANG HINIRANG 



Bayang magiliw, 

Perlas ng Silanganaiu 

Alabngpuso 

Sa dibdih mo f y buhay. 

Lupang hinirang, 
Duyan ka ngmagiting, 
Sa manlulupig 
Di ka pasisiiL 

Sa dagat at bundok, 

Sa simoy at sa langit mong bughaw. 

May dilag ang tula 

At awit sa paglayang minamahal. 

Ang Idslap ng watawat mo'y 
Tagumpay na nagniningning; 
Ang bituin at araw niya, 
Kailan pa ma > di magdiditim. 

Lupa ng araw, ng luwalhati't 

pagsinta, 
Buhay ay langjit sa piling mo; 
Anting Ugaya, na pag may 

mang-aapi, 
Ang mamatay nangdahilsa iyo. 




36 



