



[i»» - «* , 

/ ^ > .yrV OT 



MR& 



s fcn 















4 



•s 









#1 












•• 



•l 



» 



4 ,9 



1 



* 






Doha Aurora Aragon Quezon • tW/«* o/ President 

Manuel L. Quezon , educator, humanitarian, social worker, and 
the hiost revered woman in the Philippines . — Photo by X OR. 








By SOL H. Qwekoh, Ph.B., M.A. 

Charter Member and First President, Malacanan Presa Association; 
Business Editor and Columnist, The Evening News; Author, 
Manuel L. Quezon: His Life And Career; Sergio Osmefia 
The Patriot; Elpidio Quirino — The Barrio School 
Teacher Who Became President; Professor 
of English and Public Relations, 

Cosmopolitan Collejpes 




FIRST EDITION 






E. ALZONA COLLECTION 
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY 



1 9 0 

Fortune. Plblishkrs 

Manila, Philippines 











Copyright, 1950, by 

SOL H. GWEKOH 
Manila, Philippines 









-4C ^cjf(o^) 



Any copy of this First Edition not bearing the 
genuine signature of the Author will be consid- 
ered as having come from a fraudulent source. 

/O l / 



1/ 



(I 



c 






C It 

yi'> 1 



Copy No. . K . / 







Printed in the Philippines by 



ARZAGA a SONS PRINTING PRESS* 

Manila 



To the everlasting memory of my dear Brother 

JESUS H GWEKOH 




INTRODUCTION 



I T WAS mv original intention to follow soon 
my biography of President Manuel L. Que- 
zon, which I published in mid-1948, with the 
life story of his equally patriotic wife, Doha 
Aurora Aragon Quezon, who had finally returned to the 
Philippines from the United States of America where she 
stayed for the duration of the World War 11 and long after 
the death of her illustrious husband in 1944. My purpose 
was to make the Aurora A. Quezon biography serve as a 
companion volume of my first book, entitled MANUEL L. 
QUEZON: HIS LIFE AND CAREER.' 

Rut, as usual, in the ordinary course of biography writ- 
ing in book-length form, many things unexpectedly happen. 
The search for new and additional materials, especially 
those wholesome events in her early years which greatly 
influenced her young life and which were known only to 
the few individuals who had survived the war but who 
were hard to contact because either they were living far 
from Manila or their whereabouts were unknown, some- 
how delayed the publication of this particular biography 
in its present edition. 

Then, when the manuscript had been brought up-to- 
date in early 1949, the greatest and most regrettable trag- 
edy in the history of the Philippines happened. Doha Au- 
rora and her party were suddenly massacred while travel- 
ing on the provincial highway to her hometown, Baler. So, 
there arose again the imperative necessity of incorporating 

*A new and enlarged edition of this particular book, in which 
hitherto unknown materials will he incorporated, will be issued by 
my publishers, FORTUNE, in 1951, to appropriately mark the 73rd 
birthday anniversary of President Quezon. 



the last fateful events in her life in the biography. The 
result was, after further painstaking research and diligent 
study, the final completion in its present form of this bio- 
graphy of Dona Aurora A. Quezon. The biography has 
been divided into two parts — the first deals with her noble 
life from birth to death which embraced a period of sixty 
years, and the second treats of her loving deeds done in 
the interest and welfare of her own people both in the 
Philippines and in the United States of America. 

* * * * ♦ 

I BEGAN writing about the Quezon family shortly 
after the establishment of the Government of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines in 1935. I was then the ambu- 
lating correspondent of the pre-war T-V-T Publications, 
owned by the distinguished Roces family at whose head 
was the late Don Alejandro Roces. Sr., in the Visayas and 
Mindanao with station in Cebu City. 

My first book on Quezon, entitled, QUEZON THE 
PRESIDENT, brought me face to face with the great and 
beloved Chief Executive in the Malacahan Palace on the 
occasion of the nationwide celebration of his birthday an- 
niversary in 1938, thanks to the thoughtfulness of Senate 
President Mariano Jesus Cuenco, then the secretary of 
public works and communications, and to the kindness of 
the Honorable Jorge B. Vargas, then the secretary to the 
President of the Philippines. 

When I returned to Manila early in 1938, I became 
more absorbed in the writing of the Quezons, and at every 
date marking an important occasion in their lives, 1 caused 
the publication of my Quezonian materials in the metrop- 
olitan newspapers in my efforts to make the people emu- 
late the good acts of and the exemplary traits inherent in 
the Quezon couple. 

Of course, I owe it to both President Manuel L. Quezon 
and Dona Aurora A. Quezon the rare and signal opportu- 
nity given me, together with their select friends, of join- 




ing them in their numerous trips to the provinces and the 
islands, thereby enabling me to gather first-hand informa- 
tion about them. Of Doha Aurora, this book carries her 
complete biography, although a shorter one appears also 
in my earlier book, entitled STARS OF BALER, jointly 
with that of her husband. Doha Aurora is also extensively 
treated in my other book containing the full biography of 
her husband-President, titled MANUEL L. QUEZON: HIS 
LIFE AND CAREER. 



Sol H. Gwekoh 



Manila 

August 11, 1950 





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



ipfcO KEEP the memory of the late beloved ami 
I distinguished Doha Aurora Aragon Que- 
rn zon olive forever among her people, I 

imposed upon myself the delicate and dif- 
ficult task of writing her complete biography . This is the 
first book edition of that work. Its early publication was 
made possible through the kind con pi ration of a ft ir prom- 
inent personages in Manila whom I have found to be the 
really good , 1 rue, and loyal friends of D o ha Aurora both in 
life a nd in death. When they teamed that I teas busy writ - 
lug this biography , they not only gave me encourage meat 
but also willingly extended their help. I am therefore 
grateful to President of the Philippines Elpidio Qnirivo, 
1 'ice- President of the Philippines Fernando Lopez, the Hon- 
orable Jorge II. Vargas, Colonel Andres Soriano, Dr. Mu- 
tual Li m, the Honorable Felipe Bunicamino, President 
F rat/eiscoT. Benitez of the Philippine Women's University , 
and President Francisco Dahipau of the University of the 
East . 



The Author 



CONTENTS 



BOOK I 

1 . The Favorite Child of Baler (Childhood Days) 17 

2. The Popular Student (In the Philippine Nor- 

mal School) 24 

3. The Belle Aurora 28 

A. The Loving Wife and Mother 33 

•*>. The Great Lady in Malacanan (First Lady of 

the Land) 39 

G. The War Volunteer (In the United States of 
America During the World War II, 1942- 

1940) 45 

7. The Fate of the Martyr (Massacre on the 

Highway) 50 

8 . The Most Revered Woman (Last Journey).. 68 

BOOK II 

L The Virtuous Filipina 81 

2 . The Model Farmer and Businesswoman 94 

3. The Exemplary Social Worker 97 

4. The Distinguished Feminist Leader 107 

5. The Noble Humanitarian (Chairman of tin 

Philippine National Led Cross) 112 

G. The Devout Christian 121 

7. The Best Loved Citizen 135 





ILLUSTRATIONS 



Facing Page 

1. Formal Photograph of Doha Aurora Frontispiece 

2. The Aragon House in Baler 20 

3. The Belle Aurora 30 

4. The Quezon Bride 40 

5. Doha Aurora Speaks over the Radio 48 

6. View at the Requiem Mass 70 

7. Recreation Hour: Bowling 86 

8. Oil Painting of Doha Aurora 102 

9. Presentation of the Red Cross Charter 120 

10. The Real Catholic Filipina 128 

11. The Quezon Family 136 





1 . 




I N THE Philippines the Filipino woman is an 
exalted being to her people. She has been 
their pride long before the men of other 
climes have seen fit to honor their own 
women. The Filipino woman, by her talent, skill, industry, 
courage and patriotism, has proved the equal of the Fili- 
pino in affairs and activities be it in time of peace or of 
war. For that matter, the honor roll of the Filipino wom- 
7 * en is long and meritorious, and embraces various fields 
$ of endeavor. 



^ Fortunate indeed are the few nations that can point 
0 to women who are as eminent and distinguished as their 
men. Such women are Cleopatra, the great character in 
>' history; Joan of Arc, the great warrior; Madame Curie, 
' the great scientist; and Mrs. Franklin Delano Roosevelt, 
the great humanist, to cite a few. 



And of these few nations, happily the Philippines is 
one, for although considered a young nation, acquiring its 
political independence from the United States of America 
only on July *4, 1946, when the then President of the Phil- 
ippines Manuel Roxas hoisted the Filipino tricolor, it 
counts among its outstanding and peerless women, warriors 
and pioneers in the past days, and of innumerable cru- 
saders and leaders of worthy causes in the present era. 

Who has not heard of Agueda Kahabagan, the Batan- 
gas woman soldier who by sheer merit attained the rank 
of an army general and, clad in a general’s uniform, rode 
on horseback to lead her troops, “looking every inch a 
soldier”? Who does not know Maria Gabriela, that cou- 
rageous w ife of the equally famous Diego Silang. who be- 







AURORA A. QUEZON 



came the “heroine of the anti-Spanish movement” in the 
Philippines? 

As we peruse the long list further, we meet more of 
the interpid women revolutionists who defied all conven- 
tions in order to wage the wars — first against Spain and 
then against the United States of America— side by side 
with their menfolk. There are Melchora Aquino, popular- 
ly known as “Tandang Sora” and called the “Mother of the 
Revolution”, who, despite her poverty, gave her all in feed- 
ing the Filipino soldiers; and Trinidad Pecson, of San Mi- 
guel de Mayumo, Bulacan, who fought in the battlefield 
and who, for nursing the wounded, won from them the 
sobriquet, “Mother of Mercy”, while not to be outdone by 
his soldiers, General Emilio Aguinaldo, President of the 
Philippine Republic of the revolutionary period in the last 
years of the nineteenth century, conferred upon her the 
title of “Mother of Biak-na-Bato“ in recognition of “her 
patriotism and distinguished services.” 

Then, of course, for their religious fervor, we have 
several notably pious Filipino women who, although be- 
longing to rich families, “relinquished a life of ease and 
pleasure” to follow the hard, thorny but glorious and ever- 
lasting life led and lived by the Great Savior, Jesus Christ. 
Antonia Esguerra and Rosa Prieto, both of Manila, were 
rewarded by the Roman Catholic church authorities the 
rank of venerable , the first step leading to sainthood, for 
joining the Sisters of the Beaterio de Santa Catalina. 

Another distinguished and pious Filipina, Ignacia del 
Espiritu Santo (1688-1748) of Binondo, Manila, founded 
the La Compania de Jesus, the congregation of the Sisters 
of Charity, one of whose members, Asuncion Ventura, a 
native of Pampanga, later became the founder of the Asilo 
de Looban, an orphanage for girls, in Manila in 1885. 

( oming down to our own generation, we have, tower- 
ing high above all her contemporaries, AURORA Aragon 
Quezon, the great lady and humanitarian whose noble life 



[ 18 ] 



THE FAVORITE CHILD OF BALER 

and loving deeds are in themselves a real inspiration to 
the Filipino womanhood of today and in the years to come. 
While of her much had been said and written during her 
busy and fruitful life and immediately after her death, yet 
more, and much more, of Doha Aurora, as everybody, those 
who had come to know her personally or by name, loved to 
call her is treasured in this her first and only complete 
biography. 

* * * * * 

I T WAS Dr. Jose Rizal, the greatest Filipino 
hero and martyr, who aptly said in his im- 
mortal poem, My Last Fare well , that the 
place matters not. 1 How true! The world 
has seen its great men and women of all climes and times 
born anywhere under any circumstances. The greatest of 
all men — Jesus Christ — was Himself born in a lowly man- 
ger. The Philippines is not an exception to the rule. Ca- 
lamba in Laguna was an insignificant town until it gave 
birth to a Rizal. So was Bigaa, in Bulacan, which is the 
birthplace of Francisco Baltazar, most renowned of Tagalog 
poets. Then there is Baler, a little town on the eastern 
coast of Luzon, which is practically isolated from the rest 
of Quezon province (formerly Tayabas), yet it has become 
historically famous for a series of events that took place 
within a space of twenty years in the later part of the nine- 
teenth century. 

First and foremost of these events was the birth in 
1878 of Manuel L. Quezon, first President of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines (1935-1944), who has been aptly 
dubbed the “Father of His Country" for his incessant labors 
for the political independence of the Philippines. Ten years 
later, or in 1888, Aurora Aragon, the daughter of destiny, 
was born. Like her illustrious husband, Quezon, she spent 
her years performing humanitarian sendees both in the 
Philippines and in the United States without any thought of 

reward. 

1 El sitio nada imports . — RizaL 



[19] 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



The last event marked Baler as the last foothold of the 
Spanish forces in the Philippines. A Spanish garrison was 
besieged in the town church by the Filipino insurgents dur- 
ing the Philippine Revolution from June 27, 1898, to June 
2, 1899. Not knowing that Spain had lost the Philippines 
to America, the Spanish soldiers refused on five occasions 
offers of peace and demands for surrender, and continued 
to fly their flag for almost a year. 

A typical Philippine community enjoying provincial en- 
vironment and atmosphere, Baler was at the time of the 
births of the Quezons the capital of the district of El Prin- 
cipe under the jurisdiction of Nueva Ecija. Later it was 
transferred by law to the province of Tayabas. Parsing 
through the national inter-provincial highway, one finds 
Baler to be only 241 kilometers from Manila. 

The town which started as a mere sitio belonging to Bar- 
rio Zabali was raised to township in 1609 by a group of 
seven Franciscans headed by Fr. Bias Palomino. Follow- 
ing its founding, the missionaries took unto themselves the 
responsibility of converting the inhabitants to Christianity. 
The original townsite was Kinagunasan on the side of the 
San Jose river opposite the present location of the town 
which lies on the mouth of the Aguang river on Baler bay. 

One of the oldest towns in the Philippines, Baler has a 
history which is both tragic and mysterious, and which 
reminds one of the destruction of Sodom and Gomorra. The 
name Baler itself carries a tragic meaning for it signifies 
a place washed away by water. True enough, for on De- 
cember 2 <, 1*35, about two o’clock in the morning, as the 
peaceful inhabitants were fast asleep, the sea overflooded 
the town, and eventually washed it away. The phenomenon 
was considered strange as the weather was clear when it 
occurred. Learning from that bitter and costly experience, 

the people transferred the town to the present site which 
is one kilometer from Kinagunasan. 



[ 20 ] 




THE FAVORITE CHILD OF BALER 



People of Baler love to narrate the legends about the 
naming of their town. One popular version which has been 
handed down from one generation to another is that Baler 
was once written “Valer” as the old records show and meant 
to refer to the bay (Baler bay) which protects the town 
during stormy weather. 

However, the old folks assert that this town was named 
after an early Franciscan friar who was greatly beloved 
by the people for his many and varied religious accomplish- 
ments during his residence there, particularly the building 
of the concrete church. He was Fray Valeriano, so they 
remember, but was popularly known as Padre Vale. 

Baler is a picturesque town. To the west it is walled 
in by the great and imposing Sierra Madre range, while on 
the east it faces the vast Pacific Ocean. Its beautiful val- 
leys, its green pasture lands, its thick and luxuriant forests, 
its softly flowing brooks, and its invigorating climate the 
year round have fascinated adventurers, hunters, and fish- 
ermen from all places in the country. Ilocano pioneers have 
long settled in Baler to help the inhabitants develop the un- 
tapped resources. 

The old people found their surroundings idyllic and 
which provided them with abundant spiritual and material 
riches. The immense and virgin forests gave them wild 
carabaos, hogs, and chickens, besides flourishing ornamental 
palms and choice orchids to adorn their homes which they 
built with molave, banaba, tindalo, and narra — all Philip- 
pine hardwoods which were plentiful in the region. Not 
only were they happy and contented with the innumerable 
blessings extended them by Nature, but the people were also 
religious, industrious, and civic-minded. They were like- 
wise hospitable, gallant and courteous to strangers. 

It was under this favorabe atmosphere of the time that 
the girl Aurora was born in this town. The place was the 
nipa house of her parents located on Zamora street. The 
date was February 19, 1888. Before her were already born 



[ 21 ] 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



seven children to the couple — Don Pedro Aragon and Doha 
Zeneida Molina. She was the youngest of them. Both par- 
ents came from well-known families who were admired 
and highly respected in the community by all — the resi- 
dents, the Spanish officials, and the Franciscan friars. 

The mother Zeneida belonged to a middle-class family 

in whose veins ran Spanish blood and who spoke Spanish 

fluently. She had a sister — the attractive, charming and 

beautiful Doha Maria Dolores Molina who became the 

mother of Manuel Luis Quezon. Then there was the father, 

Pedro, who proved lucky in his varied enterprises, so that 

the family soon was able to expand the conjugal property 

and to send the children to school to acquire the rudiments 
of education. 

However, the Philippine Revolution in 1898 brought 

both disaster and misfortune to the Aragon-Molina family. 

Members of the family, headed by Don Pedro Aragon, were 

among the inhabitants who were caught by the Spanish 

guardias civiles following the surprise attack made by the 

Filipino revolutionists on the barracks of the Spanish sol- 
diers during the first uprising. 

Don Pedro Aragon was sent to Manila soon after and 
there he was kept a prisoner by the Spanish authorities 
until the uprising ended with the signing of the Pact of 
Biak-na-Bato. As the conjugal property was confiscated bv 
the Spanish government as an aftermath of this event, the 
v.ife, Zeneida, and her children underwent hardships and 

poor for the first 

time. They, therefore, contented themselves living in a one- 

room mpa shack and sleeping on the bamboo floor for the 
time being. 

So, when the child Aurora was only ten rears old *he 
and her other sisters, including Emilia the eldest and Am- 

paro^vvere forced to do household duties: they pounded rice 

: She later became Mrs. Emilia Aragon Angara. 




THE FAVORITE CHILD OF BALER 

in the crude wooden mortar, they fetched water from the 
river in earthen jars wearing wooden shoes, they washed 
the family clothes regularly, they helped plant sweet po- 
tatoes (camote) and other vegetables in the home garden, 
ami they went out on bare feet to the rice field during the 
planting time under the scorching heat of the sun. 

Even when Aurora was still a child, her elders already 
discerned in her an exceptional industry in the home and 
kindness towards her playmates and neighbors. Aurora 
was not only the prettiest of the Aragon children, but as 
her name implied, she was also the personification of hope 

and faith! 

As the mothers of Aurora Aragon and Manuel Quezon 
were sisters, they were very closely attached to each other, 
and this fact brought about the rearing of the child Aurora 
by Quezon’s mother in the Quezon home on Mabini street 
in Baler. As a consequence, Aurora became the favorite 
of Don Lucio Quezon, Manuel’s father. Living under the 
same roof, the boy Manuel and his cousin spent the time 
in joyful company from clay to day and from year to year. 
In reminiscing on Aurora, Quezon said, “At that time mv 
little cousin was only ten years old and 1 used to play with 

her.” 




2 . 




\ LTHOUGH BALER has now become his- 
torically famous, it does not yet compare 
favorably in grandeur with the Cebu of 
Osmeha, the Capiz of Roxas, the Vigan 
of Quirino and the Camiling (in Tarlac) of Romulo, to 
mention a few notable places in the Philippines. However, 
little by little it is coming to its own. For one thing, it 
takes pride in the fact that its people are educated and 
well-traveled. As early as 1870 the 1,800 inhabitants of 
the town could already read and write. Quezon s father, 
Lucio, was the schoolmaster at the Comandancia of Baler 
at the time. In those years the Franciscan friars main- 
tained a school for the young children, which was equiv- 
alent to the public school of today. 

Having been observed to be a promising girl by her 
family, Aurora was tutored at the tender age of four by 
Doha Maria Dolores Molina, her aunt and mother of Que- 
zon. Two years later, or in 1804, she entered the school of 
the Franciscan friars located in their convent in Baler to 
start the primary course of instruction, after she had been 
given pre-school training by Emilia, her eldest sister. 

Then, in 1904, upon the invitation of her cousin, Ma- 
nuel Quezon, who was at the time in the government serv- 
ice as prosecuting attorney (provincial fiscal) of Tayabas, 
the Aragon family left Baler for Lucena. the capital of 
Tayabas, to live with him for some time. Having lost first 
the family property during the Revolution and later her 
father, Don Pedro, in 1901, Aurora was not in a financial 
position to acquire higher education. So Quezon, ever gal- 
lant and generous and affectionate to his cousin who had 
been closely related to him during all the years, readily 



[ 24 ] 




THE POPULAR STUDENT 



extended his help so that she could realize her life ambition 
— to be a public school teacher like Sister Emilia. He 
spent for her schooling in Manila. 

Young Aurora came to Manila to study at the Philip- 
pine Normal School, the one ambition of young women in 
the provinces at the time. She lived in the government 
boarding house for girls, now known as the Normal Hall, 
and she was under the care of a certain Miss Colman who 
gained the reputation of having made girls into accom- 
plished ladies. Excepting vacation days when she had to 
return home, Aurora remained in the dormitory and pored 
into the pages of her books. She soon became a bright 
and popular student. Her teachers were well impressed 
by her intelligence, so that she was promoted from first 
to third grade. 

A natural love for tilings Philippine made her extreme- 
ly fond of the graceful native dances. She readily became 
an expert dancer of the potpouri dance which she taught 
to the other girls in the school. In the Philippine Normal 
School she was an enthusiastic member of the Anahaw 
Society. She completed the primary and intermediate 
grades in this school but before she could start her studies 
of the secondary course. Student Aurora had to return to 
Baler because of her pool* health and that ot her aging 
mother. 

Her inability to continue her formal schooling made 
Aurora very resourceful which virtue she took along in 
old age. As she hated to be indolent— she wanted to keep 
herself always busy — she cultivated the habit of reading 
good books ’in English. Spanish, and Tagalog at home. 
Reading matter being very scarce at the time, Aurora took 
hold of evervthing that was in sight, and made good use 
of what she had learned. The result was marvelous. "By 
reading assiduously good books since I left school, I have 
learned to write correctly and speak fluently, she once 

remarked. 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



Ever generous, she did not keep to herself the little 
knowledge that she had acquired. She was not alone to 
learn, for soon after her return to her hometown, she 
formed the Baler Reading Circle and Library. The meager 
book collection which Dona Aurora had accumulated as a 
result of her being an avid reader since her student days, 
she shared with the townspeople who with her generous 
assistance began to learn the rudiments of English. 

The Baler Library was perhaps the first private entity 
of its kind in the Philippines to cater to the cultural needs 
of the people. In 1914 this collection became an important 
part of the Malacahan Library following the decision of 
Doha Aurora to donate it to the Government. 

At the same time she started building her private li- 
brary, which, at the outbreak of the World War II (1941) 
which devastated the Philippines, had already more than 
two thousand volumes on varied subjects. Her col- 
lection was rich in rare and ancient books on the history, 
culture, and lore of her people. She had her own ex libris 
on which was inscribed one of her favorite maxims, “Wis- 
dom excels Wealth.” 

She was also a rabid collector of Filipiniana books, and 
her pre-war collection was one of the best in the Philip- 
pines. So great was her love for things Philippine that 
on one of her birthday anniversaries she lamented the fact 
that her friends never thought of giving her something 
that was genuinely representative of her native land, par- 
ticularly a Philippine book. 

She believed that education would be the best means of 
improving the social condition of the Filipino women. 
“Education, thorough education,” she said. It is. I think, 
admitted that the Filipino woman has been graced by na- 
ture with excellent traits. She is keen, alert, industrious, 
kind-hearted, virtuous;- public-spirited, and home loving. 
Give her education and a'fair chance, and she will do the 
rest.” 



[ 26 ] 




THE POPULAR STUDENT 



Besides being endowed with an enchanting personality, 
Aurora possessed an inexhaustible fund of humor that 
made her conversation brilliant and fascinating. Despite 
her brief schooling, she was proficient in both English and 
Spanish which fact became the object of great admira- 
tion by many people, including foreigners. 





£ M70NA COLLECTION 

THE national LIBRA** 






B.U. A « 



rora 



I N HER time Aurora Aragon was the reign- 
ing belie of her community. She possessed 
beauty, she had charm, she was attractive 
and captivating, and everybody admired 
her for her intellect and industry. The old folks adored 
her, while her contemporaries undoubtedly cast an eye of 
envy on her. Whenever there was a social or literary gath- 
ering, the people turned to young and beauteous Aurora to 
grace and honor the occasion. It was their privilege to see 
her enthroned and worshipped as it was her right lo be 
showered with glowing tributes by the bards of the day. 
As she had been beautiful since early childhood, young 
men from different localities came to plead their cause to 
her. There was no doubt that all her suitors meant well 
but she, typifying as she did the real Filipino woman of 
the Maria Clara type, kept everything to herself until the 
opportune time came. 

Aurora Aragon and her cousin. Manuel Quezon, grew 
up together and having cultivated a mutual liking with 
the passing of the years, they grew fonder of each other. 
In the picturesque town of Baler, the two cousins were 
often seen playing and walking together and caroling to 
each other in the happy but innocent days of their youth. 
As they came to know and understand themselves very in- 
timately and affectionately, young Manuel later fell in 
love with his equally young and beautiful cousin. He ad- 
mired the charm, beauty, kindness, and industry of Aurora 

who, in turn, appreciated his courage, valor, intellect, and 
gallantry. 

For years they lived in Lucena following the accept- 
ance by the Aragon family of the invitation of Quezon to 



[ 23 ] 



THE BELLE AURORA 

join him in Tayabas where he was then assigned as pro- 
vincial fiscal. All this time Quezon, ever gallant and solic- 
itous of his cousin’s welfare, saw to it that Aurora was 
given the best care and that her needs were supplied. 
Quezon was so attached to her that even when the call of 



e/.UIl nu nnaviive. 

public service took him away from her side, he commu- 

f . ... 4 T — knt* nActor* 

nieated regularly with Aurora. 

« mm 

of 



letters kept her posted 

lieu I CKumi ijr mm ' 

his activities and achievements; and even when the 



OI HIS C 441 V 4 WV.MV.v " ^ # 

vouthful Filipino leader represented the Philippines at the 
International Navigation Conference held at St. Peters- 
burg, Russia, in 1908, he never failed to write her. 

As the vears passed, Quezon continued to adore his 
cousin more and more. The passionate lover that he was, 
ho always kept in touch with her either by writing regulai- 
] y or by visiting her frequently in the family residence. 

D uring these years Senorita Aurora frequently visited Ma- 
li ila upon the invitation of Quezon, and in these trips she 
v.-as accompanied by either Mrs. San Agustin or Mrs. Ro- 
driguez. 

In one of his visits to Lucena. Quezon took up the 
matter of romance seriously with the young lady. The shy 
™ lovely cousin did not accepv him read Hy as he e^cted; 
instead, she told him, "Sabihm mo kay harunj (Tell it to 
Mother). The answer, which came to him as a great sur- 
prise made Quezon temporarily despondent, desperate, an 
disappointed, so that he left the home heavily depressed 

and down-hearted. 

However, he never lost the hope of winning the love of 
oung Aurora. He continued sending her letters in 1 aga- 
log signed Nonong. Wherever he was, he always got in 
touch with her. In these love letters could be gleaned 
true and everlasting affection of Quezon for Aurora. 

Aurora was making one of her occasional trips to Ma- 

pih when Quezon thought of playing a practical joke on he. 
ynla wnen wue shed bit ter tears. One eve- 

ning he attended a formal dinner ; from there, in his formal 
evening d^ess/he visited her. He had intentionally pinned 



[ 29 ] 







AURORA A. QUEZON 

orange blossoms on the lapel of his tuxedo When he 
showed up in the house, he saw that Aurora had two ad- 
mirers calling on her. As he came in, the young lady was 
attracted to the orange blossoms, so she asked him the 
reason for wearing that particular flower. In a serious 
manner, he answered her, “I have just been married. 

Upon hearing his reply, Aurora suddenly burst into 
tears unmindful of the presence of her suitors. Why she 
cried so bitterly Aurora later explained. “It was not be- 
cause of his getting married that I was hurt most/’ she 
reasoned out. “No, I was hurt because he had not told 
us he was getting married.” Like a true Filipina she 
would not openly admit as yet her feelings for her cousin. 

Aurora’s delicate health up to 1918 alarmed Quezon 
considerably. She was thin and pale, and the doctors ad- 
vised her to go to cooler places, if possible, to regain her 
lost vitality. Fortunately enough, the Filipino people were 
then contemplating the sending of the first independence 
mission to the United States to work for the early grant 
of political independence. 

When in 1918, Quezon, then President of the Senate, 
was named head of this mission, he did not lose time to 
invite his adorable cousin to make the trip. The invita- 
tion was gladly accepted by Aurora. A maid accompanied 
her. Although the missioners left Manila on board the 
s. s. Shinyo Maru on December 9, 1918, her presence in 
the boat was never detected by the members of the party 
until their arrival in Hongkong. 

On the first night of the trip Aurora seated herself on 
the deck inhaling the cool and pure sea breezes. Later her 
cousin seated himself beside her, and the two lovers were 
left alone for hours as the boat sailed smoothly towards 
Hongkong. On that night the lover proposed marriage to 
his sweetheart. The young lady maintained her silence, 
and Quezon knew' what it meant. Although several months 
before their trip Aurora had been informed by intimate 
triends that Quezon had confidentially told them that he 



[ 30 ] 





Ti * 1**11* Aontru. pho*oin nitht •! in 1 1,1 
Miss A riif/ou. 



THE BELLE AURORA 



was getting married soon to “one of the fair daughters of 
Tayabas,” it never occurred to her that she was the one 
being referred to. However, she felt happy that, after all, 
her cousin was to be married and was to settle down. But 
never did she for a moment think that she was to be the 
lucky bride after a long engagement of twelve years. Un- 
til then she had entertained doubts of the intentions of 
her already well-know r n cousin. 

The wedding plans of Quezon were kept a secret from 
his bride because he wanted to give her a surprise of this, 
the happiest moment in her life. Besides, the proposed 
marriage was strongly objected to by Aurora’s mother al- 
though she was his own aunt. 

On their arrival in Hongkong the party went shopping 
first, and then visited the American legation. In this 
British city rickshaws are used for transportation. Aurora 
rode in a rickshaw on her way to the business section of 
the city. Unfortunately the rickshaw man took her to the 
wrong direction, isolating her from her companions. When 
Aurora found out the mistake, she immediately told him. 
“Stop. .. .Stop!” The coolie mistook her words for 
“Shop. . . .Shop,” so he doubled his speed. The other mem- 
bers had to turn around and follow Aurora’s rickshaw. 

After their shopping tour the missioners gathered at 
the American consulate general and attended the marriage 
ceremony which in Hongkong was called a “registrar mar- 
riage” as it was performed by the registrar of the colony. 
In this simple and unobtrusive ceremony that took place 
on Saturday, December 14, 1918, the Quezons had Speaker 
Sergio Osmena and Governor Maximo Rodriguez of Taya- 
bas as their official sponsors; but as these gentlemen were 
at the time in Manila, two members of the mission repre- 
sented them. 

Three days later the couple underwent a church wed- 
ding solemnized by the Archbishop of Hongkong at the 
Catholic Cathedral. That was on December 17. As the 



[ 31 ] 




AURORA a. QUEZON 



contracting parties were closely related to each other, a 
special dispensation had to be secured before the second 

ceremony could be performed. 

On their return to the Philippines in 1919, the Que- 
zon* spent their much delayed honeymoon in a beautiful 
home in Santa Ana district; from here they successively 
moved to their own homes — first in Marikina and later 
in Pasay city, both in the province of Rizal. 

Many years later when Quezon had occasion to recol- 
lect the fond memories of his wedding, he wrote : 



“On this trip came with me, not as a member of 
the delegation (a delegation to Washington, I>. U to 
plead for immediate independence for the I hil ip- 
pines) but as my life partner, the woman who, for 
twelve long years, had been engaged to me. 1 he op- 
position to our marriage of her beloved mother and 
my dear aunt had been removed by the will ol God. 
Aunt Zeneida had joined our ancestors the >eai be- 
fore. Contrary to Filipino custom which celebrates 
marriages at great expense and with pompous <. 1*1 *- 
monies, my bride and I were married in Hongkong 
in our street clothes and with the attendance ot only 
the members of my staff. Twenty-four years of mar- 
ried life with the same wife have proved that matri- 
monial happiness does not depend upon the noise of 
the wedding. Nor for that matter upon closing one’s 
eyes to the sight of other beauties and running away 
from their company during the period of one’s en- 
gagement.” 



The Quezon-Aragon wedlock was blessed with four 
children: Maria Aurora, who was named after her mother 
but was called “Baby” to distinguish her, was born on 
September 23, 1919; Maria Zeneida, or “Nini”, named after 
their maternal grandmother, was born on April 9, 1921; 
Luisa Corazon Paz, the third child, lived for a short time 
only as she died on December 14, 1924, and is now buried 
in the family lot in the Manila North Cemetery; and Ma- 
nuel, Jr., affectionately called “Nonong”, the pet name of 
his father as a boy, was born on June 23. 1924. 



[ 32 ] 




4 , 




H ER MARRIAGE to Manuel L. Quezon did 

not change Dona Aurora a bit. She re- 
mained simple in her manner, her poise, 
and her acts. The eminence of power and 
wealth did not spoil her. She was gracious to the poor 
and helpful to the needy; she was at home both in her 
nijia hut in Arayat, Pampanga, as well as in her stately and 
historic mansion in Pasay, Rizal. Her understanding soul 
listened to the plaints of all who came to seek her advice 
and aid. She was as popular as her husband and counted 
with as many visitors as the latter. 

As the wife Doha Aurora inspired her husband in his 
life-long campaign for the grant of independence by the 
United States of America which led to the present free 
und sovereign statehood of the Philippines. Whether in 
her native land or on foreign shores, she lived quietly with 
her family sharing with her illustrious mate the burden 
of carrying on the incessant fight to let the democratic 
way of life prevail among the people. 

Because of the character of her husband, Doha Aurora 
could become jealous but unlike other women, she kept her 
jealousy to herself and never had any outburst of it. She 
could be jealous all right, but she never let jealousy in- 
terfere with her work or that of her husband’s. They had 
their misunderstandings no doubt; but in these occasions 
she remained the reserved and forgiving wife, which trait 
has set her off as a model for Filipino wifehood. Unlike 
Marie Antoinette who spent her time in useless frivolity. 
Dona Aurora preferred to keep herself busy in her farm 
in Arayat, Pampanga. In being really very faithful to her 
husband, she typified the real Filipino wife. She was very 



[ 33 ] 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



solicitous of him and in spite of her hurt feelings some- 
times, she loved him very dearly. 

Doha Aurora was the family’s guardian angel who not 
only attended personally to the sick members of the presi- 
dential brood but worried very much so that she had to 
stay always at their bedside. She was also the family's 
favorite cook, preparing their favorite dishes. She had 
personal supervision over the household affairs. 

She brought up her children in a way very different 
from other Filipino mothers. Doha Aurora was modern 
in that she let her children discuss any current subject at 
the table. But like any other old-fashioned lady she did 
not allow her daughters to go out alone. It was only after 
the death of the father when they were already matured 
that she permitted them to go out unchaperoned. 

She loved all her children equally, as a result of which 
they all respected and adored her. She never forgot the 
birthdays of her children which were always celebrated. 
On those days all the members of her family heard mass 
together. This act became more of a tradition than a 
practice in the Quezon home. 

As a mother Dona Aurora never scolded her children. 
They were so careful in their dealings with their mother 
as not to offend her. None could be rebellious against her 
because she was diplomatic in dealing with them. She 
could say “No” to them when the occasion demanded, and 
she meant it. Once she saw r one of her daughters at an 
improvised bar in the Manila Hotel on the occasion of a 
certain festivity, and although she did not approve of this 
act, Dona Aurora did not call her daughter’s attention at 
the time, but waited until they had returned home when 
she made known her attitude. 

Before they occupied the Malacanan Palace in 1935 
upon the assumption into office of her husband as the first 
President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the 
Quezons lived in their family residence in Pasay. This 



[ 34 ] 



THE LOVING WIFE AND MOTHER 



beautiful country home was furnished tastefully and com- 
fortably by Doha Aurora with antique and modern pieces 
of furniture. The living room had old and beautiful pieces. 
As she cherished this home very much, it took Quezon a 
month to convince her to leave it for the more stately 
Malacanan Palace. 

The Quezons had also a house in Marikina, Rizal, 
which they called a country home as it was erected on the 
cliffs overlooking the Marikina river, and adjoining an 
orchard of mangos, papayas, bananas, and oranges. Que- 
zon himself attributed the beauty of this place to Doha 
Aurora’s industry. In this Marikina home, Doha Aurora 
cultivated tropical fishes in crystal bowls. She also treas- 
ured a big collection of dolls dressed in the costumes of 
different countries. She likewise took fancy in rare Phil- 
ippine orchids. Unfortunately, like her Pasay home, the 
Marikina home was completely destroyed by bombing, 
shelling and fire during the battle for liberation of Manila 
and the neighboring towns in early 1945. 

In 1930 Doha Aurora built a third house in Baguio, 
which after many years of gradual improvements became 
what the husband called “a comfortable and attractive 
home.” Located on a nice site overlooking the Pines City 
and its Burnham Park, she loved the house very much that 
she never exchanged it for the Mansion House despite the 
pleadings of Quezon that they live in the latter place. 

The Quezon conception of an ideal and lovely family 
was voiced by the husband himself. It showed how their 
own family was administered and how the children were 
reared. “In the family the mother and father must love 
their children and sacrifice for them; and the children, in 
turn, must look upon their parents as guides in their daily 
life, as the light that will make them see between the wrong 
and right. It is in a closely united family that I find moral 
satisfaction,” he revealed. 




AVRORA A. QUEZON 



DoS. Aurora w.» . stern diaciplinarian. She believed 
in training the children well. To her . woman . place . a 
in the home where there is always something for her to do 

to keep her busy. 



She also tvpified the dutiful wife who could follow the 
plans of a husband even if he changed them every .second. 
At a luncheon given in her honor by prominent women, 
she related how once she had to change her plans ot m rul- 
ing the children to a school abroad, just to suit her hus- 
band's wishes. 



“We have good schools in the Philippines but I wanted 
to imitate others who send their children abroad. My hus- 
band asked me to remain with the children. It entailed 
a great sacrifice. Indeed it was, especially when all I he 
three children fell sick at the same time in Paris, and 1 
was left alone in a strange country, riding forever in taxis 
that fly, with chauffeurs that invite you to leave the cab 
if you dare to ask them to slow’ down. 



“1 hadn't the nerve to ask him to let us return, and 
when the President (Quezon) announced that he had paid 
their tuition fees at the girl's school in Rosemont, Phila- 
delphia, my heart sank along with my hopes. 



“Then, two nights before he was to sail back, while I 
w’as pondering how I should tell him that I yearned lor 
home shores, I prayed, ‘My Lord, I leave everything to 
you. Do as you please with me.’ 

“Soon after, the cable came. My husband instructed 
me to pack our things and come back with him to the 
Philippines for he couldn’t sleep and eat. He needed our 
company. 

“Imagine my feelings when the girls said, ‘Mother, 
that is the happiest decision you have ever made.’ When 
the President arrived, everything was packed and we were 
ready to go. Thus, one’s husband can change plans every 
second, but a dutiful wife follows his plans." 



THE LOVING WIFE ANI> MOTHER 



Dona Aurora was fond of recalling to mind the child- 
hood days of her children. When she talked of their pranks 
as kids she was visibly happy. '‘Baby did this," "Nini did 
that" and “Nonong was such and such," she would remark 
she smilingly related stories of long ago unmindful of 
the precious time consumed. Of her husband, Doha Au- 
rora’s earliest memories were that Quezon was a handsome 
and brilliant law student. As Quezon was ten years her 

he would place her on his lap and narrate fasci- 



nating stories about the big city that was surrounded by 
massive walls which was Manila. 



In dedicating his book, entitled The Good Fight , Pres- 
ident Manuel L. Quezon once more made patent his love 
and admiration for Doha Aurora and his children. He 
wrote: "To my wife and children whose courage in the 
presence of the greatest dangers and whose devotion to 
me and to the cause for which we are fighting, was the in- 
spiration during the dreadful days on Corregidor, and our 
long journey since then." 

In return, Dona Aurora never forgot him even in his 
death. Of her grief over his passing she once expressed 
in this wise: "When it is winter I imagine he is cold and 
when it is summer I imagine he feels the heat." Such 
was, of course, the natural emotion of a bereaved wife 
whose love for her husband burned with ardor and pride 
and who in his lifetime was to her both a husband and a 

father. 

The death of her husband left a void "in the heart of 
the woman who knew him best... and Knowing him, un- 
derstood and loved him best." How could she forget Que- 
zon when there was evidence everywhere in her home to 
keep his beloved memory fresh and vivid? Scrapbooks, 
souvenirs, various photographs and paintings of him were 

all reminders of him. 

So grief-stricken was she that Dona Aurora could not 
attend his funeral which the great men of the world joined 



[ 37 ] 




AURORA a. QUEZON 



in person or in spirit to pay Quezon a last homage, nor was 
she able in her last remaining years on earth to see the 

films taken of that occasion. 

So engrossed was she in her recollection of him that 
at her 31 Gilmore Avenue home in Quezon City, Dona Au- 
rora had photographs of her husband hang e\tr> where, 
she had one in her former room in the second floor of this 
house, and in the room in the first floor to which she had 
moved later because she had been suffering from a weak 
heart, she brought with her his large portrait in everlast- 
ing remembrance. 







in 




alucanan 



Aa LTHOUGH GENERAL Emilio Aguinaldo 

y Famy had the signal honor of being the 
\ first Filipino to become his country’s first 
President in a Republic, yet the rare dis- 
tinction of being the first Filipino Chief Executive to 
occupy and live in the Malacafian Palace went to President 
Manuel L. Quezon who, upon the inauguration of the Gov- 
ernment of the Commonwealth of the Philippines in 1935, 
took possession of this historic edifice. Before him, former 
Spanish and American governors general made Malacafian 
their official residence. 

The selection of Quezon, then President of the Senate 
by his people in the presidential election of 1935 to be 
the chief magistrate of the land gave the Quezon family 
the unique privilege of being the first Filipinos to stay in 
the Palace. Following established custom and protocol, his 
wife, Aurora Aragon Quezon, became the first Filipino 
First Lady of the Land, which title she held continuously 
until the death of her illustrious husband-President on Au- 
gust 1, 1944. 

The Commonwealth, which succeeded the American ad- 
ministration of the Philippines under a governor general, 
was inaugurated on November 15, 1935. The fine, clear 
and cold morning of that day brought together over a 
quarter of a million spectators in the largest mass gather- 
ing ever seen in Manila to witness the historic, solemn 
and impressive ceremonies on the birth of the new govern- 
ment. 

At the main ceremonial stand erected in front of the 
Legislative building on P. Burgos Drive awaiting the ar- 



[ 39 ] 




AURORA a. QUEZON 



rival of the new Filipino head of the natlon th ® dl *' 

tinguished guests composed of the high officials of the 
American and Philippine governments garbed in their cut- 

am • a •« m i 'in In ^ 



aw ay a, army auu ... , 11 J. 

representatives with their gold braids and medals, digni- 
taries of the church in their black priestly vestments with 
splashes of purple sashes and skull caps, and delegates 
from the forty-nine provinces in glistening top hats and 
derbies. Near and around the place and at the Sunken 
gardens were soldiers and policemen in khaki. 



The Quezons were then living in their Pasay home 
facing the Dewey Boulevard. On that morning President- 
elect Quezon and his distinguished family heard the six 
o'clock mass officiated by the Reverend Crosgrave at the 
family chapel, during which they received the Holy Com- 
munion. At 7:30, the President, together with Mrs. Que- 
zon and their three children, drove in the presidential car 
to the scene of the ceremonies, preceded by a cavalry 
escort of the 26th Cavalry, Philippine Scouts (USA). At 
the head of the cavalcade were screaming police sirens who 
cleared the way. 



Upon their arrival at 8:15, a bugle call sounded and 

the announcer said : "The President of the Commonwealth 
and the Governor General of the Philippines!” All stood 
up as they took their seats in the main stand. Behind 
them marched three flag bearers — one carried the Amer- 
ican flag, the other had the Filipino flag, and the third 
the blue presidential flag bearing the great seal of the 
Commonwealth. 



Then the ceremonies began. Governor General Frank 
Murphy read the proclamation of President Franklin De- 
lano Roosevelt of the United States of America announc- 
ing the termination of the existing government and the 
establishment of the new Commonwealth. Then followed 
the administration of the oath of office to Quezon. After 
V ice-President Sergio Osmena and the ninety-eight mem- 



[ 40 ] 




THE GREAT LADY IN MALACASAN 



bers of the first National Assembly had been sworn in, 
President Quezon delivered his inaugural speech which he 
finished at 9:30. Shortly after he had reviewed the mili- 
tary parade held in his honor at about 11 o’clock, the Pres- 
ident. the First Lady, and their children left the Legisla- 
tive building for the Malacanan Palace, accompanied by a 

cavalry escort. 

Magnificent Malacanan Palace had f -urteen First La- 
dies who assumed the position of hostess of the Palace 
during the American administration from 1901 to 1935, 
when the first Filipino First Lady of the Land came not 
only to work side by side with the President with dignity 
and understanding, but also to share with him the honor 
of heading the state functions and national charities. 

These fourteen American ladies — eight wives, four 
daughters, and one sister of American governors general 
and a governor’s secretary’s wife — who are still well re- 
membered in the Philippines for their charm and grace, 
are the worthy predecessors of the first Filipino Malacanan 

hostess, Mrs. Aurora Aragon Quezon. 

Dona Aurora was a typical Filipino who was neither 
ultra-modern nor semi-conservative in her ways, actions, 
and dealings. She aws a happy blending of the three dom- 
inant cultures in the Philippines: she was as graceful 
as the Spanish woman, as progressive as the American 
lady, and as humble as her Filipino sister. “Schooled m 
the virtues of her elders and reared in the tenets of her 
parents’ tempered religion, and inspired by the lofty am- 
bitions of her husband whose illustrious career climaxe: 
in the presidency of the Commonwealth,’’ Dona Aurora 
ruled the Palace with “unerring motherly tenderness and 
solicitude” and was the guardian angel of the family. 

As hostess of Malacanan, Dona Aurora held “At Home” 
parties in the Palace not only for the entertainment of 
the wives of the members of the Cabinet and the Nationa 
Assembly, but also for people from ail walks of life m 



[411 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



order to make them feel that the Palace is not exclusively 
for the use of the nation’s highest official but for all the 
Filipinos. In these parties, Dona Aurora welcomed warm- 
ly her visitors, be they prominent or unknown. She stood 
to receive her callers for two or more hours in the recep- 
tion room of the Palace where three great big crystal chan- 
deliers hang from the ceiling. 

Being an accomplished lady, Dona Aurora fitted well 
the position that she acquired by virtue of her husband’s 
pre-eminence. She was not only a great lover of art and 
culture, but also their enthusiastic patron. Besides hoi 
manifold obligations as mother of a family and as 1 irst 
Lady, she still found ample time to devote to art. She 
was always counted among the selected few distinguished 
women in the Philippines who had given their efforts and 
money to push forward the development of art and culture 

in this country. 

It was but natural for Dona Aurora to show interest 
along these lines. In the first place, she was an accom- 
plished musician : she sang well and she played the piano, 
too. Her favorites in music were the vernacular songs, 
especially the kundimans and the danzas, and Christmas 
carols and sacred music, particularly the Ave Maria by 
Dr. Francisco Santiago, famous Filipino composer and 
pianist, and former director of the Conservatory of Music, 
University of the Philippines. From a private tutor, she 
studied vocalization. 

Dona Aurora loved folk songs and folk dances; in fact, 
it can be said that she was a lover of all good things Phil- 
ippine. Of these she had been patron on many occasions. 
Like all other musically-minded people, she read poems in 
Spanish, English, and Tagalog, because she knew that 
poetry and music complement each other. 

She was a composer of note ; several of her musical 
productions were composed during her teaching days in the 
public schools of Baler. These pieces have become folk 



[ 42 ] 




THE GREAT LADY IN MALACASAN 



songs in her place ; old men and women, young boys and 
girls, and the school children sing them by heart. Most 
popular of them is Rung Sa Buhay Kong Aba. 

She was a regular sponsor of the concerts of different 
Manila music societies, like the Asociacion Musical de Fi- 
lipinas and the Manila Music Lovers Society. She also 
sponsored the symphony concerts of the Philippine Con- 
stabulary band which were given for the benefit of patients 
of the Quezon Institute. To the people of her native prov- 
ince, she brought the first musical concert by noted Manila 
artists. Any significant work of art found appreciation 
from Dona Aurora. When the new’ and magnificent Ave- 
nue Theatre on Rizal Avenue v.as inaugurated on January 
25, 1939, she consented to be one of the distinguished 
guests. 

Through art and culture she found the means which 
created better understanding between members of the same 
people as well as between two or more different peoples. 
It was on this simple but practical philosophy in life that 
Dona Aurora had always been glad and obliging to help 
the cause of culture. So when she heard of the trip of the 
Philippine Cultural Society to China and Japan, she 
dropped the organizers an encouraging message. She 
wrote: “Your efforts to interest other Oriental peoples in 
Philippine music, dances, art, and literature will undoubt- 
edly prove fruitful, bring credit to our country, and serve 
to create better understanding and more cordial relations 
between the countries visited and ours.” 

Doha Aurora w r as a great help to her late husband- 
President because she herself settled many a case w r hich 
Quezon could not have decided. Very often politicians 
w’ho had troubles had to see her first before going to Que- 
zon to seek her counsel. 

She did not belong to any particular political party, 
although her husband was affiliated with and became the 
head of the powerful Nacionalista party in the Philippines. 



143 ] 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



But she had an inclination for certain individuals and 
groups, and as a party-man she was a very disciplined one. 
Take the case of Gregorio Santayana whose candidacy for 
provincial governor of Quezon (formerly Tayabas) in the 
election of 1947 Dona Aurora had to back up, because he 
had been nominated by the party, although in the same 
election she had a nominee— a man who was both good 
and religious, the two outstanding qualities which she 
highly regarded in an individual. 

She was never interested in any political position. 
That was the reason why she did not consider favorably 
the plan of the late President of the Philippines Manuel 
Roxas who, as head of the Liberal party, wanted to draft 
her as one of the candidates for senator in the election of 
1946. 

As a politician Dona Aurora was indeed very shrewd, 
powerful, and influential. She had her own choices for 
candidates. None of the candidates she put up in all the 
elections ever lost, for she worked personally for them, 
and even went to the extent of campaigning in their 
favor. When Manuel Roxas was the official candidate of 
the Liberals for president in 1946, she went out to stump 
for him. She did not only meet her people, talk to them 
individually, but even delivered speeches in three lan- 
guages — Tagalog, Spanish, and English. 




3 . L 



DOVE of peace was reigning: supreme 
I and unmolested in the Philippines, the peo- 
J pie were living happily and contentedly, 
and the country was in a state of prosper- 
ity and abundance when the Greater East Asia war broke 
out in the Philippines on December 8, 1941, as a result of 
the unexpected air raids conducted by the Japanese enemy 
on several strategic military installations of the United 
States army in the archipelago. 

To the surprise attack the people promptly reacted with 
a show of anger coupled with condemnation, for they never 
thought that the Japanese militarists who then formed a 
powerful clique n their country would ever start their 
unwarranted invasion of the South Asian region with the 
Philippines which had been a haven to their enterprising 
and adventurous nationals. 

On that fateful day Dona Aurora was in her farmstead 
in Arayat, Pampanga, “busy making of it a sort of model 
farm and, at the same time, a profitable investment/’ It 
was her husband who was in Baguio then who first broke 
the news about the hostilities to her. “I gave my wife 
the bad news and advised her not to worry about it for 
everything would come out well in the end. 1 told her also 
that I was driving down that night to take her and the 
children to Manila with me,” the late President Manuel 
L. Quezon recollected. 

As soon as Quezon had returned to Manila and was 
through with an important conference with General Doug- 
las MacArthur, commanding general of the United States 
armed forces in the Philippines at the time, in which it 




AURORA a. QUEZON 



was decided that Quezon should transfer to Corregidor 
together with him and other high Filipino government of- 
ficials, Quezon sought the advice of his wife. Of the deci- 
sion of Doha Aurora, he related : 

“When I got home, I called my wife aside and re- 
peated to her everything that General MacArthur had 
told me. I wanted her advice. She felt that it would 
be very painful to leave and be away from our people. 
‘But this is war,’ she said, ‘total war— and the Mili- 
tary Commander should know better what should be 

done to win it* 

“The winning of the war’, Mrs. Quezon added, 
‘is the only question before us. Nothing else matters/ 

“I agreed. She had put her finger on the right 
spot. 

“How about you and the children — will you come 
with me?” I inquired. Instead of answering my 
question she asked me another: ‘What do you want us 
to do?’ 

“I want you to remain here. The Japanese will 
respect you and treat you with every consideration. 
I have always dealt with their nationals in the Phil- 
ippines with courtesy and justice. And you have done 
the same. 

“Mrs. Quezon answered: ‘I shall do as you wish, 
but my preference is to be with you. Remember the 
sacred w'ords, “For better or for worse, in sickness 
or in health till death doth us part 

“ ‘However/ she counselled, iet us think the matter 

over tonight and tomorrow’ we should hear what our 

children have to say. They are grown un enough to 
be heard/ ” 

ihe trip to Corregidor was made in the afternoon of 
December 24 when the fall of Manila to the enemy was al- 
ready considered “imminent and inevitable.” In Corregidor 
Major General George C. Moore, commanding general of 
the United States army unit in that fort, gave Quezon a tui 

[ 46 ] 



THE WORLD WAR VOLUNTEER 



other male members of his staff quarters in the tunnel sep- 
arate from that assigned to his wife and daughters who 
shared the same lateral with Mrs. Francis B. Sayre, wife 
of the United States high commissioner to the Philippines, 
and some American ladies. Every night before they went 
to bed, Quezon kissed his wife and children, saying to the 
former, “Good night, sweetheart.” 

It was shortly before noon of December 29, 1941, that 
they had the first bombardment from the air in Corregidor. 
As the days passed the enemy gained much headway in its 
assaults which gave the USAFFE high command only one 
alternative: surrender. But before the fall of Corregidor 
to the invaders was consummated, the Quezons had already 
left the fort safely to enable them to make the trip to the 
United States of America where the President was to trans- 
fer the seat of the Commonwealth government and he was 
to be the symbol of redemption of the Philippines. 

The departure from Corregidor on February 20, 1942, 
was indeed dramatic, it was to signal the start of the long 
odyssey from the island fortress to Washington, D. C. The 
journey was full of dangers. At times it was thrilling, but 
at other times it was hardly bearable. 

In this trip Quezon was accompanied by Doha Aurora 
and their three children: Maria Aurora, Maria Zeneida, and 
Manuel, Jr. It was a submarine that took them away from 
Manila to the Visayan islands, from where they boarded a 
P-T boat to reach Mindanao. It took the P-T boat four 
hours to make the trip. During these hazardous hours, 
Doha Aurora, in the company of Fr. Pacifico Ortiz, the Que- 
zon spiritual adviser, said her prayers continuously in the 
chart room of the vessel which had Ensign George ( ox as 
skipper. Then a large flying fortress hopped them to Aus- 
tralia. From Melbourne, Australia, the Quezons were pas- 
sengers in the s. s. Pvfsidfiit Coolid fye for the crossing of 
the vast Pacific ocean. They arrived in San Francisco, Cali- 
fornia, on May 8. 10 42. after an uneventful voyage of 18 

days. 




£ ALZONA COLLECTION 

THE national libra* 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



Dona Aurora was always hardworking and devoted not 
only to her family but also to her country and to God. As 
the living symbol of Filipino womanhood during the war 
years, Dona Aurora shared the perils which her brave and 
illustrious husband underwent while the Philippines was in 
a most critical situation. And although she did not bear 
a gun with which to fight the common enemy, yet it can be 
said that like the soldiers, she was at the front lines for 
she played mother to thousands of Filipinos who had to look 
up to her for comfort and inspiration in those hazardous 
times. 

In the United States of America, Dona Aurora helped 
her husband-President carry on the heavy burden in the 
long and ceaseless fight of driving away the enemy from 
the Philippines, thereby restoring once more to her people 
the democratic way of life which tvas introduced by altruis- 
tic American leaders. 



For sometime the Quezons stayed in southern California, 
occupying the house of their friend, Mrs. Pilar Hidalgo-Lim, 
widow of the famous Filipino general. Vicente Lim. Dona 
Aurora enjoyed her days here for the pleasant climate of 
the place charmed her. 



To keep herself busy in the allied war efforts, Dona 
Aurora volunteered to be a worker in the blood donor serv- 
ice of the American Red Cross. In this work she did not 
only prove very helpful but also became the inspiration of 
many American and Filipino women who, like her, gave 

their time and efforts generously and freely to a worthy 
cause. 



At the suggestion of the Washington Post, an influen- 
tial and popular American newspaper, an “Avenge Bataan” 
drive for war bonds was launched in the United States of 
America. As the First Lady of the Philippines, Dona Au- 
rora officially opened the "Avenge Eataan Week” when on 
February 2, 1944. she purchased the first bonds in the name 
o- her family. Like all other persons who bought bonds 



[ 48 ] 





Putin A.irora ueaiinl In rsilf of ill cow tmni trillions inritf 
tit x to reach tin /topulnn in itci/iiitintinif them of her cartel 
nodal nerrin /irojerts. Sin bruinlcast her speeches and appeal* 
u'h c wc v er ma nna ru. 




THE WORLD WAR VOLUNTEER 



during the campaign, she signed the scroll which, by direc- 
tion of President Quezon, was given “a place of honor in 
my country." 

Besides the self-imposed duties which Doha Aurora had 
embraced as a volunteer war worker, she had also to look 
after the delicate health of her husband. When the World 
War II broke out, Quezon was already a sick man, having 
had recurrent attacks of tuberculosis. His illness, however, 
worsened during his residence in the United States of 
America, so that his physicians had to adopt extreme pre- 
cautionary measures in his last days of life. He died at 
Saranac Lake, in New York, on August 1, 1944. 

At the time of his untimely death, Doha Aurora was at 
the little Homan Catholic chapel just a stone’s throw from 
their house attending an early mass with the children. His 
death left in Doha Aurora a void that could never be re- 
placed, and made her assume the duties of the head of the 
Quezon brood. The widow and her children stayed by his 
side even in death for almost two years, when they decided 
to return to the Philippines to be with their old friends 
and relatives once more. But the trip home was made only 
after Doha Aurora had received assurances from President 
of the Philippines Sergio Osmeha* that since everything 
had returned to normal in the country, the mortal remains 
of the late President Quezon could be shipped back for a 
permanent rest in the land which he had loved so much 
and for which he gave the best years of his earthly life to 

see it enjoy its freedom. 

Her return to Manila was an occasion of happy reunion 
with the people whom she had deeply endeared in life. 

’Serpio Osmena was President of the Philippine Commonwealth 
from 1944 to 194G. 



[ 49 ] 




' 



7 . 

Vka 3ale of the Wartyr 

^ -THURSDAY, APRIL 28, 1949, would have 

f passed out as a Quiet but hot day in the 
J Philippines as all other days of the sum- 
mer months are from year to year had it 
not been for the brutal killing of the Quezon party, headed 
by Doha Aurora, in a desolate, wild and dangerous spot 
in the national highway shortly before noon. As the mer- 
ciless murder was perpetuated about 168 kilometers away 
from Manila, the capital city of the Philippines, nothing 
was known about the fateful event until late in the after- 
noon when the metropolitan newspapers issued their first 
“extra” closely followed by a second, and the radio broad- 
casting stations made special news flashes at regular in- 
tervals of the tragedy. 

The Manila Times Extra of that day carried the banner, 
Dna. Aurora, Baby Quezon, Eight Others, Killed by 
Huks, while the Evening Chronicle Extra ran this streamer, 

Huks Kill Mrs. Quezon, Baby Quezon and Mayor Ber- 
nardo. Both the newspaper readers and the radio listeners 
were stunned, shocked by the news! They could not be- 
lieve it at first, but it was the truth and the fact that the 
dastardly crime was consummated, as it had been planned 
out days previous, to no other than the “most revered and 
beloved woman in the Philippines” — Dona Aurora Aragon 
Quezon. The news of the wanton massacre of the Que- 
zons which spread like cogon fire shocked the country from 
the highest magistrate of the land to the humblest citizen. 
Everyone showed deep concern and indignation. The peo- 
ple cried for action, prompt action, for the speedy appre- 
hension of the ruthless band of criminals. 



[ 50 ] 



THE FATE OF THE MARTYR 



The Quezon party of thirty-eight persons was in a mo- 
torcade of ten cars and two jeeps bearing Constabulary 
officers and soldiers on security detail. They were bound 
for Baler, the hometown of the Quezons which is located 
in the remote northern strip of Quezon province, to wit- 
ness the ceremonies for the unveiling of the historical 
marker at the birthplace of the late President Manuel L. 
Quezon, to inaugurate the Baler memorial hospital, and to 
attend the traditional town fiesta. 

On that particular day Dona Aurora woke up very 
early in the morning and, together with her daughter, Ma- 
ria Aurora (Baby), she heard an early mass and received 
the Holy Communion. In her preparation for this trip, 
she did not forget to place her old rosary into her bag as 
she always subscribed to the belief that this rosary, with 
several beads already missing and which she had inherited 
from her mother, had great power against harm as had 
been demonstrated many a time in the past. 

The party left the Quezon home on Gilmore Avenue in 
Quezon City as early as 5:30 o’clock in the morning of 
that eventful day. It was due to return after May 2 as 
Dona Aurora wanted to attend on that day the celebration 
marking the second anniversary of the rebuilding of the 
Baler Catholic church which was mainly done through her 
help. It proceeded directly to Cabanatuan, capital of 
Nueva Ecija, and upon reaching Calaanan, near the junc- 
tion of the road branching to Bituloc in Laur, inquiries 
were made from the Constabulary personnel stationed 
therein as to whether or not the way from there to Baler 
was safe. As they were assured that “the road was com- 
paratively clear of possible danger from the dissidents, 
the party continued the trip. 

At about 10:30 a. m., the motorcade was crossing the 
Nueva Ecija border on the steep winding road leading to 
Quezon province. As they reached the Villa Aurora bend 
of that solitary place whose thick underbrush and tall 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



shaggy trees made it an ideal site for a man 

armed with a rifle planted himself in the middle of he 
road and menacingly motioned them to stop. When the 
leading car was about 15 feet from the man, Mayor I on- 
ciano A. Bernardo- of Quezon City, sens.ng some danger 
ahead, got out of it, then raised his hands in token of sur- 
render and shouted in Tagalog, “This is Mrs Quezon s 
party ” His plea, however, was only answered by an in- 
tense attack concentrated on his car,’ resulting in the death 
in cold blood of all, except Major General .Rafael Jalandoni, 
retired chief-of-staff of the Armed Forces of the Philip- 



lRorn of poor parents on December 2, 1905, in Santa Idisa, 
Nueva Ecija. Ponciano A. Bernardo worked not only to go through 
school but also to help support his family. In school, Bernardo was 
always an honor student. He finished his elementary schooling in 
Santa Rosa, Nueva Ecija, and was graduated with honors from the 
high school in San Isidro, also in Nueva Ecija. m 1923. In 192 i he 
was graduated from the University of the Philippines and was con- 
ferred the degree of bachelor of science in civil engineering. He 
passed the board examinations in the same year, obtaining the third 
highest rating among the successful candidates. 

Bernardo held various positions in the government. From 1924 
to 1926 he was an engineer’s assistant in the Bureau of Public Works. 
From 1929 to 1932, he w'as assistant civil engineer in Tavabas. He 
was later elevated to the position of district engineer of Tayabas, 
a position he held until 1937. In the later part of 1937, Bernardo 
was assistant city engineer of Baguio. While in Baguio, Bernardo 
did much toward the development and beautification of the summer 
capital, resulting in his promotion to district engineer of Antique 
in 1939. 

In 1940, the late President Quezon appointed Bernardo as “proj- 
ect” engineer to work on Mrs. Quezon’s pet project — the building 
of Quezon City — at the same time designating him vice-mayor of 
Quezon City. 

During the Japanese occupation. Bernardo was imprisoned in 
Fort Santiago on suspicion of being a guerrilla. He stayed in 
Fort Santiago for five months. After liberation he was appointed 
manager of the ECA. and in 1947 he was named mayor and city 
engineer of Quezon City. Bernardo was also a member of the Capita 1 
Site Planning Commission. He was the president of the local chapter 
of the UP Alumni Association in Quezon City. 

Bernardo is survived by his wife, the former Josofioa Martinez 
of Quezon province, and eight children: Carolina, IS; Josefina, 17; 
Ponciano, Jr., 15; Emmanuel, 14; Juliet, 12: Reynaldo, 10; Marie 
Chu, 8; and Cherry, 6. — From the Evening News, 1949. 

2 The bullet-ridden death car has been preserved as an object 
of historical interest. 



[ 52 ] 



THE FATE OF THE MARTYR 



pines. Shot dead himself, Bernardo’s body fell from where 
he had stood and was soon covered with thick dust. When 
Jalandoni regained consciousness later, he found the life- 
less bodies of Doha Aurora and her daughter, Maria Au- 
rora, piled on top of him. The wounds inflicted in her 
head caused the instant death of Doha Aurora. 

The locale of the sneak attack was the bend on the na- 
tional highway at Kilometer 1G8 (from Manila), a site ad- 
mittedly considered a treacherous terrain of the Sierra 
Mad re range. 3 

Desiring to avoid the cloud of dust from the dirt road. 
Doha Aurora preferred to be ahead of the other cars — 
ahead even of the security guards’ jeeps. In Mayor Ber- 
nardo’s Buick sedan, between Jalandoni on the right and 
Bernardo on the left, Dona Aurora sat, with no thought 
of danger. At the driver’s seat were, from left, Lieut.-Col. 
Antonio San Agustin, assistant manager of the Philippine 
Charity Sweepstakes Office, who was at the steering wheel, 
Felipe Buencamino III, and Maria Aurora (Baby) Que- 
zon. 

So sudden was the attack of a heavy hail of machine- 
gun bullets on the party that the escort guards did not 
have time to fire back even a single shot. Everybody im- 
mediately scampered for safety. 

The dissidents, totalling* about 100 heavily armed jun- 
gle fighters, were strategically deployed about 15 meters 
further on the high embankments ol the zigzag road which 
was firmly barricaded of cut timber. Ihey continued fir- 
ing from all directions on the different cars as these ap- 
proached the bend until the arrival of the re-enforcement 



The site where Mrs. Aurora Aragon Quezon was murdered lias 

been converted by President of the Philippines Elpidio Quirino in o 
a national forest reserve to he known as the Aurora Memorial I ai '• 

(Malacanan Press Release No. 459, April 30, 1U41>). 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



of Constabulary soldiers from Nueva Ecija when they 
started to flee to the forests and disperse in small groups. 4 

The ambushers were later identified by the drivers and 
passengers of several trucks to be a gang of maiauders. 
The former were herded together under a tree about 200 
meters from the spot where Dona Aurora was muidered 
and detained until the attack on the Quezon party was 
over, when one member of the gang told them, Go now 
as your white-haired Mrs. Quezon is already dead." 

From their victims the dissidents stole whatever they 
could. Robbed from Doha Aurora were her money and all 
the jewelry she wore— an engagement ring, a wedding 
ring, a diamond studded wrist watch, and a necklace close- 
ly resembling the rosary beads. Later the Constabulary 
recovered her bullet-ridden residence certificate for the year 
1945 when taken from the body of an unidentified dissident 
during an operation of the famous Nenita commandoes in 
Nueva Ecija on the lawless elements, and a black bag of 
alligator skin which still contained the unfinished bed- 
spread which she had started to knit in Manila. 

News of the tragedy was immediately communicated to 
the surviving children. Maria Zeneida (Nini), who was 
first contacted at her Gilmore Avenue home, was prostrate 
with shock upon getting the information. She in turn noti- 
fied her brother, Manuel, Jr. (Nonong), then vacationing at 



•Known dead from the ambuscade were 12, namely, Mrs. Que- 
zon, Maria Aurora (Baby) Quezon, Felipe Bueneamino III, Mayor 
Ponciano A. Bernardo of Quezon City, Col. Primitivo San Agustin, 
Lieut Col. Antonio San Agustin, Lieut. Piosdado Lasam, Lieut. 1>. 
M. Arabejo, Juan Molina, Pedro Payumo (Mrs. Quezon’s cook), Cpl. 
Quirino Almarines and Pfc. Brigido Valdez. Among the 2 Cy survi- 
vors, three were wounded — Major General Rafael Jalandoni, Capt. 
Olimpio Manalang, and Cpl. Raymundo Silvero. The others were 
Dr. Eduardo Quisumbing, Director Hilarion Silayan, Dr. Luis Alan- 
dy, Mrs. Sixto de la Costa, Mrs. Amparo A. Angara, Mr. and Mrs. 
Maximo Rodriguez, Dr. and Mrs. Francisco Vicuna, Mayor and Mrs. 
I’edro Alcantara, Mrs. Enriqueta Amador, Francisco Trinidad, Jos** 
Aicjandrino, Cesar Valenzuela, David Valenzuela, P. C. Guevara, ar.d 
Mrs. Clara de Zubia. 




THE FATE OF THE MARTYR 



the home of Mrs. Consuelo Cuyugan in Baclaran, Rizal, 
about the massacre. Upon learning of the tragedy, Mrs. 
Cuyugan’* recalled that during Doha Aurora’s visit to her 
home the previous Monday, Doha Aurora told her “to look 
after Nonong who is not so strong/* She wondered if Doha 
Aurora had any premonition that something fatal would 
happen to her soon. 

The massacre which was also communicated to President 
of the Philippines Elpidio Quirino in Baguio, came as a 
shock and for a moment it rendered him speechless. Upon 
regaining composure, the C hief Executive then recalled his 
offer of the presidential plane to Doha Aurora for the trip. 
“Had she accepted my offer, she would have been saved 
from the tragedy,” he reminisced. The President then de- 
cided that the Philippine Government take charge of the 
funeral of Doha Aurora and forthwith ordered a 15-man 
committee, headed by former Speaker Jose Yulo, to make 
the necessary arrangements. At the same time, in a proc- 
lamation he issued, he ordered all public buildings to dis- 
play the national flag a* half-mast for nine days, beginning 
on April 29. in token of the “loving remembrance of the 
late Mrs. Aurora Aragon Quezon and as an expression of 
bereavement of our people for the untimely and immeas- 
urable loss.” 

Doha Aurora was also dissuaded by a friend from mak- 
ing the trip to Baler because of the unsettled peace and 
order conditions in that section of the country. But she had 
complete and absolute trust and faith in her people, so that, 
to that well-meaning friend, she answered as she pointed 
to her white hair: “Luis Taruc knows my white hair and 
he will not hurt me.” 

The bodies of the Quezons arrived in Manila late in the 
night of that ill-fated Thursday, accompanied by Jalandoni. 
Upon instructions of the living children, the remains were 

'Mrs. Ciivutran plays second mother to the Quezon children who 
fondly call her Ninany* 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



immediately sealed in bronze caskets, so the eager hut sor- 
rowing public was not allowed a view of them. 1 hen, as 
the remains were brought to the Santo Rosario chapel of 
the University of Santo Tomas a large crowd of people 
from all walks of life not only followed but kept vigil day 
and night until the hour of interment on Friday after- 
noon. 

Was Dona Aurora really the target of the ambushers? 
From the sworn testimony of a certain Domingo Lawag, 
foreman of the Bureau of Public Works assigned to the 
Bongabon-Baier road construction project, who was one of 
some 70 persons held captive at the time, the dissidents 
were after certain "government officials expected to join 
Mrs. Quezon’s party" whom they “blamed” for the alleged 
‘‘extravagance and corruption in the government.” 

The Quezon assassination was rated the second most 
important news event in the Philippines that happened in 
1949 by the Evening News, leading afternoon daily news- 
paper of Manila ; and on the basis of the publicity accorded 
Philippine events in the United States during the same year, 
it was considered the third most important, surpassed only 
by the election to the presidency of the Philippine Republic 
of Elpidio Quirino and his whirlwind visit to the United 
States. 




^■kHE ATROCIOUS crime on the Quezon party 
I brought tears to the people in the Philip- 
* pines and foreign countries who had heard 
of it. There was profound mourning every- 
where. There was universal lament over the death of 
Dona Aurora which was unanimously held to be “a great 
loss to the country, considering the fact that she had been 



active in charitable, civic and religious activities" and that 
the woman herself possessed sterling qualities worthy of 
emulation and adoration by the women of the Philippines. 
In Lucena, Quezon province, a day was set aside by the 




THE FATE OF THE MARTYR 



Provincial Board as a day of prayer for the repose of the 
soul of Doha Aurora. 

To President of the Philippines Elpidio Quirino the 
death of Doha Aurora was “an irreparable loss to her fam- 
ily and to the Filipino people to whose welfare she dedi- 
cated her life fully with utmost zeal and devotion. * * * I 
know the whole country mourns Mrs. Quezon’s death. She 
was a mother to her people. The whole country is enraged 
by the incident,” he remarked. 

Speaker Eugenio Perez of the House of Representatives 
said that “our womanhood has lost a leader and a cham- 
pion. We will always remember her works, charitable, 
civic, and religious. We feel a void in our midst in the 
untimely demise of the great and beloved Filipina leader.” 

When the news of the tragedy was broken to Sergio 
Osmeha, retired President of the Philippines, in Cebu City, 
he was stunned and became speechless for sometime, lie 
was one of the many individuals who must have been 
visibly affected by the event because of his close personal 
relations with the Quezons. He said that “no words are 
strong enough to condemn such a horrible crime.” Mrs. 
Esperanza Limjap Osmeha, his wife, was equally shocked 
and so grief-stricken was she that she shed tears upon 
being informed of the tragedy. 

In Baguio, the Quezon massacre spelled gloom and 
sadness all over the Pines City of the Philippines where 
Doha Aurora had been a prominent resident because of 
her regular commutation between Manila and that north- 
ern mountain resort in her life time. The Most Reverend 
Michael J. O’ Doherty, archbishop of Manila, was vacation- 
ing in Baguio then. During his long residence in the Phil- 
ippines he became an intimate friend and spiritual adviser 
of the Quezons. He was stricken with grief upon learning 
of Doha Aurora’s death. He remarked that “Mrs. Quezon 
had established a wonderful record as a diplomat, as a 
First Lady, as the consort of the late President Quezon. 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



She has always been a national asset in holding the re- 
spect not only of Filipinos, but also of other people who 
came to know her.” 

Former Senate President Jose Avelino considered Doha 
Aurora a great Filipina in her own right. “The lifelong 
inspiration and most trusted counsellor of her immortal 
husband, with whom she shared struggle, victory, and exile, 
she could rightly be called the Mother of the People and 
our Republic,” he asserted. 

Ambassador Carlos P. Romulo, chief of the Philippine 
Mission to the United Nations, recalled that Doha Aurora 
was “liked by everyone and had no enemies. She was the 
First Lady of the Philippines — even after the death of her 
husband. Her work in the Philippine Red Cross was 

something that will live forever. She was a lady of such 
dignity.” 



Dr. Jose P. Laurel, president of the wartime Republic 
of the Philippines (1943-1944), joined his countrymen in 
mourning over this national catastrophe, and of Doha Au- 
rora and her daughter, he paid this tribute: “It is incon- 
ceivable that the wife and the beloved child of the late 



President Quezon should die precisely in the hands of the 
people for whose rights the late President had fought so 
hard. * * Doha Aurora and her daughter had been per- 
forming heroic work of faith, hope, and love for the masses 
in the noble tradition of our late President Quezon. Like 
him they, too, have given their lives in the course of a 
thankless struggle for the betterment of our people. Only 
Divine Providence can ever adequately explain to a sor- 
rowing nation the infinite wisdom behind such supreme 
sacrifice suddenly exacted irom heroes who had already 
given too much to a grateful people.” Nay, all Filipinos, 
high and poor alike, those who knew her personally and 
those who knew her only by her name and deeds, shed tears, 
not once but whenever the atrocious event was mentioned. 



[58] 




THE FATE OF THE MARTYR 



The news of the tragedy which was received with shock 
and sorrow had evoked universal condemnation against the 
persons responsible for the atrocity, according to reports 
sent to the Department of Foreign Affairs from its diplo- 
matic and consular offices abroad. This world reaction 
was explained by Undersecretary Felino Neri of Foreign 
Affairs in this wise: "Foremost among the deeds for which 
our people shall long remember Mrs. Aurora Aragon Que- 
zon is the indefatigable zeal and utter unselfishness with 
which she has pursued the work begun by her illustrious 
husband in ameliorating the condition of our masses and 
maintaining unsullied our national prestige abroad. The 
goodwill and friendship that the Philippines enjoys with 
the nations of the world today is in a measure due to the 
foundations laid down by the late President Quezon spe- 
cially during the war years.” 

On his part, Ambassador Joaquin M. Elizalde, of the 
Philippine Embassy in Washington, D. C.. said in his state- 
ment: “Dona Aurora was one of the best loved women of 
our country. Not only as the wife of our late President 
Quezon but because also of her own gracious qualities, she 
held a unique position in the eyes of the Filipino people. 
For several decades her influence and assistance were im- 
portant factors in her husband’s political career. In these 
later years she had devoted her efforts towards helping 
others.” 



Governor Mariano Penaflorida, of Iloilo, urged the wip- 
ing out of the criminals Who massacred Dona Aurora 
whom she called “the svmbol of virtue and decency, who 
was revered and loved by all Filipinos.” 



In life Dona Aurora was "the most lovable person in 
the Philippines/' said a taxi driver of Manila in comment- 
ing on her death, while to one housewife "she was the 
kindest woman I've ever met.” 



Demonstrative of the love and reverence the people 
hold for Dona Aurora were the suggestions made at the 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



moment. A certain Silvestre B. Asia, of Manila, who con- 
sidered “Mrs. Quezon’s death a glorious one, suggested 
that she “should be listed as one of our greatest heroines;” 
while Quintin de la Torre, of Talisay, Cebu, urged that 
every Filipino should plant the ornamental plant, Dona 
Aurora (Musaenda philippics var. aurorae), to “symbolize 

devotion to duty.” 



Messages of condolence from foreign countries contin- 
ued pouring in Malacanan and at the home of the Quezons 
for days after the tragedy. There was a message of sym- 
pathy from His Holiness Pope Pius XII. President Harry 
S. Truman of the United States of America led his people 
in voicing their sympathy for the death of Doha Aurora. 



From Tokyo, Japan, General of the Army and Mrs. 
Douglas MacArthur extended their deepest sympathy to 
the surviving members of the Quezon family. “There 
will be universal horror and regret throughout the world 
for this profound tragedy to a family whose greatness is 
infinitely stamped on its country’s history," said his mes- 
sage to Manuel Quezon, Jr. 



Deep regret at the slaying of Doha Aurora by the dis- 
sidents was expressed by Associate Justice Frank Murphy 
of the United States Supreme Court upon being apprised 
of the event. Of her, Murphy said : “As the beloved wife 
of the former President, Mrs. Quezon was respected and 
revered throughout the Islands and by many friends in 
this country. The wholesome influence of her fine charac- 
ter and wise counsel was widely felt both inside and out- 
side government circles. The Philippine people have lost 
a great cherished friend.” 



To Rear Admiral H. H. Good, of the United States 
Navy, Dona Aurora was an inestimable loss to the Re- 
public of the Philippines. “Her martyred death will be a 
symbol of the democratic forces which are trying to de- 
stroy that way of life,” he said. “We in the United States 



[GO] 



the fate of the martyr 



know full well of her stand for democracy and that her 
work for your first President will be carried in the annals 
of both our countries as one of the outstanding examples 
of teamwork in showing how democracy can be carried 

forward.” 

Another tribute came from J. Weldon Jones, former 
acting high commissioner of the United States to the 
Philippines, who pointed out that Doha Aurora “was a 
quiet but outstanding supporter of her illustrious hus- 
band;” while Congressman Charles Halleek, House Repub- 
lican floor leader in the United States Congress, called 
the late President and Doha Aurora “magnificent people.” 

Colin W. Waddell, noted Australian scholar, who used 
to lecture on life in the Philippines, wrote that in Doha 
Aurora the Filipino people look to her dignity and grace 
“with much the same warm affection that we show towards 
our Queen Mother in England.” 

Some foreign governments also joined the Philippines 
in this hour of affliction. Through its minister in the 
Philippines, the chief of the Spanish state transmitted his 
“expression of the sincerest condolence.” 

“The government and the people of Australia learned 
with deep horror the murder of Doha Aurora/ read the 
message sent to the Department of Foreign Affairs. The 
death of one who has played such a part in the develop- 
ment of the Philippine Republic and who was so intimate- 
ly connected for many years with its most historic move- 
ment is a bereavement which will be felt by every Filipi- 
no,” it stated. 

Heads of various national organizations commented 
on the tragedy. In the opinion ol Dr. Manuel Dim, 
succeeded Doha Aurora as chairman ot the board o £°v 
ernors of the Philippine National Red Cross, her tea 
was “a national disaster, not only for the Red Cross, u 
for the entire Filipino nation as well.” He adde , - rs. 



AURORA a. QUEZON 



Quezon leaves behind a heritage r.ch in subhrrnty and 
of unequalled worth. Her unselfish devotion to humanity 
at large, and her people in particular will live in the hearts 

of all men long after she is gone.” 

••The women of the Philippines lost a leader, a great 
sympathizer and a staunch sponsor of social justice for 
all,” in the estimation of Miss Julita V. Sotejo, president 
of the Filipino Nurses Association. 

Upon the recommendation of the American Associa- 
tion of the Philippines, the American community in the 
Philippines observed a month of mourning for Dona Au- 
rora whose place in the Philippines was likened to “that 
of Martha Washington in the early days of the American 
Republic.” Frederic H. Stevens, then president of the 
American Chamber of Commerce, in lamenting the am- 
bush, said “it is an appalling thing to have to write down 
in the annals of the nation. Americans here feel this deep- 
ly and wish they could aid or comfort. 



Women’s clubs in different countries which are affil- 
iated to the National Federation of Women’s Clubs of 
the Philippines did not lose time cabling messages of con- 



dolence to the Quezon family. Tokens of bereavement 
were received from the Philippine-American Women’s 
Club of Washington, D.C., the Filipino Women’s Club of 
San Diego, California, and the Filipino-Hawaii Women’s 
Club of Honolulu. On its part, the Filipino Community 
of Honolulu, in the territory of Hawaii, sent three wreaths 
of rare Hawaiian orchids to Manila in loving remembrance 
of Doha Aurora. 



The Joint Committee on United States-Philippines Re- 
lations, of which Dr. Adam C. Derkum 1 is the permanent 
chairman, upon motion of Roy C. Bennett, unanimously 
approved a resolution expressing to the surviving mem* 

’One-time division superintendent of schools in Tariac and Pam- 
panga. 



[ 62 ] 



THE FATE OF THE MARTYR 



bers of the Quezon family their “sincere and deep sym- 
pathy and condolence in their great irreplaceable loss.” 
The resolution said, in part, that “Mrs. Quezon, both in 
her public and private life, was exemplary in character, 
a civic leader, a great humanitarian, a devout and faith- 
ful Christian” and that “we who knew Mrs. Quezon per- 
sonally, admired her fine qualities of leadership, her de- 
votion to her people, and the absorbing interest in the wel- 
fare of her country.” Represented in this Joint Committee 
were the Philippine Society of Southern California, the 
Pan-Pacific Association for Mutual Understanding, the 
Sponsors of the Philippine Heroes, and the Bataan-Corre- 
gidor Memorial Committee. 

The Fourth Estate throughout the world gave the 
Quezon massacre its due importance and significance as 
can be gleaned from the different newspaper accounts re- 
ceived in the Philippines. While the dastardly crime was 
unanimously condemned, the profound sympathy of the 
people of all climes was conveyed. 

In the United States the tragedy was made the day’s 
biggest story in the AY tr York Sun, while the AY w 1 ork 
World Telegram carried a six-column banner over the UP 
story which was accompanied by the portraits of Doha Au- 
rora and her daughter. Both the New York Post and the 
Journal American headlined the story as second in impor- 
tance only to the talks on the Berlin blockade. 

Consul Sofronio Abrera of the Philippine Consulate 
in Los Angeles, California, reported that all the Los An- 
geles newspapers carried the news of the massacre in ban- 
ner headlines. Well known in that American city were 
the Quezons who spent part of their “exile” in the l nited 
States for the duration of World War II in the West Coast. 

After expressing its deep sympathy for the Filipino 
people in this grievous loss, the New ) ork Times said that 
the “Philippines has lost in Mrs. Quezon a gracious lady 



[63] 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



who was widely beloved and honored for her leadership 
in many good causes.” 

The tragedy was described by the New York Herald 
Tribune in its editorial as “so wanton and pointless, what- 
ever the motives of the killers." In paying tribute to Dona 
Aurora, the editor said that “the great crowd of mourners 
which gathered for her funeral procession was an eloquent 
testimony to her position in the hearts of her people," and 
concluded that "the United States will share in the sorrow 
of the Philippines, and hope that the young Republic will 
soon be able to stamp out the forces which threaten it." 

The Chicago Daily News, in its issue of April 28, 1949, 
front-paged the story, with an eight-column headline read- 
ing thus, REDS KILL QUEZON’S WIDOW. This typified 
the manner editors of the metropolitan press in the United 
States reacted to the shocking news of her death. So sig- 
nificant and newsworthy was the Quezon story that it 
shoved down practically all other news of the day, includ- 
ing an interview given by President Harry S. Truman 
on the Taft-Hartley labor law. 

In its editorial of April 29, the Bristol Press of Con- 
necticut wrote that the daring assault on Dona Aurora 
“demonstrates the fearlessness of the Huks. . . Mrs. Que- 
zon was the First Lady of the Philippines and was very 
popular with the people. The assailants must have known 
that her death would cause an angry outburst and demand 
for retaliation.” 

On the other hand, the Hamilton (0.) Journal-News 
editorial of April 30 expressed the hope that “the cold 
blooded massacre which took place while Mrs. Quezon 
was on the way to dedicate a plaque honoring her husband, 
should arouse the Philipine government to take decisive 
action against the communist-led bandits who have infest- 
ed Central Luzon since the Japanese defeat.” The same 
newspaper paid tribute to Dona Aurora saying that she 

[64] 




THE FATE OF THE MARTYR 



“was probably the best loved and most highly respected 
citizen of the new Republic. She was admired as much 
for her own contribution to Philippine independence and 
the welfare of the Filipinos as for the memory of her re- 
vered husband/' 



All Europe was shocked by the violent death of Doha 
Aurora. Not to be outdone by their American contem- 
poraries, European newspapers published a full account 
of the tragedy on their front pages immediately upon re- 
dispatches from press service asso- 



ceiving the 

ciations and their own correspondents in the Philippines. 



From Buenos Aires, Argentina, in South America, 
came the report of Minister Nareiso Ramos of the Philip- 
pine Legation, saying that the death was played up by 
the afternoon newspapers with lengthy AP and UP am- 
bush accounts. “The death of so good and virtuous a wom- 
an who had consecrated her life to the welfare of her peo- 
ple is a national loss," he added. 

In Madrid, Spain, Charge d’Affaires Manuel Nieto of 
the Philippine Legation cabled the Department of Foreign 
Affairs to the effect that all Spanish newspapers front- 
paged the massacre with a picture of Dona Aurora. 

In the Philippines the Quezon murder was given great 
prominence in the newspapers for days. It was the biggest 
story for weeks. Editors and columnists alike wrote ex- 
tensively and commented exhaustively on it. 

To Mrs. Virginia Benitez Licuanan, Manila Chronicle 
columnist, the tragic death of Dona Aurora was a shock 
to all “not only because of its suddenness, but because it 
was too violent an end for so gentle a person. The contrast 
between the cruel ruthlessness of her assailants and t e 
serenity and humanity of her spirit is what makes the 
attack seem as outrageous and blasphemous as t e ese 
cration of a holy shrine,” she pointed out. 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



Ernesto del Rosario, of the “Off the Beat” column, also 
of the Manila Chronicle , wrote that wherever the guilt for 
the murder of Doha Aurora lies, “no hands have ever 
dripped with more innocent or nobler blood. The outraged 
people will not listen to any reason for this most heinous 
of all crimes. It is a crime that strikes at the hearts of 
each and everyone of us. * Mrs. Quezon, those who 
died with her and those who died before them are martyrs 
to the cause of peace and order.” 



Vicente Villamin, Manila Daily Bulletin columnist, 
writing from Washington, D.C.* termed the murderous 
incident “an attack against both the people and the gov- 
ernment.” He urged both entities to “close ranks to repel 
further attacks.” He said that 1 
be overwhelmingly convinced that 



“every erring soul must 
; every act of lawlessness 
and bestiality will be discovered and dealt with relentless- 
ly.” 



Of Doha Aurora, Villamin remarked that her “fate 
should serve as a unifying force among the good people 
of the Philippines, irrespective of personal political dif- 
ferences and party affiliations. It should also serve to sear 
the soul of those few who believe in violence and covet 
the things that belong to others without earning them.” 
He added that “if every act of service and humanity that 
she (Doha Aurora) rendered to others in her lifetime is 
represented by a beautiful rose, there will certainly be a 
mountain of beautiful roses symbolizing her public life.” 

The Philippines F ree Press , American-owned independ- 
ent weekly, pointed out in its editorial that the murder 
of Doha Aurora was one act committed by the dissidents 
that had aroused so much anger all over the Philippines.” 
In justifying its assertion, the editor emphasized on the 
preparations made for the ambush. “The attack was sud- 
den and treacherous. Deliberation was evident in the *un 
emplacements that had been prepared days in advance at 
the point of the ambuscade. Men were held captive, to 



[ 66 ] 



THE FATE OF THE MARTYR 



make more deadly certain the success of the well-laid plan. 
For weeks in advance, it was generally known in the sur- 
rounding area that on that day Mrs. Quezon and party 
would pass along that road to Baler to honor the memory 
of her husband,” it said. 



The same weekly had also a full-page illustrated edi- 
torial on the event. In it the editor remarked that “the 
death of Dona Aurora came not only as a shock to Fili- 
pinos but almost as an assault on their person. The 
widow of so grreat a man, so great a lady in her own right, 
dedicating her days to the service of the needy, revered 
by all — now’ brutally murdered, butchered. ... by men 
turned savagres ” 



The Manila Times editorial, on the other hand, opined 

that “the brute, insensate murder brought to her 

(Doha Aurora) a martyrdom that will forever enshrine 
her memory in the hearts of the people whose love she 
gained.” 




8 . 

Oka Wod Severed Woman 

RIEF-BOWED throng MOURNS LOSS.” 

W J This was the eight-column streamer of the 

Manila Times, largest morning daily news- 
paper of the Philippines, on April 30, 1949, 

the day after the mortal remains of Doha Aurora Aragon 
Quezon and the two other members of her family had 
been laid to their final resting place. How aptly typified 
was the general feeling and sentiment of the people of the 
country on her funeral day by the headline! 

Unmindful of the overcast sky that afternoon, a sor- 
rowing throng conservatively estimated at 300,000 people 
from all walks of life lined the long funeral route from 
the University of Santo Tomas chapel to the North Ceme- 
tery and bowed their heads in grief to pay her their last 
tribute as the hearse bearing the body of Dona Aurora 
rolled past them. 

Although the funeral ceremony was scheduled at four 
o’clock in the afternoon, yet long before that hour the 
mourners and the general public had started gathering at 
the chapel. By the time the religious rites had begun, the 
chapel became so crowded that guards of honor were posted 
by the different organizations to which Dona Aurora and 
her daughter, Maria Aurora (Baby), had belonged, like 
the Philippine National Red Cross, the Girl Scouts of the 
Philippines, the National Federation of Women’s Clubs, 
and the Young Ladies Association of Charity (YLAC). 

At the chapel a small group of distinguished women 
and selected Red Cross workers stood guard at the casket 
containing the body of Dona Aurora. It was draped with 



[G8] 



THE MOST REVERED WOMAN 



the flag of the Philippines, “symbolic of the nation’s ac- 
knowledgment of her greatness.*’ The thick lei of fresh 
sampaguita and ilang-ilang blossoms, placed by her family 
on top of the casket, reminded the persons closed to her 
of the flowers that she was fond of wearing in her life 
time. 

After the 25-minute religious ceremony in the chapel, 
the casket was moved from the altar to the chapel door 
with President of the Philippines Elpidio Quirino acting 
as one of the principal pallbearers. 1 

As the casket was lifted into a motorized unit outside 
the chapel, the Philippine Army band played Nearer Mu 
God To Thee . The pallbearers accompanied the casket to 
the university campus gate where the procession was 
formed. The solemn funeral cortege which inched slowly 
passed P. Noval, P. Tampa, E spa ha, Quezon Boulevard, 
Rizal Avenue, and Blumentritt, and then proceeded to the 
North Cemetery. 

At the head of the cortege were the Philippine flag and 
a motorcycle escort ; then followed closely the three funeral 
coaches loaded with floral tributes, a contingent of uni- 
formed Manila policemen, a detail of the city firemen, and 
the Philippine Army band led by Major Laureano Cariho. 

The leading car was a black Packard limousine in which 
rode President Quirino with his daughter, Miss Victoria 
(Vicky) Quirino, and his senior aide. '1 railing behind 
were car No. 12-J which was occupied by the Quezon fam- 
ily, the car of acting Senate President Cuenco, and that 
of Speaker Perez which had the widow ot the President 
of the Philippines Manuel Roxas in it. 

Near the corner of Rizal Avenue and Bambang street, 
the hearse bearing the casket of Dona Aurora broke down, 

’The other pallbearers were acting Senate President Maiiano 
J. Cuenco, Speaker Eugenio Perez, Chief Justice Manuel V. Moran, 
r. ml Mrs. Francisca T. Benitez, president of the Philippine Womens 

University. 




AURORA a. QUEZON 



so that the hearse bearing the casket of her (laughter had 
to push it all the way to the cemetery. From the h ihpino 

veterans’ mausoleum in the cemetery, members of the Que- 
zon family relieved the honorary pallbearers up to the Que- 

zon burial ground. 

While the crowd at the University of Santo Tomas 
chapel filled every available space and others hung through 
the windows to witness the ceremonies, the bigger number 
of people at the cemetery perched atop neighboring mau- 
soleums. boys clung to the huge and standing crosses of 
nearby tombs while women pressed against the wrought- 
iron railings enclosing the Quezon family lot to view the 
mortal remains of Dona Aurora for the last time. 

As the cortege was nearing the Quezon lot, the mournful 
crowd was startled by the sudden flash of two successive 
lightnings that had forked against the sunset, followed by 
rolls of thunder, which heavenly phenomenon set the people 
"to thinking dark forboding thoughts." 

At six p. m., the casket of Dona Aurora arrived at the 
burial site preceded by mournful dirges. As the last notes 
of Chopin’s Funeral March died away, the Most Reverend 
Rufino Santos, auxiliary bishop of Manila, prepared to 
conduct the last religious rites for the adored dead. 

There was complete silence as the bishop took his place 
at the head of Doha Aurora’s bier, and then opened his 
missal. The brief rites lasting two minutes ended as he 
reached for the font and blessed the departed lady. All 
this time the people bowed their heads in reverence and 
sorrow. 

Then the flag-draped casket of Doha Aurora was car- 
ried to its permanent resting place inside the lot by Speaker 
Eugenio Perez, acting Senate President Mariano Jesus 
Cuenco, former Speaker Jose Yulo, Dr. Manuel Lim, cabinet 
secretaries, and congressmen. The flag removed, the bronze 
casket was slipped into the new concrete crypt a few yards 



[TO] 




Pi •!/>/#' ti'om it !l ti'tlfh't* til ft I 

Santo Tot, ms eha/n I at the lnf/h 
me nu.tr tf on ft, 'h* join ml ho 



n mss 






THE MOST REVERED WOMAN 



to the left side of the marble tomb of her illustrious hus- 
band. Then President Quirino, with face frozen with grief, 
laid a sprig of flowers on the tomb and later knelt down 
for a moment as he said a prayer together with his daugh- 
ter. 

On the tomb of Doha Aurora were laid the mass of 
floral offerings consisting of beautiful wreaths and sprays, 
among them the Philippine Anti-Tuberculosis Society’s em- 
blem fashioned of red roses and the one wreath which 
bore the inscription, “To Mrs. Quezon, the most revered 
woman in the Philippines.” After the ceremonies, admir- 
ers of Doha Aurora gathered keepsakes from the family 

lot. 

As Doha Aurora was buried on that Friday after- 
noon, the Philippine official tri-color flew at half-mast at 
all public buildings and government offices throughout the 
country “in memory of the great and noble lady.” 

* * * * * 





HORTLY AFTER the Manila periodicals 
^ had published brief accounts of the tragic 
demise of Doha Aurora and the Manila 
radio stations had broadcast the event late 
that fateful Thursday of April 28, 1949, friends and ad- 
mirers of Dona Aurora began to make arrangements for 
the holding of appropriate necrological services in her 
honor and religious rites for the eternal repose of her soul. 



From Baguio the following morning. President of the 
Philippines Elpidio Quirino took an airplane to be in 
Manila on time for the high requiem mass said for Doha 
Aurora at the chapel of the University of Santo Tomas 
where the mortal remains was laid in state. Other masses 
were also said in the same chapel from six o'clock to nine 

o’clock in the morning. 

Gregorian masses for Doha Aurora were likewise of- 
fered at 6:30 o’clock every morning by the Centro Escolar 




AURORA a. QUEZON 



University at the San Beda church, while the daily evening 
rosaries for her were conducted by University President 

Carmen de Luna. 

Among the many high requiem masses for Dona Aurora 
were those offered by the Asociacidn de Damns F'ilipinas 
at the Settlement House in Paco; by the National federa- 
tion of Women’s Clubs at the Pro-Cathedral in San Miguel, 

officiated by the Most Reverend Rufino J. Santos, D.D., 
auxiliary bishop of Manila; by Sir Gabriel La O, president 
of the Papal Knights Association, and Sir Paulino M. Sam- 
pedro, delegate of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta, 
at the chapel of the Archbishop’s Palace atJ Villa San Mi- 
guel in Mandaluyon; by the Philippine National Red Cross 
at the Pro-Cathedral in San Miguel; by the board of di- 
rectors of the De La Salle Alumni Association at the col- 

lege chapel. 

A high requiem mass under the auspices of the Na- 
tional Campaign Organization for the Antipolo Church Re- 
construction, of which Doha Aurora was the chairman of 
the board of directors, was said at the Church of St. 
Therese of the Child of Jesus in the Carmelite Monastery 
in Quezon City; another was offered under the sponsor- 
ship of the Manuel L. Quezon Educational Institution at 
the Pro-Cathedral in San Miguel; and still another was 
said at the instance of the May Devotions Laymen’s Com- 
mittee at the Malate Catholic church. 

The White Cross, Inc., likewise offered a high requiem 
mass for Dona Aurora at its chapel in San Juan; another 
was said at the Pasig Catholic church under the sponsor- 
ship of the national, provincial and municipal officials and 
employees and prominent citizens and leaders of Rizal led 
by their governor; and another one yet was that sponsored 

by the Nueva Ecija Red Cross chapter held at the Cuba- 
natuan parish church. 




THE MOST REVEKED WOMAN 



In Lipa City (Batangas) where she had sponsored the 
building of the church to Our Lady Mediatrix, Auxiliary 
Bishop F. Domingo Lebrca dedicated a high requiem mass 
after nine days’ community prayer. 



For living and dying “as a pillar of the Catholic Church 
and a model for all Filipino laity,” the Laymen’s Committee 
on the Marian Movement requested all parish priests in the 
Philippines to say a requiem m iss in their respective par- 
ishes on Saturday, May 28, 1049, for the repose of the soul 
of Doha Aurora. The committee also asked “the faithful 
to participate in this manifestation of love and gratitude 
to this wonderful woman who worked so faithfully for our 

Lady.” 



In foreign lands religious ceremonies were also held in 
memory of Doha Aurora. Brigadier General Carlos P. 
Romulo, chief of the Philippine mission to the United Na- 
tions, and his wife, Mrs. Virginia L. Romulo, hail a high 
requiem mas celebrated at the St. Matthews Cathedral in 
Washington, D. ('., officiated by Monsignor Richard Cart- 
wright. 



Another high requiem mass was said at the St. Mat- 
thews Cathedral also for Doha Aurora at the initiative of 
the Philippine Embassy at Washington, D. C. The service 
was presided over by Archbishop Patrick A. O'Boyle of 
Washington. Reverend Pacifico Ortiz, who was the chap- 
lain assigned to President Quezon in Corregidor and the 
United States during the World War II, delivered the 
eulogy. 

Father Ortiz described Doha Aurora as a person who 
“walked through life doing good, who was light unto the 
blind, protecting unto the weak, the mother of the poor, 
and in a sense, the mother of us all. . . If there ever was 
a person who to this our generation incarnated charity, 
love, kindness, it was she — the sweet, compassionate lady 
whose memory binds us in prayer today.” 




AURORA A. QUEZON 

In elaborating further, he said : “This was her role in 
the history of our country; this was the part she played 
qjnce the birth of our nation : Like a mother, to keep us 
together; to heal broken friendships, to bind up political 
wounds, to pour the oil of compassion upon the social ulcers 
of our age to cherish and guard the sanctities of the home. 
Behind the man we all admired, stood the lady of charity.” 

At Saint Vivian’s Cathedral, hundreds of Filipino and 
American devout Catholics who knew Doha Aurora in life 
prayed and heard Father Francis Hoza sing the high re- 
quiem mass and deliver a sermon extolling her Catholic 
life and activities. In Hongkong, Monsignor Henry Valtor- 
ta, bishop of this British colony, officiated at a high re- 
quiem mass for Doha Aurora. Another mass was said at 
the Hongkong Catholic Cathedral by Rev. Eleuterio Her- 
nandez, superior of the Dominicans there, at the instance 

of the Philippine Consulate. 

In San Francisco, California, the Filipino community 
joined together in a special requiem mass for Doha Aurora 
in which Archbishop J. J. Mitty of San Francisco officiated. 
In New York City, a high requiem mass was said for the 
same noble purpose at St. Patrick’s Cathedral. It was ar- 
ranged by the Philippine consulate on behalf of the Filipino 
residents. The Philippine delegation at Buenos Aires, Ar- 
gentina. also held a high requiem mass officiated by Car- 
dinal Primate Luis Copello. 

A series of Gregorian masses was likewise held at the 
Vatican City in Rome, Italy, for the eternal repose of the 
soul of Doha Aurora. The masses were offered by the 
National Campaign Committee for the Reconstruction of 
the Church for the Virgen de la Paz y Buen Viaje de An- 
tipolo. Filipino pilgrims who attended the golden jubilee 
of Pope Pius XII had a mass celebrated at the altar of 
the Pieta Chapel in honor of Doha Aurora on June 19, 1949. 

Aside from the masses, necrological services were also 
held in memory’ of Doha Aurora. The Philippine National 




THE MOST REVERED WOMAN 



Red Cross, of which she was the chairman of the board of 
governors up to her death, broadcast a simple necrological 
program over Station DZRH one evening, while the Insti- 
tute of National Language dedicated its regular weekly ra- 
dio program over Station DZFM to her memory during 
which Dr. Francisco Santiago’s song, entitled Doha Aurora, 
was featured. In the cities of Cebu and Zamboanga in the 
Visayan islands, solemn necrological services were held with 
speakers representing the cosmopolitan population extol- 
ling the life and labors of Dona Aurora. 



Tribute was paid to the memory of Dona Aurora by 
the Congress of the Philippines when both Houses devoted 
their respective sessions during which the speakers wept 
unashamedly. On the part of the Senate, a resolution of 
condolence on the death of Dona Aurora was unanimously 
passed shortly before it declared a recess for a period of 
three days ending on May 3 (1949) as “a token of re- 



spect." 

In eulogizing Dona Aurora, Senator Geronima T. Pec- 
son who spoke in “slow, measured accents often accom- 
panied with tears,” said that her “passing was a national 
disaster of the first order.” The woman senator then ad- 
ded: "She was the personification of all the qualities and 
virtues that our people love in a woman. She was out- 
standing as the inspiration and helpmate of the beloved 
leader who dedicated his whole life passionately in the 
preparation of a people for an independent Republic. 



“in 



Acting Senate President Cuenco remarked that 
Dona Aurora’s death, one of the greatest Filipino women 
who ever lived, beloved of her people for her unselfish and 
untiring devotion to the public good, the nation has suf- 
fered a truly irreparable loss. A loyal nation will ie\ere 

and honor her memory.” 



As one of the speakers at the necrological services in 
honor of Dona Aurora given under the auspices of the 
Philippine National Red Cross at the Malacanan Palace, 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



Mrs. Trinidad F. Legarda, president of the National Fed- 
eration of Women’s Clubs, pointed to Doha Aurora’s 
death as truly a national loss. “If those of us today re- 
vere her. the future generations of Filipinos will exalt her 
as one of the greatest benefactors of our people in her 
own right, for her noble life and loving deeds will for- 
ever be a stimulating source for inspiration and emula- 
tion/’ she said. “We, her unworthy successors, can build 
no better memorial than to continue the work that she 
has started and to try to follow her worthy example.” 

In the same services, President of the Philippines EI- 
pidio Quirino, after dwelling extensively on the career 
of Doha Aurora as a devoted and inspired wife, a virtuous 
and glorious mother, and an illustrious patriot, concluded 
thus: 

“The world has shared our people's sorrow in ii.r 
tragic passing. Those of us who know her well can 
most truly say: to know her was to respect her, to 
admire her, to love her. No longer shall she grace 
the halls of the land which were wont to he exalted 
by her ennobling personality; no longer shall welfare 
institutions feel the touch of her kind heart and hand. 
No longer shall these Palace halls be dignified by her 
handsome and queenly figure; no longer shall these 
walls receive the impact of her gentle influence. No 
longer shall this atmosphere, which for many years 
she had enlivened with her wisdom and charm, be 
permeated by her spirit of racial honor and pride — 
as embodiment of the noblest type of Filipino wom- 
anhood. 

“Everyone of us feels the poorer because of her 
death. All of our people and our posterity will be 
the richer because she has lived.” 




. ./I virtuous woman is a crown 
to her husband, a prudent wife is 
from the Lord. — She stretches 
forth her hands to the needy. Fa- 
vour is deceitful and beauty in 
vain: a woman that feareth the 
Lord , she shall be praised. — Her 
husband is honorable in the gates 
when he .sitteth among the sen- 
ators of the land** 



V ERY WELL, indeed, does this quotation 

bespeak of Dona Aurora, the virtuous 
lady, the exemplary representative of 
the new type of Filipino womanhood, 

whose “quiet and unobstrusive and ever self-effacing in- 
fluence and example” had brought bountiful blessings to 

her people in her lifetime. 

Her lofty character and ideals were an inspiration to 
her fellow-women ; her democratic and simple ways were 
the admiration of her countrymen, both rich and poor; 
while her charm, her sympathy, and her personality had 
gained for her the respect of all, h ilipinos and foreigners 

alike, in the Philippines and abroad. 

In her nothin? was complex; she remained incred-bly 
humble and unaffected throughout her years although she 
had both power and influence. The following little .stories 
will amply show the great interest Doha Aurora had for 

the little people. 

It was late in the afternoon of a certain day when Dona 
Aurora had just gone through a hard and exhausting 



181 ] 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



grind, so she decided to have a rest in her room in the 
second floor of her house. She ordered her maid that she 
be not disturbed. But soon came for a conference with 
her an influential politician who was also a high ranking 
government official. Seeing that he was an important 
individual, the maid went up to Doha Aurora, despite pre- 
vious orders, to tell her of the caller. Politely Doha Auro- 
ra refused to see him and he was asked to return much 

later. 

A few minutes after, four farmers came barefooted 
and knocked at the back door. They wanted to see Doha 
Aurora to whom they had to confide a serious problem 
which she alone could help settle. But this time the maid 
was unmoved by their pleas and forthwith dismissed them. 
As they turned their backs to leave, Doha Aurora called 
for them. Forgetting her weariness in the meantime, she 
listened interestedly to their talks, and then pledged her 
cooperation. After expressing their gratitude to her, the 
group left satisfied that they had accomplished their mis- 
sion. 

Then there was that sixty-two-year-old woman who, 
dressed in simple cotton and wearing a pair of worn-out 
shoes, walked in one day to the Philippine National Red 
Cross office and wrote her name on a slip of paper which 
she sent in to Dona Aurora. Although the latter was busy 
presiding over an important meeting of the society in 
which the next fund-raising campaign was being mapped 
out, Dona Aurora excused herself from the conference and 
met the woman, who turned out to be a former classmate 
at the Philippine Normal School. 

A very outstanding characteristic of Dona Aurora was 
her willingness to help everybody, be they strangers or 
acquaintances. At one time, on her way to Baguio, her 
car was unexpectedly stopped near San Fernando, the cap- 



[823 




THE VIRTUOUS I-'I LI PIN A 



ital of Pampanga. The driver was being mobbed by an 
angry crowd as the motor victim lay unconscious on the 
concrete road. Soon after Dona Aurora had the situation 
well in hand, for she took the patient to the provincial 
hospital for medical treatment. "I am Mrs. Quezon,” she 
told the mob before she departed. When she arrived in 
Baguio, she telephoned the hospital and inquired after the 
victim’s condition. In due time the man got well and re- 
turned to his home hale and healthy. 



Again, when a prominent scientist needed medical 
treatment for the cure of his cancer in the throat, Doha 
Aurora, upon learning that the patient could not afford 
to make the trip, without knowing him personally, brought 
the matter to the attention of her husband-President who, 
in turn, appointed the government scientist as Philippine 
delegate to a conference that was held abroad. In this way 
he was able to secure the necessary medical aid to alleviate 

his affliction. 

Doha Aurora was one woman who never spoke ill of 
other persons. She also hated gossip. Even society- 
matrons were careful in their conversation with her, es- 
pecially when the talk went a little gossipy. A stickler 
to the Spanish proverb, "What you hear in one house, 
never repeat in other houses,” she had taught the Quezon 
children the value of this popular adage which had with- 
stood them in good stead, either in private or in public, 
for they have never been rude in their speech. 



This gracious and refined lady possessed a fine voice 
which was never known to have risen in anger. That voice 
had "a soft, musical quality about it. And character. 

When used in singing her restless grandson to sleep, it 

ssed audience 



soothingly tender; when addressing a 
it instinctively commanded attention and drew respect, and 

when telling a creepy ghost story — a pastime Mrs. Que- 
zon was nartial to of a moonless, windy night it took 



[83] 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



on a vividness that sent her young listeners cowering 
under blankets/* 

Her advice, be it to her children at home or to her com- 
panions, always carried weight. Not infrequently had she 
been responsible in bringing back to the Quezon political 
bandwagon many a disgruntled politician. Dona Aurora 
through her charming personality and convincing persua- 
sion, had in many cases won over from the opposing: polit- 
ical factions many valuable adherents to the dynamic and 
strong leadership of President Quezon. 

To Doha Aurora morality had an all-embracing scope. 
It did not mean only the sexual phase of the thing as many 
people have mistakenly interpreted it. To her morality 
had a vast wider province because she put a premium on 
the morality of a person. She thought that morality must 
necessarily include dealings and behavior with friends and 
fellowmen. That was the reason why she had brought 
happiness to many a couple in their marital life. It was 
during her frequent trips to Baguio (which, because of 
its very small area, has become the most gossipy town in 
the Philippines) that she got wind of the doings of people 
around her from her friends who used to bring her the 
gossip which she termed “mis-mis” (an expression she 
coined to stand for chismis or gossip). 

In her hometown in Baler, Dona Aurora had the Re- 
demptorist fathers hold religious missions now and then, 
each mission lasting nine days during which time she had 
people married and children baptized and confirmed with 
her acting as the godmother in most cases. 

Of her friends Dona Aurora demanded both faithful- 
ness and loyalty. She was particular about a friend’s 
word or promise to her. To her one’s word was a vital 
thing, and if it was not complied with she got disappoint- 
ed. But Dona Aurora never showed that she was mad 



[ 84 ] 




THE VIRTUOUS FILIPINA 



with anybody, for she never revealed it or expressed it 
to anyone, never spoke of her anger, she never raised her 
voice to anybody, even to her servants. However, when 
anyone of her friends discovered that Doha Aurora had 
failed to invite her to a party at the Quezon home, when in 
previous occasions that friend had always been one of those 
called to g race such an occasion, then would that particular 
friend discover for herself that she had incurred somehow 
the displeasure of Doha Aurora. 

So the next thing for her to do was to inquire from 
other friends of Doha Aurora to find if she had incidental- 
ly spoken of her anger. On the other hand, when friends 
asked Doha Aurora why someone had not been around 
for sometime, she usually pave a pretext such as, “Oh, she 
might be busy with something important that she cannot 
dispense with just now,” in order not to cause any em- 
barrassment. “You will think you are living in paradise 
if you do not know that she is mad at you,” remarked Dr. 
Eduardo Quisumbing, a close friend of the Quezons for 
many years. “She was very sweet and diplomatic. She 
possessed that rare characteristic seldom found in Filipino 
women: reservation. She would not insult you in the pres- 
ence of anyone.” 

Social justice had been put into actual practice by 
Doha Aurora long before President Quezon enunciated his 
noble program along this line. During the administration 
of the last American governor general, Doha Aurora was 
informed that one tubercular Bilibid prisoner was on the 
verge of dying. The patient was not receiving the right 
medical treatment. To save him, Doha Aurora appealed 
to Governor General Frank Murphy, and soon after the 
prisoner-patient was transferred to the Santol Sanato- 
rium. As he was penniless, she paid the hospital charges 
from her own money. 

Also well known was Doha Aurora’s generosity and 
patience. She had been so generous all her days that any 



[ 85 ] 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



civic movement mode Be initial appea for flnan ml «,<t 
to her to bolster the project. She had been liberal in the 
disposition ot her money which she earned through her 
business deals-she had varied investments which proved 
successful — and her liberality had enabled many poor but 
deserving Filipino students to pursue and complete their 

professional studies. 

Many a time her generosity and patience had been 
tried and tested. Just how generous and patient she was. 
was manifested during the fete President and Mrs. Quezon 
gave for the alumni, faculty, and students of the Univer- 
sity of the Philippines on the occasion of the celebration 
of the thirtieth anniversary of its founding at the new 
Malacanan grounds on the south side of the Pa-ig river, 

when Doha Aurora’s autograph 1 




eagerly sought by 

thousands of collegians. Tags, pieces of paper, identifica- 
tion cards, pictures, etc., some dirty, others soiled, were 
presented for her signature, and for six hours, starting at 
11 o'clock in the morning, she willingly obliged her guests. 
During that period Doha Aurora signed an average of 
about 45 autographs a minute, which meant a total ot 

2,700 an hour. 

She also possessed the easy, half-humorous charm of 
the born after-dinner speaker, although she distrusted her 
own ability in public speaking. 



This admirable trait of Doha Aurora had been exhibit- 
ed many times. "When 200 prominent Filipino and Amer- 
ican women gathered at a banquet to honor her soon after 
her arrival from a trip to Europe, she gave the audience 
two new and rib-tickling after-dinner jokes. “There was 
an Italian who was asked to talk in English to an English 
group. To please them he spoke at length. At the close 
of his talk, he was congratulated. Then a guest stood 
up. and said, ‘1 wish I could speak Italian!* I hope that 
hasn't happened to me," she declared in justifying her 



[ 86 ] 




THE VIRTUOUS FILIPINA 



reason for speaking to them in English. “Since English 
is the universal language, I thought it best to use it instead 
of my own beloved Tagalog .” 

Then she continued. “A Japanese gentleman in the 
diplomatic circles in New York was seated beside an Amer- 
ican friend of ours when the soup was served. 'Do you 
like the soupy?’ questioned our friend. 'No, I do not like 
the soupy,’ answered the Japanese. Then the Japanese 
was called to speak, and he spoke at length in perfect Eng- 
lish. The American was embarrassed, but never so acute- 
ly as when his Japanese neighbor turned to him after- 
wards, and asked, ‘Did you like my speaky?' So, if you 
do not understand me, ask your neighbor. I would hate 
to have someone congratulate me on my English after this 

luncheon.” 

Her popularity with the people is accounted for also 
by the fact that she spoke three languages — Spanish, 
English, and Tagalog — fluently. But she always preferred 
to talk in the native language which she did with “a charm- 
ing trace of Tayabas accent.” Because she had a good 
command of the English language. Doha Aurora was “.sur- 
prisingly apt and witty to the point of the epigrammatic.” 
Proof of this trait was her answer to the question of pref- 
erences in food. “I consider eating a total waste of time. 
If I could only take food in the form of pills, I would 
much prefer it,” she replied pointedly. 

She was very much against the present-day panuelo- 
less terno which, to her, was a “complete assassination of 
the Filipino dress.” She also frowned on certain uncon- 
ventionalities to which many young girls get affected now- 
adays, principally smoking, drinking, and pseudo-sophis- 
tication. 

Doha Aurora became a well-traveled woman. She had 
made trips to the United States, Europe, and the countries 
of the Orient. She had gained much from her travels, 



[ 87 ] 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



learned a great deal about other peoples, their customs 
and virtues, all of which she had appreciated and liked. 
She had a great admiration for American institutions, 
principally those in which the women participate actively 
in their affairs. The independence and the self-reliance 
of the American woman she greatly admired. Ot the Amer- 
ican woman, Doha Aurora had this impression: “I am 
a great admirer of the American woman. I think it can 
fairly be said that the education of the average American 
woman is above that of her sisters in other parts of the 
world. Because of her intellectual and physical training 
she is independent and self-reliant. She is, therefore, 
well fitted to do the woman's part in the upbuilding and 
improvement of the human race. I was so kindly treated 
by every American lady I met in the United States that I 
got the impression they are all nice and generous." 

As a friend, Doha Aurora was regarded by all as a 
“fair-or-foul weather" friend because of her ever-read mess 
to help those whom she found in distress and those who 
sought her advice and help. Her homes in the prewar 
(World War II) days and those on Gilmore Avenue in 
Quezon City and in Baguio which she occupied from the 
liberation of the Philippines in 1945 up to her death were 
always swarmed with visitors — friends, colleagues of 
President Quezon, and former political enemies — who came 
to her even after the death of her husband. 

Dona Aurora usually went out of her way to please her 
friends. She did a lot of activities outside her daily chores 
for them. 1 At one time she consented to throw the first 
ball at the inaugural ceremonies of the Quezon City Bowl- 

1 While in the United States during World War II, Doha Aurora 
had a gall-bladder operation. Upon her return to the Philip- 
pines in mid-1946, she underwent a thorough and satisfactory 
health examination. Her physician found her “heart was 
better” and after five years of restriction she was allowed to 
have her morning coffee. "The doctor said that if I observed 
regulations, I could expect to live to a ripe, old ago,” she said 
with her face lighted up. 



[88] 




THE VIRTUOUS FILIPINA 



ing Alley (on Highway 54 and Santa Mesa Extension). 
Once she had to oblige friends by personally distributing 
the award granted to Dr. Concepcion A. Aguila as the 
“most distinguished alumna” of the Centro Escolar Uni- 
versity. Then there was the Philippine Women’s Uni- 
versity which held the celebration of its Do-Day to coin- 
cide with her birthday anniversary on February 19 be- 
cause of Dona Aurora's close association with the univer- 
sity officials. 



Dr. Eduardo Quisumbing treasures the ever-thought- 
fulness of Dona Aurora for her house guests. “She saw 
to it that they ate well, slept well, and enjoyed their stay,” 
he said. In that manner she was like her husband, the 
late President Quezon, who was known in his household 
as “the old man.” Her thoughtfulness knew no bounds. 
In her out-of-town trips to Baler, Baguio, Lucena or Ara- 
yat, she had always plenty of food stocked up which she 
passed around to her companions during the brief stop- 
overs on the way. Dona Aurora was ever solicitous about 
her visitors’ convenience. 



Although during her days as the First Lady of the 
Land (1935-1944) Dona Aurora did not have the so-called 
“kitchen cabinet” so prevalent during the post-liberation 
era, which is composed of close women friends and asso- 
ciates of the wife and family of the chief executive at the 
time, yet she was surrounded by a small but exclusive group 
of ladies who kept her company at home or in Malacanan, 
and who attended her small private gatherings which were 
“thoroughly enjoyable without desecrating the sanctity of 
the people’s palace." On her part, in these parties she 
“could enter into festive gaiety ... .without appearing lu- 
dicrous, be lively without losing her stately poise.” This 
delightful circle of women with whom Dona Aurora had 
struck life-long friendships included Mesdames Esperanza 
Limjap, wife of former President of the Philippines Ser- 
gio Osmena; Alicia Syquia, the late wife of President of 



[ 89 ] 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



the Philippines Elpidio Quirino; and Marina Yulo, wife 
of former Chairman of the Philippine Executive Commis- 
sion Jorge B. Vargas. 

Dona Aurora enjoyed her few but chosen hobbies in 
life She was very fond of collecting antiques, jewelry, 
and combs. She missed them a lot when the Japanese took 
possession of her Pasay home and looted her personal prop- 
erty. She had also a collection of gold coins which she 
kept in the bank. She had only a few genuine jewelry. 
This accounted for the fact that, as a woman, she was not 
showy but instead the personification of humility in the 
real sense of the word. She had a miniature Japanese-like 
garden pool for her tropical fishes over which she used to 
spend minutes feeding them. Her collection of rare old 
paintings was destroyed by the enemy during the occupa- 
tion period of the Philippines from 1912 to 1945. Because 
she was a voracious reader she kept a good-size library 
of her own. Her room in the Gilmore Avenue home was 
littered with religious classics. She was still reading Our 
Lady of Light when the tragic trip to Baler was made. 

In the dining room of her Baguio home, Doha Aurora 
treasured a painting of Philippine fruits which was sal- 
vaged from the burning Pasay home at liberation time. 
Doha Aurora related that this painting was saved by a 
Swiss gentleman who rolled it up in a bamboo tube and 
carried it with him all the way to Switzerland and then to 
the United States to restore the painting to the Quezons. 

Table tennis with the President was her favorite in- 
door sport. The late President, it was said, lost many a 
game to his charming wife although he was considered 
adept at the game. 

Because she hated to disappoint any well-meaning 
friend, Doha Aurora braved stormy weather to fulfill 
scheduled appointments. When she spoke at the celebration 
of the National Heroes’ Day at the foot of the Bonifacio 



[ 00 ] 




THE VIRTUOUS FILIPINA 



monument in Balintawak, Caloocan, Rizal, she exposed 
herself to a drizzling rain, and only an umbrella and a 
raincoat held over her head by Mayor Ponciano A. Ber- 
nardo of Quezon City protected her. On this occasion a 
rainsoaked row of 2,000 heard Doha Aurora urge “Filipinos 
to keep aglow the memory of revolutionary heroes." 

She radiated dignity among her friends who kept close- 
ly attached to her. Her natural intelligence kept her 
company alive and pleasant. Even her husband’s enemies 
found her unaffected by the temporary unheavals in Phil- 
ippine politics. In fact, some leaders of the opposition 
group were among the loyal friends of the Quezons. As 
expressed by Senator Emiliano Tria Tirona, quondam op- 
position stalwart, but the cow padre of Doha Aurora, she 
being the godmother of his youngest child, “In spite of the 
bitter political struggle that took place between her beloved 
husband, President Quezon, and our opposition group, she 
and her husband tried their best to maintain their personal 
friendly relations with us, showing that the stringent po- 
litical relations were not a bar to the continuance of 
personal relations. I will always remember her solici- 
tude for her goddaughter, who was seriously ill when she 
was baptized, and also her affection and attention to our 
little baby boy during our trip from Europe to Manila 
in 1933.” 

In return, her intimate friends made it a point to re- 
ciprocate her good deeds by making her happy on her birth- 
day anniversaries. On this day — February 19 a torch 
parade was usually held leading to the home of Doha Auro- 
ra 2 , followed by an asalto (surprise party) and ‘ Happy 

•An analysis of the* handwriting of Bona Aurora, based on 
the manner she signed her name, “Aurora A. Quezon , was 
made by Linda Marquez and published in her column, . /><" 
ing of Handwriting, in the Mamin Times sometime ago. 1 or 
analysis, though quite brief, is a confirmation of the exemplary 

character of Bona Aurora. She wrote: 

“In whatever circumstances Aurora Quezon found herse. , 

[ 91 ] 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



Birthday” wishes climaxed by a radio program lor the en- 
tertainment and benefit of the people. 

From one of her good friends, IWrs. Trinidad II. Le- 
garda, came this sincere estimation of Dona Aurora: “the 
gentlest, sweetest, and noblest of all Filipino women.” 
Elaborating further on the virtues of Dona Aurora, she 
said : “Among her many lovable traits, the most outstand- 
ing was her ability to treat all kinds of people alike, rich 
or poor, high or low, white or brown. Her greatest asset 
was her big Christian heart which was a haven for many 
who were in trouble and sought her wise counsel. We ad- 
mired her level-headedness in mixing with the best and the 
highest of the land and not losing the common touch. We 
secretly envied the ease and informality she displayed in 
meeting her husband's friends and associates who treated 
her as their peer or even their superior. In truth, this 

she conducted herself with ease and appropriateness. As First 
Lady of the Land, she established a prestige all her own, with- 
out detracting from the brilliance of her illustrious husband. 
Later, as widow of a great President, she retained the love 
and esteem of her people, with no attempt whatsoever to re- 
main in the limelight. Few women have done, and can do, 
what she had done. . . . 

“This outstanding ability of Mrs. Quezon to adjust herself 
to changing circumstances is eloquently portrayed by her n 
(see Quezon' ), which, at first glance looks like a u. Persons 

whose m s and n’s resemble w’s and u’s respectively possess 
great powers of adjustment. 

“Another characteristic revealed by Mrs. Quezon’s letter 
n is energy. Extremely pointed m’s and n’s indicate industry 
and initiative. Mrs. Quezon's industrious nature is too well 
known to mention in this brief analysis. 

“The fact that her a’s and o's are sometimes closed and 
sometimes open reveal sincerity. Those who dealt with Mrs. 
Quezon can furnish abundant proofs of her sincerity. In fact, 

in this, she was outstanding. Lack of affection characterized 
all her dealings. 

“But, when she decides on keeping a secret, she could keep 
it. And, she could be trusted with others’ secrets, too. This 
is demonstrated to us by her knotted o’s. 



[ 92 ] 




THE VIRTUOUS FILIPINA 



epitome of a noble and perfect woman was a rare gem of 
our land, a priceless gift to our nation ” 

No greater tribute can be paid Dona Aurora than that 
pronounced by the President of the Marygrove College on 
the occasion of the conferment of the honorary degree of 
doctor of laws upon her. In part he said: 

“Yes, side by side with your illustrious husband, 
you have brought to him through all the years, goodly 
store of comfort and counsel and unfailing encourage- 
ment in his public career; in dark days and dreary, 
as with Moses in the wilderness, you held up his hands 
and his heart; you seconded every endeavor; when 
hope seemed to falter, you cheered him ever to more 
valiant sacrifice, ever to more valiant and unsparing 
aspiration, for the everlasting weal and welfare of the 
land he never ceased to love. But in triumph and vic- 
tory, when a grateful electorate lifted your life-com- 
panion at last to the chief magistracy of the nation, 
it was at your feet that he loved to lay all the laurels 
of his personal achievements; no public recognition 
could rival the answering light of admiration that 
sparkled in your eyes; you were the wife of his bos- 
om, the mother of his children, the guardian angel 
of his heart and hearth and home.” 






Well 3 



armer an 



JB. 



u.UneiMVoniu n 



N otwithstanding her multifarious 

duties as a wife and mother, Dona Auro- 
ra had yet time to spare for her varied 
agricultural and commercial enterprises. 
To attend to this additional duty she had to commute be- 
tween Manila and the provinces of Luzon. Her farmstead 
in Arayat, Pampanga, occupied much of her attention be- 
cause she wanted to make it a model agricultural project 
for other landlords to emulate. 

On this farm Dona Aurora built a chapel and had a 
priest assigned there to take care of the religious needs of 
the people. She saw to it that the children who had not 
been baptized were eventually christened, and couples who 
had not been legally married were joined together in lawful 
wedlock. She worked very hard to put up a hospital where 
not only her tenants and their families, but also the people 
living around her farm in Candaba and San Luis in Pam- 
panga and in Cabiao in Nueva Ecija, were taken care of. 

She tried hard to provide every tenant with a good 
house. She made a plan, at her own expense, of the lay- 
out of these houses. She made arrangements so that the 
irrigation system could be extended to Arayat. In fact, 
before the 70-30 profit-sharing system was executed by the 
Government she was already practising it with her tenants 
who found it very satisfactory. She adopted the system 
as she wanted to correct the maltreatment received by the 
tenants from their landlords. 

Dona Aurora loaned money without any interest to the 
tenants who paid her back at any time convenient for them. 
In this way she initiated the move to break the notorious 



[ 94 ] 




the model farmer and businesswoman 



practice of the landlords of charging usurious rates of in- 
terest on loans or having the loans paid in kind, as rice. 
On the encouragement of her husband-President, Doha Au- 
rora undertook farm experiments to raise the standard of 
living of the tenants. 

Her idea of farming, especially in Central Luzon, was 
to increase the income of the tenants, to raise their stan- 
dard of living. At the same time, the farmers would be less 
idle. So she tried crop rotation so that the land will be 
planted throughout the year and she exerted efforts to learn 
from people who know more about farming. She even got 
a Japanese expert from Formosa to help her produce as 
many crops within a limited time and area throughout the 
year as they do now in Japan. If the land is tilled, the men 
will be kept busy all the year through, was her belief. She 
was not contented with our system of growing rice as she 
wanted more yield from the land. 

She tried piggery and poultry. When the World War 
II broke out late in 1941. she was trying to cross the na- 
tive carabao with the Indian buffalo in order to put up a 
dairy so that her tenants would have milk to drink. She 
also raised chickens. From her ramie crop she could get 
money in two weeks’ time. The watermelons raised in her 
farm were sold two months ahead of the regular water- 
melon crop. In her farmstead in Arayat, she set up a big 
orchard, and where one day she had every friend of the 
family plant a fruit tree. 

Her home in Quezon City was full of plants because she 
was equally interested in flower gardening. She loved or- 
chids to such an extent that she had an orchid house built 
in the Malacanan Park. This was destroyed by the Jap- 
anese during the occupation period (1942-1945). She was 
the only First Lady of the Land so far — and there have 
been four already — who was showered with orchids. Inas- 
much as she was very particular about her grounds, the 
delicate task of garden planning was entrusted to no other 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



than to Dr. Eduardo Quisumbing, renowned Filipino bota- 
nist and director of the National Museum, who personally 
did the landscaping and gardening in Malacanan and in 
the Quezon summer house in Baguio. This work earned 
for Dr. Quisumbing the sobriquet, "Gardener of Malaca- 

nan.”* 

She organized the Acoje Mining Company. In fact, the 
word “Acoje" was coined to represent the three women 
investors: “A” for Aurora; “Co" for Consuelo Cuyu- 
gan; and “Je" for Jesusa Arroyo Viuda de Laeson. She 
was' very successful during the mining boom in 1936 and 
1937. She left 21,000 shares in the Far East Oil Develop- 
ment Co., Inc., and 14,000 shares in the San Mauricio Min- 
ing Co. Just before she died she went into the real estate 
business and constructed several houses in Baguio, Quezon 
City, and Manila. She also had fishponds in Pampanga. 
As a Filipina she was a good example of an enterprising 
and successful businesswoman. 



'This was not the first time that Dr. Quisumbing devoted his 
time and efforts to the Malacanan grounds, for as early as the admin- 
istration of former Governor General Dwight F. Davis he already- 
started landscaping the Malacanan Park and grounds of the Mansion 
House in Baguio upon the personal request of the Chief Executive. 




. . . . she teas a person of great 
distinction and yet so selfless and 
so generous teas she that she com - 
pletcly surrendered herself and 
fur personality to whoever she 
served and gave allegiance to.** 



N HER lifetime Dona Aurora’s main concern 
was the people's welfare. Her one obses- 
sion was her ceaseless work for humanity. 

As a result, her varied humanitarian en- 
deavors and activities brought her to the fore of every 
movement in which she lent her noble name, gave her 
invaluable help, and extended her wholehearted coopera- 
tion. Her distinct service to the teeming millions brought 
her popularity. The name — Dona Aurora — became a by- 
word in every home, and the poor and the needy who de- 
pended on charity day in and day out learned not only to 
like and respect her, but also to adore her. 



The charitable work of Doha Aurora knew no bounds. 
She distinguished herself by showing time and again her 
deep concern for the social, physical, spiritual, and eco- 
nomic welfare of the indigent and the sick, the homeless 
and the friendless. By her invaluable and exemplary social 
service she was looked up to as the ministering angel and 
guardian of thousands of people. 



There was r.o charitable movement in the Philippines 
which did not seek her sponsorship or patronage. There 
was no work of charity that merited the name in which 
she was not identified and in which her services were not 
offered free. Even the time and efforts of her two daugh- 



[ 07 ] 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



ters— Maria Aurora and Maria Zeneida— were regimented 
by her when needed for a worthy cause. Her unselfish 
devotion to charity made the people to rally behind her 
projects which were generally crowned with success. 

Doha Aurora manifested her interest in social work 

early in life. It was in her beloved Baler that she began 
her community service. She had just returned to her 
hometown from her studies in Manila when she displayed 
the spirit of charity leadership by organizing the first civic 
society among the young women. Since that was sometime 
in 1911, the organization she founded was believed to be 
one of the first women’s civic associations ever formed in 
the Philippines. Records show that the Baler civic society 
even antedated by many years the Woman’s Club of Ma- 
nila. Being the organizer, she became the president, an 
honor bestowed upon her by a grateful community. 

“Under her administration, the association was instru- 
mental in urging the municipal council the passage of im- 
portant measures for the welfare of the inhabitants of the 
town,” an early account related. “On account of bad water, 
dysentery was prevalent in Baler, and through the activities 
of the society, the people were educated in drinking boiled 
water. Smallpox was also prevalent then, and the society 
taught the people the importance of putting those attacked 
by the disease under quarantine. The establishment of 
barrio schools in the town was due to the efforts of the 
association,” it further stated. 

As early as 1913, Dona Aurora, then popularly known 
in Manila as Miss Aragon, helped found the Asociacion de 
Damas Filipinas, a charitable organization which now 
maintains the Settlement House for unfortunate women 
and orphaned children. It was also through her initiative 
that the Community Health and Nursing Association of 
Manila was later organized. At one time she became the 
president of the Asociacion Catolica de Damas Filipinas, 



[i>3] 



the exemplary social worker 



an organization intended to promote the welfare of Cath- 
olic women in the country. 



After her marriage to Manuel L. Quezon, then the Pres- 
ident of the Senate, Dona Aurora interested herself in the 
relief of suffering mankind. The years before the World 
War II came, during which her husband was the chief 
executive of the land, she and the President stood sponsors 
at the birthday anniversary ball of President Franklin 
Delano Roosevelt of the United States which fell on Jan- 
uary 30. One-half of the proceeds of this nationwide affair 
was retained in the Philippines to insure the campaign 
against the dreadful disease of infantile paralysis, and the 



remainder was 



forwarded to the United States. 



Dona Aurora, as she was affectionately called by her 
people, was the honorary president of the White Cross, a 
charitable organization whose purpose is to promote the 
moral, mental, spiritual and physical well-being of the la- 
borers and their children. The association is pledged to 
help in the building of a new, strong, and happy nation. 
Its motto is to serve labor, and true to it the White Cross 
began its task by taking under its care the numerous chil- 
dren of tuberculosis laborers. 



Founded by Mrs. Victoria Lopez-Araneta, the White 
Cross has received the endorsement of government offi- 
cials, physicians, and humanitarian entities. It owns and 
maintains the first tuberculosis preventorium in the Philip- 
pines — the Quezon Preventorium — which is located on a 
four-hectare estate on Santolan street, in San Juan, Rizal. 
The institution 1 is unique for it is a hospital for normal 
children of diseased parents. Aside from being a hospital, 
it is a school, a playground, and, above all, a home. 

’Its medical staff of physicians and nurses is assisted by the 
Sisters of Charity of the La Concordia College. Its initial capacity 
of 300 beds were all donated by Manila businessmen and sugar bar- 
w * from Negros. The children arc scheduled to stay from three 
to four years at the preventorium to prepare them to return to 
their homes without any great danger of contracting tuberculosis. 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



Dona Aurora also gave her wholehearted support to the 
cause of the white plague— tuberculosis. Her personal in- 
terest in the eradication of the disease was due to the fact 
that her husband fell a victim to it, having contracted the 
illness while still in his early forties. In 1948, besides 
consenting to be the chairman of the board of governors 
of the Philippine National Red Cross, she was chosen the 
senior honorary vice-president of the Philippine r I ubercu- 
losis Society and at the same time the senior member of the 
board of directors of eleven.* 

In the anti-tuberculosis fund campaign conducted in 
that year, Doha Aurora successfully rallied the people be- 
hind the drive. In the nationwide radio hookup at the offi- 
cial opening of the campaign, she broadcast to her audience 
the fact that the “Philippine government alone cannot ac- 
complish much in its fight against tuberculosis if the people 
remain indifferent and fail to give their whole-hearted sup- 
port and cooperation.” She also stressed that “whatever 
the government authorities might do along this line would 
be in vain if the people neglect to do what is expected of 
them in the concerted fight against the common enemy.” 

She was likewise instrumental in the organization of the 
Girl Scout movement in the Philippines. Upon her en- 
couragement and initiative the first Manila troop for Fili- 
pino girls was formed at the St. Anthony’s Girl’s Institu- 
tion under the guidance of the Mother Directress. Her 
unstinted support insured the success of the national move- 
ment which now counts with troops in all important centers 
of population throughout the Philippines. Dona Aurora 
had a firm belief in girl scouting which has provided young 
Filipino girls with various opportunities for training for 

-Other di^ingnished personages in the board at the time were 
President of the Philippines Elpidio Quirino (who was the honorary 
president), Secretary of Health Antonio Villnrama (the other hon- 
orary vice-president). Ambassador Carlos P. Rornulo, Major General 
Basilio J. Valdes (retired), and Drs. Miguel Canizares and Antonio 
G. Sison. 



[ 100 ] 




the exemplary soc ial worker 



dership and citizenship, and at the same time has af- 
forded them the pleasure of enjoying an international fel- 
lowship with the girls of other nations, thereby fostering 
lasting peace and goodwill among all peoples. 



Her social service included the pleasant task of visit- 
ing public and private hospitals during which she person- 
ally made inquiries from the patients of their needs and 
how they fared along. Physicians, nurses, and attendants 
an dressed in immaculate white usually accompanied Dona 
Aurora in these regular visits which both hospital personnel 
and patients had always looked forward to and iiad come 

to like and love. 



Jointly with her husband-Presidont, Doha Aurora start- 
ed another form of social service which, at Y uletide season, 
gladdened the hearts of -Manila’s poor and waifs. Every 
Christmas, they played Santa Claus to thousands of chil- 
dren in the different districts of Manila by personally dis- 
tributing, in an afternoon set specially lor the purpose, 
the Yuletide bounty from Malacanan consisting of more 
than 20,000 packages containing toys, clothes, and sweet- 
meats accompanied by Christmas cards bearing their pho- 
tographs. So to the thousands of young children of poor 
Manilans, Doha Aurora readily became known as the Lady 
Bountiful of the Philippines for the gratuitous Christmas 
parties she gave during the presidential term ol her hus- 
band which started in 19"5. 



So deeply in love was Doha Aurora with her charity 
activities that not even the death ol her husband in 1941 
made her give up her work and retire in the seclusion of 
private life. Instead, upon her return to the Philippines 
from the United States in 194G, she immediately plunged 
herself to her first love — social service — and became active 
in helping speed up the rehabilitation and reconstruction 
of the war-devastated areas of the Philippines. She also 
engaged herself in ameliorating the sufferings of her 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



people, including the veterans, in which task she was much 
engrossed at the time of her death. 

Of her devotion to her postwar work and service to the 
Philippines, former Senate President .Jose Avelino re- 
marked • "When that frightful holocaust was over and she 
came back for a well-earned rest, she saw that there was 
work to do. There were suffering widows and orphans 
to take care of. Using all the resources she could com- 
mand and declining a pension she justly deserves until the 
last war widow and orphan is taken care of bv the gov- 
ernment, Mrs. Quezon contributed a big job in laying the 
foundation of our present program for the rehabilitation 

of our war victims." 

When to Doha Aurora was broached the plan ol a group 
of civic-spirited investors in education to found the Phil- 
ippine College of Commerce and Business Administration 
(PCCBA), she readily consented to join them in the enter- 
prise, thereby becoming closely identified with the growth 
and expansion of this progressive institution which, at the 
opening of the academic year in 1950, became a 1 ull-fledged 
university with the name. University ot the East. 

Not only that but Doha Aurora, as in other instances 
when she loaned “her prestige and personality to worthy 
public efforts," she acted as sponsor in the blessing first oi 
the vR. Papa building which now houses the high school de- 
partment of the PCCBA and later of the Dalupan Hall 
together with President of the Philippines Elpidio Quirino. 
To perpetuate her association in life with the PCCBA, 
Francisco Dalupan, president of the University of the East, 
had a bronze plaque placed at the main entrance ol the 
Dalupan Hall. In fond recollection of her Dalupan said: 
“She was a great lady, one dearly beloved by our people 
and country, partly because she was the widow of a great 
Filipino patriot but also an admirable personage in her 
own right." 



[102] 







• 1 1 



7 



1 1 


L.Am 


1 . 


I V 



i 



‘V 

' 






* w 






w r # 



r% 



Tin liiriliihijf mini itrsii rtf »i b»tin Aurora A. (J 
lpr t n icux nairl.nl /»// tin unmlnn; "/ I * r a, I port m *. 
/.„ fir nn ml •• Anna-solo. In i Vin-Vn *nUot of * .4 /' 
i t > nantfo L"J» : amt In r on/p su la ’■ • 

( hi * zan-H ni nm anno, of tin J'K ‘»p * »•* ^ • 1 




the exemplary social worker 



The Filipino Nurses’ Association had "a great sympa- 
izer and a staunch sponsor" in Dona Aurora. At one time 
bhen she was approached by the nurses on behalf of a 
worthy cause, Dona Aurora worked and obtained P5.000 
from the International League of Red Cross Societies in 
Geneva to be spent in the treatment of six nurses who had 
fallen victims of tuberculosis during the World War II. 

| When the Philippine Government approved Common- 
wea'th Act No. 693 providing a monthly pension of one 
thousand pesos to Doha Aurora "in recognition of your just 
merits and as a humble tribute to the memory of our late 
great leader," President Manuel L. Quezon, she declined 



to make personal 



of it and instead advised President 



of the Philippines Manuel Roxas of her decision to donate 
the money to the special fund then being raised under 
the auspices of a committee headed by Mrs. Roxas and 
the then Vice-President of the Philippines Elpidio Quirino 
for the relief of sick and disabled Filipino war veterans, 
war widows and orphans. 

In her letter to President Roxas, Doha Aurora said, in 



part: 



"When this pension was first remitted to me last 
December, 1945, 1 found it necessary to decline ac- 
ceptance of the same because 1 felt that there was 
more pressing need of taking care of countless war 
widows and orphans who urgently had to be immedi- 
ately succored even for the bare necessities of life. 
Thev were clamoring for assistance and their pngi.i 
demanded preferential consideration by the Govern- 
ment” Faced with the situation 1 noted upon i my a - 
rival. I could not in good conscience receive the bom- 
fits of the government assistance while so many o 
my less fortunate sisters and their orphaned children 
were so much more in need of such aid. 

*‘I am happy to know that among the first acts of 

the Government ol the tieouidic was to eel as.de the 
sum of P 1,000, 000 for the relict and rehaoditution o 

11 OS] 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



war widows, orphans, invalids, and other indigent war 
victims who are not entitled to the benefits provided 
by existing law. In view of this information, I hereby 
withdraw my objection to receiving the said pension, 
but in memory of my late beloved husband w r ho al- 
ways felt a very deep concern for the fate of the un- 
fortunate victims of the past war, I request that the 
amount you have sent to me be accepted as my contri- 
bution to the funds already raised for the benefit of 
the said indigent widows and orphans of the last war.” 

The Filipino workingmen considered Dona Aurora “a 
dear friend of the masses” because they realized that she 
“dedicated a great part of her services to the nation” for 
their welfare. In their own words, Doha Aurora ‘‘spared 
no efforts towards the alleviation of the plight of the com- 
mon tao.” 

A further evidence of her solicitude for Philippine 
labor was demonstrated when, in response to a request 
made on her, she prepared a message to be read during 
the annual nationwide observance of Labor Day in the 
Philippines on May 1. However, her tragic death on 
April 28, 1949, prevented her from joining the people in 
the celebration. In her message she said : 

“For a country that has just undergone the rather 
arduous phase set by a nascent industry, the Philip- 
pines is to be congratulated for its phenomenal ad- 
vance in the field of labor-capital relations. 

“It is most noteworthy that labor has taken com- 
plete cognizance of the role it has to take in the 
formulation of a sound and enduring basis around 
which harmonious economy devolves. That local la- 
bor, young in the ways of trade unionism, has mili- 
tated against the unsound manifestations of capital- 
ism and at the same time taken due recognition of its 
defined rights and prerogatives, edifies the laborers, 
evokes the respect of the capitalist and fosters that 
smooth relation between the tw T o.” 



[ 104 ] 




£XEM?1AKY S0C1AI WOKKKU 



Although 



A irvra eivatly helped imnirni*r*bU 



% i 



**** nr^ferr^ :o be relegated to the barkgrouncl. !*•- 
«he had always bee r. reticent in her distinctive work -. 

• _ * — 1 .. tli.wi. vll.l I I ■ i 1 t AJ / * 1 1 * '/ 



»k>n? social. etucai -•* ■ . 

Z , ew per^w wh - w~r* well posted on her varied hu- 

iitariar. activit e- ki ' *1 t them ami they had not 
ah rether ign red or fa:’.ed to give due credit to her 

ichieverr • nts H • " luietly .he worked, the fru.ta of 

It labor .poke ud ar d far And her outstanding public 
“lice wa< dr -dr.r * the tore when fitting honors were 
SUed upon her ir. the Philippines and 

. „ - v , *• — e t*> the service of humanity, 

L 'T sr . -i ,.. r .- where. Her various menu- 
'tr works ..... reac hed far and wide, 

r*™ 

JJve°C liege f De:r it. M gan, in the form of the 

^ - :_•••-• n — the honorary degree of 

/ ... • her husband-President re- 

SSS 



highest 



the Philippines . in the United States of America. 

T „/. rr vc -V* V - r to Dona Aurora, the Mary- 

In Z 0 *;* p v," ;• singling out her distinctive 

grove College •- .. Foremo st as ycu 

labors ir r ;; • for social welfare, for edu- 

tave been ir. £ . • :• ^ vour devotion to the p r. 

to the under] r.vi^ged, to ..e nun. —ateful 

who have fallen u] • :*. the th"in> o ’ * v 

people cherish : m re patriotic desire, an. j *» > 

St- goes op t the throne of Grace no mo o „* 

wboleaoul* etiti n than that, un.ler the IMP ™* 

your character at. i tt-a they ntay preserve nU the na 

loss graces : th. ir gl riona Cathol.c P«t, and bu.1. 

in the Philip! ine - nothing less than a hapl . • 

out. Reput lie that - t all outshine even the van ah. .. ■ : • 

dours of the fabled isles of the blest, reel t\ 

[ 105 ] 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



A grateful people remembers Dona Aurora even in her 
death. A posthumous award, consisting of a medal and 
a certificate of merit, was conferred upon her by the Wom- 
en’s Civic Assembly in 1949 in recognition of “her inte- 
rest and activity in human welfare and public affairs 
which continued even after the expiration of the term 
of office of her husband.” Mrs. Zeneida Quezon-Buenca- 
mino, her only surviving daughter, received the award in 
the name of her illustrious mother. 




[IOC] 











ONG BEFORE the Filipino women were 
granted the right of ruffrage by the:: 

they had been taking ae- 



Lroverr.ment. 



Thev were i 



undivided sumvrt 



rive participation in local politico I; :> 
true they were r. : all wed by law to vote on election day 
n 0r to hold ar.y elective offer until the woman suffrage 
act was arrr ve ; . nevertheless, they worked hard for the 
candidacy o: either their r.us ^ r that ( * t • *r ^ a» * 
candidate. Many Filipino women were staunch political 
leaders. They were eloquent political stumpers. They 
banded themselves r get her into political groups and cam- 
paigned for the victory of their men. 

If they were the wives of successful and powerful poli- 
ticians they ; in ; their husbands in many n undertaking. 

lind the men in their projects: in return. 

the men always counted on the women s invaluable and 

their ret projects. Nay. in the 

Philippine: 

indispensable instrument in politics. As she plays an im- 
portant and significant role, often her number is taken 
into account when politics is the talk of the moment. 

Doha Aurora was the nation's most outstanding tern:- 
nist leader in her lifetime. Like her husband-pol.tuuan 
she wielded a great influence among both the politicians 
and the electorate in many provinces. In tins tic id. ot en- 
deavor she knew full well the grave responsibilities that 
confronted the Filipino woman. Talking once to the Ba- 
guio Woman's Club, she counselled the members to help 
insure clean elections and to exercise great care it. CM 
ing candidate- who should be true representati\e> of duir 

sex. 



the Filit'ino woman has indeed become an 



[ 107 ] 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



On one occasion she grasped the opportunit> of telling 
prospective women candidates of the dangers confronting 
them. She then remarked that “not all elective posts are 
appropriate for women.” “A woman is not fit for a post 
requiring her presence at the scenes of calamity or at ac- 
cidents any hour of the day or night. Any woman candi- 
date for such post should first obtain her husband’s con- 
sent. I believe that the more appropriate posts for women 
are those of assemblymen, board members or councilors,” 

she added. 

Intellectual and moral fitness, not sex, she emphasized, 
should be sought in a candidate. She then recalled the in- 
cident which her husband, the late President Quezon, and 
the provincial officials of Nueva Ecija met, and which 
experience, she knew, no woman could have withstood. 
When the Quezon party was inspecting the ravages of a 
storm that lashed the province, the frail bamboo raft on 
which they had embarked was tossed by the flood waters, 
so they were badly buffeted by the winds. 



Interest in woman suffrage gained momentum among 
the women leaders in the Philippines during the visit in 
August of 1912 of two noted suffragists — Mrs. Carrie 
Chapman Catt of America and Dr. Aletta Jacobs of Hol- 
land. Mrs. Catt spoke brilliantly of the great advantages 
which suffrage would bring to the Filipino women at a 
conference with Filipino and foreign ladies at the Manila 
Hotel. 



The movement, however, did not win further ground 
until after the Filipino women cooperated with America 
during the First World War (1914-1918). They organized 

themselves and then they campaigned successfully for sub- 
scriptions to the Liberty Bond; they talked to govern- 
ment officials; they gave benefits everywhere; they also 
joined the civic parade in which 6,000 women formed 
themselves into an American flag. 



[ 108 ] 



i> feminist ulou 









r.?: 



^ % 4 




r. f:r t-.t nu« 



> rmpiae wwrxn in tfc* 

^ GoverTK\r 

Gccerwl Ft*t. :.s r H^rr >.‘-r. with their efftcw&cy *n^ 
ioy*iy. so th^T .r r .5 message to the fourth rfcihppw 
Ufiiiit^re :r Carter If 1 £ *. > he rtwmmwfKkd the grant - 
in* of the right tc vote tc 



♦ V 



TT.t* 



Vs rrt i.: € r *.*->.^5 rr„ ? 



: it t:t 



diiteJy ~~ 
which c. refi.-ti.r. 
ircrren w*$ ^r: r v 



' tn. women .triers :wrw- 
Mir. s Hot*' on OttSber 2£. ;n 

.. \ Xv.t.r.j: $uffmg* for the K.*;ptro 
K v ever, the women met *r. uphill 



X:c w 



u$e :hs.t they e<pou5ed. and it w*< only in 

S Ate a ro\ ed • re w.' * ** 



• • 



figb » *r 

19S3 when the HIHUHHHiHHHIHPP 

suffrage :: • — - r. t..rr.. was signed by Governor Gen- 
eral Frank Mur “ :r. December 7. 1OTS. that they w on 

their Cafr . r..> t .. bo.&me Act No. 4 1 1 2, 






H : v. ever, the : rthw rung establishment of the Com- 
monwealth Government necessitated the drafting of a Con- 
stitution fer th 

up in the C 
After a >r: 
don a i : r * * 

(of the Cot 



• ^ 



One of the subjects taken 

rage. 

»••«*«• • « M • V % •• — 

-: *c:.:*rar:.-T. on the matter, the Comvn- 

"that the Xati nal Assembfc 

. r.v.-e&'-t shall extend the right of suffna.ee 
to women. ;f a which shall be held for that 

purpose within *• years after the adaption of the i or.st-- 

tuti’on. r.o l~s? - three hundred thousand women ether- 

vote affirmatively on the Question. 



• * y 

Vf.M f 4 

L mA . \ • 



rise qualities s 

A fcin • this effect was then presented in the Xatiom 
Assembly and iat r approved n September SO, l?fc\ ana 
»n the same h y it 1 ecame Commonwealth Act No. M 
lowing the af- xing i the signature of the r resident of the 
Philippines . Manuel L. Quezon) on it. This act stipulated 
that a plebiscite on woman suffrage be held on April H. 
1937. an 1 it required at leas- 300.000 affirmative votes 
before women < tild be granted the right to vote. A> t t 
women wer< w '1 organized at the time, they car > ’ ■ - 
147.725 vote- in favor of suffrage. Those who voted - «' 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



On one occasion she grasped the opportunity of telling 
prospective women candidates of the dangers confronting 
them. She then remarked that “not all elective posts are 
appropriate for women.” “A woman is not fit for a post 
requiring her presence at the scenes of calamity or at ac- 
cidents any hour of the day or night. Any woman candi- 
date for such post should first obtain her husband’s con- 
sent. 1 believe that the more appropriate posts for women 
are those of assemblymen, board members or councilors,” 

she added. 

Intellectual and moral fitness, not sex, she emphasized, 
should be sought in a candidate. She then recalled the in- 
cident which her husband, the late President Quezon, and 
the provincial officials of Nueva Ecija met. and which 
experience, she knew, no woman could have withstood. 
When the Quezon party was inspecting the ravages of a 
storm that lashed the province, the frail bamboo raft on 
which they had embarked was tossed by the Hood waters, 
so they were badly buffeted by the winds. 

Interest in woman suffrage gained momentum among 
the women leaders in the Philippines during the visit in 
August of 1912 of two noted suffragists — Mrs. Carrie 
Chapman Catt of America and Dr. Aletta Jacobs of Hol- 
land. Mrs. Catt spoke brilliantly of the great advantages 
which suffrage would bring to the Filipino women at a 
conference with Filipino and foreign ladies at the Manila 
Hotel. 

The movement, however, did not win further ground 
until after the Filipino women cooperated with America 
during the First World War (1914-1918). They organized 

themselves and then they campaigned successfully for sub- 
scriptions to the Liberty Bond; they talked to govern- 
ment officials; they gave benefits everywhere; they also 
joined the civic parade in which 6,000 women* formed 
themselves into an American flag. 



[ 108 ] 





the distinguished feminist leader 



These varied activities of the Filipino women in the 
ig n for the cause of democracy impressed Governor 

General Francis Burton Harrison with their efficiency and 
loyalty so that in his message to the fourth Philippine 
Legislature on October 16, 1918, he recommended the grant- 
ing of the right to vote to the women. 



With great enthusiasm, several women leaders imme- 
diately met at the Manila Hotel on October 28, 1918, in 
which a resolution advocating suffrage for the Filipino 
women was approved. However, the women met an uphill 
fight in the cause that they espoused, and it was only in 
1933 when the Philippine Senate approved the woman 
suffrage bill which, in turn, was signed by Governor Gen- 
eral Frank Murphy on December 7, 1983, that they won 
their case. This bill became Act No. 4112. 



However, the forthcoming establishment of the Com- 
lonwealth Government necessitated the drafting of a Con- 
itution for the Philippines. One of the subjects taken 
p in the Constitutional Convention was woman suffrage, 
iter a spirited deliberation on the matter, the Conven- 
on adopted the provision "that the ' National Assembly 
of the Commonwealth) shall extend the right of suffrage 
) women, if in a plebiscite which shall be held for tha 
impose within two years after the adoption of the Const i- 
iition, no less than throe hundred thousand women o - - 
-ise qualified should vote affirmatively on the question. 

A bill to this i-ffcct was .hen presented In the National 

assembly and later approved on September 30 193b ana 

n the same day it became Commonwealth * c ^ °* ° 

nving the affixing <>t’ the signature of the 1 iesu cn ° 
Philippines (Manuel L. Quezon) on it. This act stip . 
hat a plebiscite on woman suffrage be held on^April^, 
937, and it required at least 300.000 affirma i\e 
•efore women could be granted the right to vo c. - 
comen were well organized at the time, they gai ™ 
47,725 votes in favor of suffrage. Those who vote 



non] 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



totalled only 44,307. Despite charges of fraud which 
reached the Department of the Interior, whose secretary 
then was Elpidio Quirino, the plebiscite committee of the 
National Assembly recommended the ratification of the re- 
sults, which was done in a special session held in August- 
September, 1937. This overwhelming majority explicitly 
manifested the solid desire of the Filipino women to be 
suffragists like their sisters in other lands where the dem- 

ocratic way of life prevails. 

In the pre-war days (years before 1041) Dona Aurora 
had been a political power. Knowing: that her husband, the 
President, could not refuse her, aspirants lor pretemue 
and position sought her help. Whoever had her blessing 
was politically made. For this reason, there were hun- 
dreds of well-connected men and women who, in their grat- 
itude, awaited their political cue from her soon afUu her 
return to the Philippines from the United States where 
she spent forty-five months because of the World War II 
(1941-1945). This, together with the spiritual power of 
Quezon then living alone in her, made her a political figure 

to reckon with. 

Her return indeed evoked much political speculation. 
She was already a widow then, her husband having died 
in 1944. As she came shortly before the presidential elec- 
tion of 1946, people kept on talking and asking these ques- 
tions: Whom will she favor in the next presidential race, 
Osmena or Roxas? Can she keep the Nacionalista party 
from breaking up? Will she be a candidate for a public 
office, perhaps for a seat in the Senate? It should be re- 
membered that in this election, held on April 2*», 1946, 
two stalwart leaders of the majority party — Osmena and 
Roxas — faced each other in the presidential fight. 

In this election in which the winner became the last 
President of the Commonwealth and also the first Chief 
Executive of the Republic of the Philippines, Doha Aurora 
personally stumped for Candidate Manuel Roxas in Laguna 



[ 110 ] 















her nk suhdaT* 

tuf nrcviMnv 




;: ^r*t raerpeoe. ekvjurot Itoha 

>*:!':> v«*I k> T-Tu: 

: T&r r jvro- t ■ t.r .? r~> crit* 
r his 5-" : k.< 

•. : poods a? . '. * 7£ : 










N *» ^ A * 

> : >; :r.c to The 
: :rf ptTiro.;.* 




■ ^ • . . . ■ *■ »- ^ v ", N . * . tt'i T N. 



...7 .. .. 7 ? wtrt . • 

- ..> T ■ t ■ ’ “ . •• - - . .i • 

Laurel 



- •■ s; 



- r . %• 



.# * 
> • * 



» • » • * 

c — • v C •* % 

z • • • **•••• 






* ; ' . : 

The L.^ 
n b ■> he- 



; . -• - 

... . . . • * • * - 



?> .^OSC A'^iTKV 
;\r.r.i: h;f name. Pwil 

r / . She r -*•...■ * * r 

, v - beer. 

he tnn t • * -••'•• 

^ veatod by her tone satrh 

died without <n- 



a N 

nee U r anyone.** 







mi. J/u 



it a 



man tin na n 



^^HE RED CROSS movement, which in the 
| last fifty years has spread throughout 
I the world, is not new’ in the Philippines, 
for almost at the same time that the first 

Red Cross societies w’ere being organized in the United 
States of America and other countries the Philippines was 

also organizing its own. 

It was in the hectic period of the Philippine Revolu- 
tion in the late years of the nineteenth century that Gen- 
eral Emilio Aguinaldo, President of the Philippine Repub- 
lic of the time, organized a Red Cross association bearing 
the name Asociacion de Damns de la Cruz Roja for the 
purpose of coordinating "the humanitarian work of the 
women. He named his wife, the late Hilaria del Rosario, 
the head of the society whose headquarters were in Malu- 
los, Bulacan. 

As Dr. Encarnacion Alzona. noted woman researcher 
and authority in history, found out, “the members' worked 
indefatigably, soliciting contributions of all kinds — clothes, 
food, cigarettes, and money — which they in turn distribut- 
ed to the needy.” The society had branches in thirteen 
provinces. To prove that the Red Cross was not formed 
to serve only the Filipino revoluionists, the members also 
took care of the sick and wounded soldiers of the enemies 
— the Spaniards and the Americans. It had also its nurs- 
es, and to Cresenciana Sanchez San Agustin de Santos went 

'The prime qualifications of the members were: must have good 
reputation and must be at least M years old; the minimum age 
for the officers was fired at 25 years. 



[ 112 ] 




THE NOBLE HUMANITARIAN 



the credit of being the "first Filipino volunteer nurse” who 
saw service in the hospital of Imus, Cavite, sometime in 

1896 . 

On the other hand, the Red Cross movement which 
was born in 189') was introduced into the Philippines in 
1905, when the American Red Cross took the necessary 
initial steps to set up a branch to meet the social welfare 
needs of the Filipinos. Affiliated to the American Red 
Cross, the branch was designated the Philippine Chapter 
of the American .Red Cross. 



In 1934 Manuel L. Quezon, then President of the Senate 
and acknowledged political leader of the Filipino people, 
initiated the attempts to establish an independent Philip- 
pine Red Cross simultaneous with the change of the polit- 
ical status of the Philippines from a dependency of the' 
United States of America to a Commonwealth. 



However, his efforts did not prosper because the terms 
of the Geneva Convention provide that a nation must be 
a signatory to the Red Cross Treaty before it can establish 
an independent Red Cross society. Since the Tydings-Mc- 
Duffie independence law did not empower the Common- 
wealth government to negotiate treaties with other coun- 
tries, the Philippine Red Cross could not be made inde- 
pendent of the American Red Cross to which it was a 

chapter. 



So, shortly after the inauguration of the Philippine 
Republic on July 4, 1946, concrete steps were immediately 
taken to organize an independent Philippine Nations e 
Cross. Manuel Roxas, the first President of the Philip- 
pine Republic, affixed his signature to the Treaty o ge- 
neva and the Prisoners of War Convention on ^bruary 
14, 1947. This presidential action was followed >> 
ratification of these two international agreemen s y 
Philippine Senate on February 18; and then on March i -- 
the Philippine National Red Cross charter, which 



[113] 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



been approved by the Congress of the Philippines, was 
signed by the President. 

After the incorporation, the Philippine National Red 
Cross transmitted its application for recognition as an in- 
dependent entity to the International Red Cross Society at 
Geneva, Switzerland. Approval of its recognition was 
received by Dona Aurora on March 29, 1947. 

At the time Dona Aurora was chairman of both the 
board of governors and the central executive committee 
of the Philippine National Red Cross.- She was unani- 
mously elected to these positions following the resignation 
of Major General Basilio J. Valdes in 1946 when the 
society was still a dependency of the American Red < ross. 
She was the first woman to head this charitable institu- 
tion in the Philippines. Her election was hailed as timely 
because the Philippine Red Cross was destined to play a 
major role in the tremendous reconstruction and rehabil- 
itation of the Philippines that had just been started. 

Since at the time of its reconstitution shortly after the 
liberation of the country from the Japanese enemy in 
1945, the Philippine Red Cross was in a prostrate con- 
dition, the offer made to Dona Aurora to lead the society 
in its uphill battle towards recovery was not a mere over- 
ture but was impelled by a real need; and her gracious 
acceptance was “in effect the best and finest thing ever to 
happen to the Philippine Red Cross” then. 

In acknowledging her election Dona Aurora said that 
“participation in the activities of the Philippine Red Cross 

=The Red Cross is governed by a board of governors with a 
membership of 30 men and women. Six of them are appointed 
by the President of the Philippines, 15 are elected by the del- 
egates chosen from the different chapters. These 21 members, 
in turn, elect the remaining nine. From among the members 
of the board are elected 11 to compose the central executive 
committee which exercises the powers of the board when the 
latter is not in session. The chairman of the board is also 
the chairman of the committee. 



[114] 




THE NOBLE HUMANITARIAN 



is a solemn obligation on the part of every true citizen 
of the Philippines” since “the Philippine .Red Cross is an 
organization of the Filipino people.” On his part Pres- 
ident Roxas paid high tribute to Doha Aurora for accepting 
the position. He declared that she “had undertaken this 
great and humanitarian work because of her deep love for 
the people.” 

Her election was announced to the nation through the 
press and the radio. In a special broadcast commemorat- 
ing the event. Doha Aurora explained the reason that 
prompted her to accept the position, thus: 

“When I was requested a few weeks ago to serve 
as chairman of the Red Cross Central Executive Com- 
mittee, 1 gave the matter serious thought and consid- 
eration before making my decision. The challenge of 
the opportunity offered me, however, influenced my 
decision considerably. * * Service with the Philip- 
pine Red Cross is a precious privilege and a golden 
opportunity to play a direct part in the vast recovery 
program operating throughout the country today.” 

On another occasion Doha Aurora disclosed the ideology 
that made her join the Red Cross organization. She said: 
“I have always shared with my late husband's feeling that 
the good of mankind should be the ultimate aim of all and 
every nation. It is that ideology that has prompted me to 
give my efforts to the Red Cross movement, to unite men 
and women from all over the world in a common pursuit 

of a single idea — understanding and goodwill. 

Displaying emotion as she started her address in that 
special broadcast Doha Aurora made known her feelings 
and those of her family during the long war years when 
they were living in “exile” in the United States of America. 
“Although we have been away from your midst, she told 
her listeners, “my family and I have always been with you 

8 In a letter to Go Puan Seng, publisher of the Fookien Times of 
Manila. 



[ 115 ] 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



in our thoughts. I doubt if any other group of individuals 
in the United States thought more of the Philippines dur- 
ing the Japanese occupation than we did. Even during the 
liberation, when there was reason for rejoicing everywhere, 
our joy was not complete, for we knew that in the bitter 
struggle that raged throughout the archipelago, the Fili- 
pino people were suffering untold hardships and incredible 
misery." 

Commenting on her acceptance of the chairmanship, a 
Manila newspaper said in its editorial that Doha Aurora 
"could have rested on the laurels of her husband for it was 
with her aid and comfort that he had achieved greatness. 
But because she is dedicated to the service of her people 
and country, she is now devoting the last days of her fruit- 
ful life to works of charity and welfare." , 

The subsequent recognition granted to the Philippine 
National Red Cross by the International Red Cross Society 
in Geneva, Switzerland, was received with jubilation by the 
Government and the people of the Philippines. Of it Doha 
Aurora said : 

"It is of special gratification to me to hail the in- 
dependence of the Philippine National Red Cross, an 
unfulfilled dream of my late husband. By this accom- 
plishment, the Filipino people have achieved a new 
mature status in social organizations, and have ob- 
tained a powerful mechanism by which they can help 
themselves. We pledge the best efforts of the Phil- 
ippine National Red Cross to the intelligent service 
of our people, and we will strive to maintain the high 
standards of performance set by the American .Red 
Cross, whose generosity and inspiring guidance have 
given us this opportunity." 

Dona Aurora further elucidated on the significance of 
the independence of this humanitarian organization in her 
address delivered at the independence ceremonies of the 
Philippine National Red Cross at the Malacanan Palace 
grounds on April 15, 1947. Said she: 



[ 116 ] 




THE NOBLE HUMANITARIAN 



“I consider this occasion one of the most significant 
in the colorful history of our country. This event rep- 
resents one of the greatest and most worthwhile 
achievements of the Filipino people. It symbolizes, in 
a tangible way, the ardent desire of the Filipino peo- 
ple to help one another through the medium of an 
organization entirely devoted to the ideals of human- 
itarianism, without regard for social status, religious 
affiliation, nationality or political creed. 



“To me, personally, the independence of the Phil- 
ippine National Red Cross is doubly meaningful, be- 
cause it is the fulfillment of a fervent dream of my 
late husband. This was one of his cherished aspira- 
tions. I feel highly privileged and honored to see that 
aspiration take the form of reality this afternoon. 

“On behalf of the Philippine National Red Cross, 
1 wish to make public our acceptance of the responsi- 
bilities which the establishment of an independent 
Red Cross society imposes upon us, and likewise our 
profound appreciation for the heroic efforts of every- 
one. — living and dead — who has contributed in some 
measure to the attainment of that dream. 



"To His Excellency, President Manuel Roxas, I 
wish to express the appreciation of the Philippine 
National Red Cross for his generous cooperation in 
all matters affecting the welfare of our organization, 
particularly those relating to our preparation for in- 
dependence. To the members of our C ongress, who 
approved our legislative charter, I also wish to say a 
few words of gratitude for the interest they have 

shown in our society. 



“To the American people, who, through the Amer- 
ican Red Cross, helped establish the independent Phil- 
ippine National Red Cross, 1 wish to say, from the 
bottom of my heart. ‘We thank you.’ To the members 
of the International Red Cross, we of the Philippine 
National .Red Cross, wish to say, ‘We pledge to do our 
best in the discharge of our functions and obligations 
as an autonomous, self-governing Red Cross bociety. 

“And lastly, to the people of the Philippines h "hose 
Red Cross this is. I say, ‘Let us do our best to make 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



our Red Cross, the Philippine National Red Cross, 

truly an instrument of service and mercy whereby the 
more favored among us may help the less fortunate. 

Then to cap it all, the American Red Cross, through 
Philip E Ryan, its director of international activities, pre- 
sented a Red Cross flag to the Philippine National Red Cross 
as a "tangible indication of the interest of the American 
Red Cross in the Philippine National Red Cross." In ac- 
cepting the gift during the simple but symbolic ceremony, 
Dona Aurora, on behalf of the Philippine National Red 
Cross said, "We are deeply grateful to the American Red 
Cross’ for this significant token of friendship and goodwill." 

During her incumbency as Red C ross chairman, Dona 
Aurora held regular office hours at her modest office at the 
Red Cross headquarters in Manila to attend to official pa- 
pers, decide on current problems, review the accomplish- 
ments of the society, answer correspondence, and swap 
comments and good-natured jokes with the Red Cress per- 
sonnel. Her multifarious responsibilities made people to 
wonder how, despite her advance age, she could still attend 
to her work. Usually Dona Aurora offered this explana- 
tion with a reassuring grin, “Serving the less fortunate 
among us is no work at all; I enjoy it. In this work she 
received no compensation or per diems and allowances of 
any sort because the position is honorary. But this did 
not mean that she was a mere figurehead in the organiza- 
tion for she religiously performed the task that confronted 

her from day to day. 

When failing health intervened in her Red Cross work, 
she limited her office hours to Tuesday and Friday morn- 
ings. But even then she had orders that she be kept in 
close touch with all Red Cross activities. No hour of the 
day or night, even during her siesta time, but that she 
could be and was approached by the Red Cross officials for 
guidance and decision. “No Red Cross activity was too 
arduous, but she stuck to it through,” a Red Cross official 



[its] 




THE NOBLE HUMANITARIAN 



remarked. “She epitomized the soul of the nation. No 
face had ever aged so beautifully, carving onto itself the 
noble reach of the heart within the wealth of achievement 
her life had seen fulfillment to,” opined Mrs. Loreto Paras- 
Sulit, Philippine Junior Red Cross supervisor. 

In the opinion of Doha Aurora the success of the Red 
Cross depended entirely upon the financial and moral sup- 
port extended by the people. During her administration 
the organization was engaged in various social service and 
relief activities and it needed at least 1*1,500,000 to cover 
these vital services. This fact she emphasized to the people 

when she said: 



“Just how strong and effective this Red Cross of 
ours will lie will depend upon how strong and effec- 
tive the people want it to be. Just how useful a role 
this organization will continue to play in the lives 
of the people of this country is dependent upon just 
how useful they believe it should be,— and their belief 
should be manifested in terms of concrete, financial, 
and material support.” 

The Red Cross fund drive of 1946 was the first under- 
taken under the chairmanship of Doha Aurora. To boost 
this campaign she appealed to the nation for full suppoit. 
Speaking in Tagalog, she pointed out that in view of the 
numerous activities of the organization, her countrymen 
should “contribute the most they could to make the drive 

a success/’ 



Doha Aurora stressed the fact that every contributor 
to the Red Cross fund campaign became automatically a 
member “irrespective of the amount he or she gives. She 
said that the Rod Cross drive “is for everybody and not 
just for certain groups of people.” She pointed out that 
the services of the Rod Cross are “extended to every man, 
woman, and child when they are in need of it, without 
discrimination as to social status, race, color, creed, or polit- 
ical belief.” The Red Cross reaches every individual with- 



[ 119 ] 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



in the family, she said. “Only through the help of every- 
body can the Red Cross exist and perform its mission to 
bulwark humanity against suffering.” 

With her check of one thousand pesos (PI, 000) Dona 
Aurora became one of the first individuals to donate to that 

Red Cross fund campaign. 

Within the Red Cross society is the Junior Red Cross 
whose members, composed mostly of young boys and girls 
studying in the grades, help the adult members in the 
humane service. Of the Junior Red Cross, Doha Aurora 
was extremely proud because the more than 400,000 mem- 
bers were all trained for leadership and their service was 
pregnant with activities which contributed extensively to 
the health, safety and general welfare of the community 
and the nation, as well as in the building of peace and 
friendship among the peoples of different climes. “Today 
the Philippine Junior Red Cross stands well organized and 
ready for service,” Doha Aurora pointed out. “I am con- 
fident that through the goodwill, the practicability and the 
educational values in their service program, they will con- 
tribute one of the most inspiring chapters in the Philip- 
pine National Red Cross and the country’s history.” 

When Doha Aurora learned that the series of earth- 
quakes and tidal waves which hit Japan resulted in the 
loss of life and property, she, as chairman of the Philip- 
pine National Red Cross, not only expressed her deep sym- 
pathy but also offered Red Cross assistance in the form of 
personnel trained and experienced in disaster relief opera- 
tions. 

Gaining from her experience as a volunteer at work in 
the blood donor service of the American Red Cross during 
the World War II while the Quezon family was in the 
United States of America, Doha Aurora promptly took up 
the challenge hurled at the Philippine National Red Cross 
to build up a national blood program, thereby ushering 



[ 120 ] 




■ THE NOBLE HUMANITARIAN 

it into a new scope of service dedicated to the “alleviation 
I 0 f human suffering. ’’ Thus the Red Cross blood bank was 

I started. 

Of the patriotic services being rendered to the coun- 
try by the men and women in the Red Cross, Doha Aurora 
had nothing but praise and gratitude. She remarked : 

i “The Red Cross is a service organization and that 

because of this a considerable portion of its funds 
go into the salaries of technical personnel who are re- 
sponsible for enabling the service of the Red Cross to 
reach the people. The salaries of the Red Cross pro- 
fessional staff amount to P63, 281.25 a month. (The 
Red Cross scale of salaries is comparatively lower 
than that of commercial establishments, or of the 
government. Many Red Cross employees are in the 
service because they love the work). It should be 
remembered that unless the Red Cross has on its staff 
I trained professional men and women who will direct 
the various services, it would not succeed in the faith- 
ful discharge of its national and international obliga- 
tions, notwithstanding the many volunteers who are 
serving the .Red Cross free. I should like to cite par- 
ticularly the members of our board of governors and 
the many chapter board members, campaign officials, 
and chairmen and other volunteers throughout the 
i country’ who are in the service of the Red Cross but 
1 are not on its payroll.” 

Just what Dona Aurora meant to the Red ( ross and 
what this organization was to her can he substantiated by 
the incident that transpired during her conference with the 
1 President of the Philippines when she requested for funds 
to cover the transportation of the three Filipino educators* 
who were chosen upon her nomination to make the s ^uc _v 
visit" sponsored by the American Junior Red Cross for 
conferences in international education and relations in * e 

United States of America. 



♦Antonio Maceda, superintendent of schools for 
Javier, superintendent of schools for Quezon, ami is* 
perintendent of private schools. 



Kizal; Abdon 
e Decena, su- 



[121] 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



The “study-visit*' project did not provide for the travel 
expenses of the delegates. Her determination to get the 
money compelled her to tell the Chief Executive: “If 1 am 
persistent about the Red Cross, Mr. President, it is your 
fault and everyone else who placed me at the head of the 
Red Cross. I cannot take my position lightly. The people 
placed me at the head of the Red Cross. I must do my 
work.” And the gracious and noble lady was soon pleased, 
and the presidential acquiescence made her indeed happy. 

In reviewing the notable achievements of the Philippine 
National Red Cross during the administration of Doha 
Aurora from 1946 to 1919, Dr. Manuel Lim, who succeeded 
her as the chairman of the board of governors of the Phil- 
ippine Red Cross, attributed to her the varied and out- 
standing activities and accomplishments. Having known 
of the invaluable services rendered by Doha Aurora to the 
Red Cross both in Washington, D. C., and in the Philip- 
pines, Basil O’Connor, president of the American Red Cross 
and chairman of its board of governors, called her “a most 
devoted and inspired leader.” On the other hand, Pres- 
ident Roxas assured his people that “the direction and 
control of this humanitarian entity is in capable and hon- 
est hands” when he said, “Mrs. Aurora Quezon, the chair- 
man of the board, called upon to direct its policies, is zeal- 
ously and disinterestedly working to expand the services 
of the Red Cross. The nation owes her a great debt of 
gratitude.” 

The Philippine National Red Cross was greatly enriched 
spiritually and materially during the leadership of Doha 
Aurora. At the same time the presence of this peerless 
woman in the organization during the few years that she 
was the head lent dignity and color to it. To the hundreds 
of men and women in the organization she was adored, 
revered, nay, worshipped! In turn she loved and respected 
them. She enjoyed their company which she always found 
wholesome and cordial. She listened attentively to their 



[ 122 ] 







> 



THE NOBLE HUMANITARIAN 



words, she spent precious moments in conversation with 
them. Indeed, she was mother and angel to one and all! 
So highly esteemed was she in the entire Red Cross society 
that the following tribute coming from the lips of Dr. Ma- 
nuel Lim is paid Doha Aurora: 



“* * 511 Into the gigantic and exacting task of al- 
leviating human suffering which is the year-round 
work of the Red Cross, Mrs. Quezon brought to bear 
all the integrity, all the sacrifice, all the moral and 
spiritual rectitude that have been the touchstone of 
the Quezons. Hers was the hand that soothed the 
fevered brow; that nursed the wound of a society 
st ricken by the cancer of oppression, that sought to 
shatter the fetters that shackle men to misery, suf- 
fering and deprivation. 



“Never for a moment did her hand, which held 
aloft the torch that was the Philippine National Red 
Cross, falter. * * * 

“* * * And so, her hair silvering, her mind mel- 
lowed by knowledge, understanding and goodwill, 
Mrs. Aurora A. Quezon, in her late years, plunged 
into Red Cross work. . . . 



“The very moment that great and gallant lady 
bore the prime weight of the Red C ross on her shoul- 
ders, the battle that the organization as an independent 
association had to wage in the Philippines was half 
won. The leadership she exerted, the warmth she dif- 
fused, the zeal with which she led the I hilippine Na- 
tional Red Cross from one conquest to another, won 
for Mrs. Aurora A. Quezon not only increased love 

anil admiration hut a glowing, burning reverence— a 

feeling that is seldom accorded a living human being. 




[ 123 ] 





FOUR hundred years of Spanish clom- 
I ination of the Philippines (1521-1898) — 
M the principal motive of which was the con- 
version of the Filipino people to Christian- 
ity — produced a telling effect on the life of the women of 
the past and the present. So great was the influence of 
the Catholic hierarchy in the country for some time in the 
past that a vast majority of Filipino families thought that 
the only institutions of learning wherein their children, 
especially the girls, could be educated were those supervised 
and maintained by the Roman Catholic church. For that 
matter young girls grew up to be devout Catholics who 
even dedicated their time and exerted efforts to propagate 
the faith. 

As for her, Dona Aurora did her role best as a real 
Catholic and because the people looked up to her as almost 
4 ‘a saint”, she wielded tremendous influence and power 
over their religious life during her lifetime. She was not 
content that she had dene her duty to God, for she saw 
to it also that all others who happened to have been way- 
laid for the moment from the right path were eventually 
led back to the only righteous way to God’s throne and His 
church. 

Dona Aurora came from a religious family who enjoyed 
the blessings of the Franciscan fathers, then in charge of 
the religious ministration of the inhabitants of her native 
town, Baler. Because the Aragon family was educated — 
and therefore spoke Spanish fluently — the Spanish friars 
and other civil government officials stationed in Baler 



[ 124 ] 




THE DEVOUT CHRISTIAN 



were very close to them. It was from the Franciscan mis- 
sionaries that she learned to say her prayers, recite her 
rosary, and attend masses on Sundays and other days of 
obligation. 

A pious Catholic that Doha Aurora was, she sent her 
children to colleges where they received religious instruc- 
tion. To her “religion is a great force for good.” In her 
different homes, she always had a family chapel where 
they heard mass and received the Holy Communion from 
time to time. In her beautiful home in Baguio, Doha Au- 
rora had a private grotto of the Virgin of Lourdes (Wucs- 
tra Senora dc la Virgeu dc Lourdes) for whom a yearly 
novena was held and which later became a traditional 
fiesta among the Catholics in the Pines City. In her bed- 
room in her Quezon City home she had a well-planned altar 
occupying one side with the Lady of Fatima reigning over 
it. She also had a book about this virgin which she placed 
on the night table beside her bed to make it available to 
her all the time. 

Because of her outstanding religious activities in Ba- 
guio, Dona Aurora was chosen the honorary president of 
the Baguio Catholic Women’s League whose members con- 
sidered her “the foremost Catholic lady.” In this city Dona 
Aurora, shortly ’ efore her death, minced no words in con- 
demning the holding of a carnival during the Holy Week, 
particularly in “the agonizing days of the Man of Sorrow 
who carried His cross to Calvary.” 

Dona Aurora was a very religious woman. At one time 
when her daughter, Maria Aurora, popularly known as 
Baby in her lifetime, turned black because of convulsions 

during an illness, she ran to the altar in her home, .n~- e 
fore the image of the Virgin and prayed fii be ore ore ei 

ing a phvsician called to treat her. Again, \Oi*n . a y ie 
vealed to her that she had been dreaming continual y or 

her father, the late President Manuel L. Quezon, she u g 



[ 125 ] 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



her to pray and pray for him as she believed as many 
others do that all things can be wrought with prayers. 

Although deeply religious and went to church and re- 
ceived Holy Communion every day, she was not a fanatic 
but a practical Catholic. For her work on Catholic action, 
she was given a decoration by his Holiness, Pope Pius XII. 
She was mainly responsible for the conversion of many 
of her close friends into the Catholic religion. One of the 
media she used was to invite friends to Baguio during her 
novena. On the last day of the novena they were all .asked 
to receive Communion. Since no one who wanted to re- 
tain her friendship dared to displease Doha Aurora, they 
all obliged her by going to confession and taking Commun- 
ion, thus becoming Catholic converts. 

Doha Aurora was also responsible for her husband’s 
return to the Roman Catholic faith. It will be remembered 
that about 1907 Quezon, then an assemblyman from Taya- 
bas (now Quezon province), left the fold of the Roman 
Catholic church to join Freemasonry. At the time of his 
marriage to her in Hongkong in 1918 he was considere . 
a free thinker. As such, a civil marriage was first per- 
formed to suit his convictions, but through the influence 
of his lovely and beautiful bride they later underwent a 
Catholic wedding before returning to the Philippines. 

The retraction of her husband in later years was at- 
tributed mainly to her. It was said that when Quezon 
became ill and a victim of the white plague, Doha Aurora 
started to pray for his early recovery. But she realized 
that she was alone in her devotions. So she told him that 
God would not probably listen to her prayer and those of 
her companions if he was not going to join them pray. So, 
to be with them in their communion with God, Quezon re- 
turned to the Roman Catholic fold. 

The Laymen’s Committee on the Marian Movement gave 
Doha Aurora the title, “A pillar of the Catholic church 



D26] 




THE DEVOUT CHRISTIAN 



d a model for all Filipino laity," because of the support 

. gerv ice she rendered to this organization. Singled out 
as the most outstanding of her activities were the laying 
of "the cornerstone of a movement which aims to make 
Christ better known — more deeply loved— more honestly 
MrV ed— through Mary” and her love for "Mary and her 
people, ‘her own little people’ that she laid down her life 

for them.” 

While living in Los Angeles, California, in the several 
months immediately following the death of her husband in 
1944, Doha Aurora did her bit as a devout Catholic. The 
philanthropist that she had always been known in her life, 
she donated a decorated glass window to the Philippine 
Community church, “the only one of it s kind in the United 
States of America” for being located in “a remodelled tire 
house.” Incidentally, this church also takes extreme pride 
in possessing a bell which had come all along trom the 
famed church of Antipolo. Riznl, shrine of the miraculous 

Virgin of Peace and Good Voyage. 

Her exemplary and active Christian charity won her 
recognition from the Ateneo de Manila, sponsors of the 
Ozanam Award, which, through the Archbishop ot Manila, 
presented her the medal that President Quezon, visibly 
happy, pinned on her during the commencement ceremonies 
of the Ateneo on March 20, 1938. 

Doha Aurora was the first lay woman to be granted this 
rare distinction. In expressing her gratitude to the spon- 
sors, she said that “she accepted it not as Mrs. Quezon 
but as the First Lady for she knows that any honor be- 
stowed on the latter is an honor given to the country.” 

The award has been named after Frederick Ozanam, 
founder of the St. Vincent de Paul society, an international 
Catholic lay organization active in the relief and aid of 
the poor and the suffering mankind. 



1127] 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



The medal bears the Ozanam profile which symbolizes 
the nature of the award : service, the Tiara and the Keys 
designate the Christian and Catholic principles energizing 
and vitalizing the service; while the shield of the Common- 
wealth indicates the field in which this sendee was given. 

The award is a recognition of some distinctive and out- 
standing service by a Catholic layman or woman — service 
to mankind in the spirit of the evangelical principles of 
mercy and charity, taught by Christ; in the spirit of that 
counsel of Christ: “So let your light shine before men, that 
they may see your good works, and glorify your Father 
who is in Heaven.” It is likewise a living testimony of 
the principle that the best citizen is he whose civic life is 
imbued with deep religious principles. 

This signal honor gained for Dona Aurora the noble 
title of the real Catholic Filipina, worthy to be called “the 
Mother of the Masses.” Her good work in the cause of the 
poor and sick acquired for her the esteem and gratitude 
of the people, especially the poor children whom she made 
happy at a gratuitous Christmas party at the Malacanan 
grounds every year during the long term of office of her 
husband-President. 

Outstanding Catholic activities of Dona Aurora which 
were cited were “her persistent care of the orphanages in 
Manila, her willingness to be Lady Bountiful to thousands 
of children and hundreds of families at Christmas time, 
her interest in poor seminarians lasting until they go forth 
as priest, a consummation not possible without her aid ; 

her concern for catechetical instruction, for rectifying mar- 
riages not properly executed according to the church’s 
mind, for men who are face to face with the disheartening 
circumstances attending their retraction of Masonry. In 
all these the graceful influence of her faith and its tenets 
is evident and characterized her life.” 



[ 128 ] 





*la* sin H’ilft, llonit Ainttm 

t <1 iitrs l ii n ilh H s (ii m n n 

I. *4 m'rlt Insl • n nt MutlHft. 



i t.i 







THE DEVOUT CHRISTIAN 



It was the practice of Dona Aurora, which she followed 
consistently for many years, to visit the different poor 
districts of Manila, especially Tondo and San Nicolas, and 
to find the immediate needs of the people. She devoted 
most of her time to orphans and children of the indigent 
families, giving them food, clothing, and not infrequently 
money. She even sent these young boys and girls to school 
and defrayed their expenses. 



Her great interest in ambitious but poor seminarians 
was well known. She paid either part or the full tuition 
fees which amounted to about P300 a year for each of some 
40 seminarians studying in the different seminaries in the 
Philippines. In some instances, Dona Aurora gave these 
boys clothes or even bought them books. 



Dona Aurora had always manifested a personal concern 
for the religious education of her people. Especially in- 
terested was she in the catechetical instruction of the chil- 
dren. She helped greatly in the building of several chapels 

in the suburbs of Manila and saw to it that priests were 

# 

assigned to look after the* religious ministration of the 
inhabitants. Sometimes, in order to arouse the interest of 
the people, she heard mass and received the Holy Commun- 
ion in these chapels. 

Poverty has often been the cause of many destitute 
families' irregularity. Ir. the cities especially, thousands 
and thousands of couples live together as man and wife 
for years without the benefit of clergy. Children have been 
born to them and usually, like their parents, they ha\<> 
been deprived of a Catholic baptism and confirmation, not 
because they have deliberately neglected their religious 
obligation but because their means is often inadequate cr 

their bare necessities. 

These couples are usually very poor and therefore can- 
not afford to pay the marriage fees. So what Dona 
did in her lifetime was to arrange quietly their belatei 



[ 120 ] 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



wedding ceremony. When she could not, get the solemniza- 
tion of the marriage free of charge, she voluntarily paid 

the fees. 

It was a fact that Dona Aurora had a dynamic and 
magnetic personality all her own. She wielded also a great 
influence over many people, Filipinos and foreigners all e, 
of both sexes. Making use of her personal charm, her sym- 
pathy, and her great tact she had been instrumental in the 
return of some prominent men in public life to the Cath- 
olic faith. 

This distinct Catholic service Doha Aurora performed 
with tact and diplomacy and -without ever offending those 
of other religious convictions and at the same time without 
ever having an inch receded from the high pitched ( ath- 
olic life in which she was born and bred.” Indeed, hers 
is an accomplishment that compares in difficulty and com- 
plexity to the entirely different task of her husband, the 
President of the Philippines.” 

Once settled down in her Gilmore Avenue home in Que- 
zon City shortly after the wartime trip to the United States 
where the Quezon family spent almost six years years of 
separation from their fellow-countrymen, years of anguish 
and longing, and of anxiety and hope — Dona Aurora made 
it a point that at seven o’clock every morning she was in 
the dim chapel of the Carmelite convent where she knelt 
down at a pew and prayed before the image of Christ Cru- 
cified. A devout woman she wore a widow’s black for 
many years. In that God’s house, she daily worshipped 
and pleaded with the Almighty "to give her the strength 
of body and strength of heart to guide her children and 
herself in the best possible manner without the aid of the 
family head.” 

Upon learning of the “miracle of the roses” which for 
some time drew hordes of visitors from the provinces, 
Dona Aurora headed a party of Catholic leaders from 



[130] 




THE DEVOUT CHRISTIAN 



Manila to the Carmelite convent in Lipa city, in Batangas 
province, to witness the reported shower of rose petals 
which happily took place during her different visits. In 
these showers, the flowers, with their distinct and fragrant 
scent, were picked up by the surprised and bewildered on- 
lookers as fast as they dropped from all directions. 



Out of respect for her, she was also allowed by the 
Mother Superior of the convent to interview Miss Teresita 
Castillo, the Carmelite novitiate who was the object of the 
apparition of Our Lady Mediatrix of All Grace. The novi- 
tiate is the daughter of Judge Modesto Castillo, of the 
Court of Industrial Relations and former governor of Ba- 
tangas. After her talk with the novitiate, Dona Aurora 
said that “in view of the miracle more Filipinos should 
pray to Our Lady Mediatrix, as requested in the apparition, 
to the end that peace may reign in the world.” 



Since the miraculous apparition in 1948, Dona Aurora 
had made repeated pilgrimages to Lipa and returned to 
her Quezon City home bringing fresh rose petals. Because 
of her unfaltering faith and sacrifices, she thought that 
she was ever safe from dangers what with her constant 
prayers and devotion wherever she was. Even in that 
fatal trip to her hometown. Baler, she carried with her 
the fresh rose petals which had been previously blessed 

by the Mother Superior of the convent. 



In Lipa City she sponsored the building of the concrete 
church to Our Lady Mediatrix. At the time of her death, 
Dona Aurora had just acquired a lot in front of the Car- 
melite convent as it was her evident intention to build a 
house in that lot where she could be near the miraculous 

virgin all the time during her visits. 



In the rebuilding of the mountain shnne of Our Lady 

of Peace (Nucstra Seftora de la Paz y Buen 

polo, in Rizal province. Dona Aurora assumed the pres, den 

cy of the national committee for the Antipolo Church 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



construction. As such she was responsible for the nation- 
wide campaign for funds for the project. At the cere- 
monies on the laying of the cornerstone of the proposed 
church, she told the guests and sponsors numbering more 
than 5,000 who made the trip from Manila, that since the 
initial start of the general campaign for funds had begun, 
she expected that “floods” of offering would soon follow the 

ceremony. 



It was the same Dona Aurora whose appeal to the faith- 
ful “to pray and voluntarily reform the evil ways of life’ 
was not only heard but also heeded. Made on the occasion 
of the annual celebration of the feast of Jesus Nazarene 
in the Quiapo church in Manila, the brief message follows: 



"A Catholic nation like the Philippines is staunch 
in its belief that Jesus Nazarene continues to bear 
the Cross as long as we persist in breaking His ( om- 

mandments. 

-‘All graces are granted to us who seek them from 
Him. Let us pray that our faith be accepted and 
strengthened by Him, and by our love and devotion 
let us strive to share His Cross with Him and lelieve 
Him part of the burden. We can do this by voluntary 
reformation from evil ways and observance of the 
divine laws imposed upon us. 

“It is within the power of the Almighty to extend 
salvation to our nation, through our undying faith 
and all-out love for Our Redeemer. 



“Let us keep up th§ traditional celebration in 
honor of our beloved Jesus Nazarene.” 



Shortly before her tragic death, Dona Aurora led pious 

Catholics, mostly residents in the archdiocese of Manila, 
in another appeal to the people for the holding of a special 
celebration in honor of Our Blessed Mother Mary Media- 
trix of All Grace on May 31 (1949) . The observance called 
for a national novena beginning on Sunday, May 22, and 
ending on May 30, to be crowned by a great general Com- 



[ 132 ] 




THE DEVOUT CHRISTIAN 



munion all over the Philippines on May 31, the feast of 
Our Lady. Main object of the celebration was for the 
Catholic Philippines to “implore her powerful interces- 
sion for the protection of our holy religion, which is being 
so cruelly persecuted in many countries at the present 
time; to beseech through her powerful intercession world 
peace, which is threatened at the present time by another 
devastating war; and finally and very specially, to obtain 
peace and charity and good will as well as respect for the 
law, amongst our own beloved people in the Philippine Is- 
lands.” 

This appeal was considered Dona Aurora’s “spiritual 
testament to her beloved country, and as such the most sig- 
nificant of her good deeds.” 



When the news of the murder of Dona Aurora reached 
the Vatican, in Rome, Italy, His Holiness, Pope Pius XII, 
reigning head of the Roman Catholic church of the time, 
immediately dispatched the following message to President 
of the Philippines Elpidio Quirino: "AL C°NOCER TRIS- 
TE NOTICIA TRAGICA MUERTE EXCMA SESO.RA 
AURORA QUEZON CUYA PERDIDA AFLIGE ENTE- 
RARE PUBLIC A QUEREMOS TESTIMONY VUE- 
CENCIA Y FAMIL1A D1FUNTA NUESTRA PATER- 
NAL CONDOLENCIA OFRECIENDO FERVIENTES 
SUFRAGIOS POR SU PIADOSA ALMA.” 

In her death, Dona Aurora was paid tribute 
Francis Hoza who delivered the sermon during he h g 

requiem mass said at the Saint V ivian s ® ™ . . 

repose of her soul, during which he emphasized t the 

spiritual standard set up by Doha Aurora ir . her l,f t.me^ 
She could have had “all the honor, worldly p « asure ^ n 

everything this world could offer, a "„ S h ® C g ° id( but Doha 
Aurora, on the other hand, understood fu» well 

values of life. “Her spiritual standard di 



[ 133 ] 




AURORA A. QUEZON 



with shallow luxuries, temptations of many opportunities, 
and hence she ignored them all." 

In portraying the Christian life led by Dona Aurora, 
Reverend Hoza recalled that she carried a statuette of the 
Blessed Virgin Mary in her bosom wherever she went. 
“Whenever it was possible, Mrs. Quezon did not fail to 
attend mass, even if going to church would mean extra 
hardships. If an automobile was not available, she had 
to ride street cars, and did not mind being pushed around 
inside by the other passengers.” he pointed out. “Because 
she understood and appreciated spiritual values.” 





OSA AURORA had done much, too 
much for the welfare of her country 
that even in her lifetime she was al- 
ready showered with tokens of grati- 
tude by the very people who were the beneficiaries of her 
great humanitarian accomplishments in the Philippines and 

abroad. 



Government officials and men behind private entities 
vied with each other in honoring her by naming public 
projects after her and by conferring on her well-deserved 
honors which not only bespoke of her benevolence but also 
enhanced the prestige and dignity of her people. So fit- 
ting were the tributes paid Dona Aurora that she had be- 
come the most revered woman in the Philippines! Every- 
where, from northern Batanes to southern Sulu, she was 
a popular figure by her deeds; she was known to all if not 
personally, at least by name. The more intimate persons 

to her still like to call her Dora Aurora while others who 
still retain their high respect for her address her formally 

as Mrs. Quezon. 



Most outstanding and eloquent manifestations of re- 
membering Doha Aurora can be cited the renaming of he 
former town of Bondo in Quezon province to Aurora, the 
naming of the institute of education of the . Quezon College 
in Manila after her; calling a barrio ,n Vaen 'a. Bohol 
after her; and christening the hospital in Baler with 
name, Aurora Memorial Hospital. 

The site on which Doha ."STS- 

the Government into a national 



1135] 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



the Aurora Memorial Park. President of the Philippines 
Elpidio Quirino ordered the development of the area into 

a fitting memorial to her. 

In Manila, Dona Aurora is remembered with the Auro- 
ra Boulevard in the northern part of the city, while in 
Quezon City there is the long and spacious Aurora Avenue, 
Doha Aurora was also instrumental in the formation of the 
Quezon City Lions Club which Mayor Ponciano A. Ber- 
nardo of that city later organized. 

She was also the recipient of a number of honorary 
titles and degrees. In 1937 the Marygrove College in De- 
troit, Michigan, conferred on her the honorary degree of 
doctor of laws for humanitarian service “in recognition 
of her outstanding service to the cause of humanity. ’ I wo 
other leading institutions of learning in the Philippines 
awarded her the same scholastic honors. The Philippine 
Women’s University conferred it on January 14, 1940, and 
the University of Santo Tomas gave it in March, 1940. 

In its citation, the Philippine Women’s University said, 
in part: “Born in Baler, Filipino by birth, heritage and 
aspiration, loyal worker for the social uplift of the under- 
privileged; leader in civic enterprises; guiding spirit in 
philanthropic movements; embodiment of domestic and 
civic virtues; pattern of pioneer qualities of mind and heart 
of the true Filipino; exponent of the best Filipino tradi- 
tion. First Lady of the Land, she uses her position of 
power and influence not for any selfish ends but to promote 
the welfare of her countrymen. Her broad social sympa- 
thies, her profound piety, her deep love of country, her 
natural modesty, her democratic and virtuous demeanor, 
have truly endeared her to the Filipino people who look to 
her as a model wife and mother. The Philippine Women’s 
University is privileged to acclaim her as the exemplar of 
the ideals of womanhood which this institution seeks to up- 
hold and perpetuate.” 



1136 ] 













. 






#v 



1 



%♦ 



* / 



'Im 









; 



of th* Inst htnnhi f*ltntoftrn jplr* of the Quezon* token 

in tl> • Init.t) Stotts of America. Sttiwliup f row left, are Hbt- 
A r. \ \ t.t nro i , \/rs. Qm ;ott, Prcnitlent Quezon, Maria 
A from (Hah i\. mnf Muyio Zenriilo (Sint). 










THE BEST LOVED CITIZEN 



On the other hand, the School of Nursing of the Philip- 
pine General Hospital in Manila awarded her an honorary 
diploma in nursing in 1935 “in recognition of her efforts 
to improve public health” and of “her service in nursing 
her husband.” She was also the first honorary president 
of the Filipino Nurses Association, the members of which 
voted Dona Aurora as “an excellent nurse in her own 
right.” 

A song, entitled Aurora, has been composed by “Mi- 
mosa”, a radio singer, in her honor; a Tagalog poem con- 
sisting of five stanzas, of four lines each, entitled Auro- 
ra Aragon Quezon, has been written in her memory by 
j Jose Esperanza Cruz; an ocean passenger ship owned by 
the De la Rama Steamship Company has been named Dorn 
Aurora; and life-size oil paintings of her, made by Fer- 
nando Amorsolo, the famous Filipino painter, decorate the 
' social halls of the Philippine Women’s University. The 
| first likeness was unveiled by Mrs. Douglas MacArthur, 
charming wife of the supreme commander of the United 
Nations forces, before the outbreak of the World War II, 
and the second was unveiled by ice-President of the I hil- 
ippines Fernando Lopez on the occasion of the birthday 
anniversary of Dona Aurora in 1950. 

1 During this celebration Don Andres Soriano announced 

his sponsorship of the “Aurora A. Quezon professional 
chair in community leadership and scholarships in social 
service” at the Philippine Women’s University, while for- 
mer Speaker Jose Yulo offered the sum of P2,000 to be 
given to the women winning in the biographical contest on 
the life of Dona Aurora to be conducted under the auspices 

of the same university. 

While short articles and essays have been written about 
Dona Aurora in the newspapers and magazines of tne 
country, yet this book is the only one to carry the u io 
graphy of Doha Aurora. 



[ 137 ] 



AURORA A. QUEZON 



An Aurora Quezon memorial medal was struck in the 
Philippines and given to the delegates attending the two- 
day national convention of the Philippine National Red 
Cross in 1949. At the same time a bronze plaque on which 
were inscribed the name of Dona Aurora as chairman and 
those of the other officers and members of the first board 
of governors of the Philippine National Red Cross was 
placed at the concrete building of the national offices of the 
Philippine National Red Cross shortly after her tragic 

death. 

On its part, the Quezon City Red Cross named its head- 
quarters building located on the Bernardo Park in Quezon 
City the Aurora Aragon Memorial Hall, in accordance 

with the resolution of the board of directors of the Quezon 
City Red Cross chapter of which Nicanor Roxas, at the 
time acting mayor of Quezon City, was the chairman. At 
the ceremonies on the occasion of the laying of the corner- 
stone, President of the Philippines Elpidio Quirino, who 
was the guest speaker, appealed to his audience to emulate 
the “charitable work of Dona Aurora who gave of her life 

the true meaning of charity." 



The Women’s International League (WIL) decided to 
have the likeness of Dona Aurora on Filipino semi-postals, 
thereby making her the first Filipino woman in the Phil- 
ippine philatelic history to be so honored. The proceeds 
of the sale will be used in building an arch of peace. 



There was also a plan in the Congress of the Philip- 
pines, sponsored by Congressman Fortunato Suarez of 
Quezon, to create the sub-province of Aurora in honor of 
Dona Aurora. Located in Quezon province, it would include 
the following northern towns: Infanta, General Nakar, 
Polillo, Bordeos, Baler, Maria Aurora, and Casiguran. 

In recognition of her distinguished service to the Phil- 
ippines, a merit award for Dona Aurora was posthumously 
given by the Civic Women’s Assembly in connection with 



[ 138 ] 




THE BEST LOVED CITIZEN 



the observance of the third anniversary of the grant of 
independence to the Philippines, held on July 3, 1949. The 
award was pinned by President Quirino on her surviving 
daughter, Maria Zeneida (Nini), during the solemn cere- 
monies which were attended by a big cosmopolitan crowd. 
The citation accompanying the award reads as follows: 

“First Lady of the Philippines from 1935 to 1944, 
whose interest and activity in human welfare and pub- 
lic affairs continued even after the expiraton of the 
term of office of her husband. President Manuel L. 
Quezon of the Commonwealth of the Philippines. 

“By her example of personal conduct she enhanced 
the prestige and dignity of Filipino womanhood in 
the Philippines and abroad. 

“As chairman of the Philippine National Red 
Cross, she won for this humanitarian organization 
both national and international esteem and recogni- 
tion ; and through her wise guidance and direction 
enabled it to render extensive and valued services to 
the whole nation. 

“Through her personal and official interpretation 
and endorsement of many other civic and welfare or- 
ganizations, in which she served as Honorary Pres- 
ident, she opened the eyes of the public to an appre- 
ciation of the value of organized social work. 

“Without expectation of gain or reward, up to 
her untimely death she dedicated her time, energy, 
money, and even life itself in service to her country 
and people, thus stimulating voluntary citizen partic- 
ipation as an essence of the democratic way of life. 



END 



Ti. tULLtt TJON 






[ 139 ] 




