I 



\\u III ^...i ! (;i 

i 1 IliST tABf OP %m iiAKf 



I'.Y l'-,. U. llODrMGUEZ 





\ 




OUR RESPECT 
TO 

MRS. AURORA A. QUEZON, 
Tho First Lady of the Land. 



4 



HER CONVERSATION WITH MESSRS. AUG. 
MONTILLA, A. MONTILLA, E. B. 
RODRIGUEZ,., AND L. MONTILLA. 



MR. E. B. RODRIGUEZ SUl^iARIZED THE 
CONVERSATION. 



*. 



BAGUIO 
April 26, 1939 



I'IRS, QUEZON *S YimiED YOTS EiCPRSSSED IN 
WORDS OF WIHE HllHAN COIiPREEENSIBILITY 



It was a delightful conversation we had 
with the First Lady of the Land when in a 
delightful morning in Baguio we visited Mrs, 
Quezon to pay our respects to here 

In Baguio^ vriiere life is quieter and 
more conteraplative and where one iiiay have the 
delist of a pause ^ one can have a better 
chance to speak to her than in l!alacanan lAdaere 
the situation is quite different because of 
her crowded hours^ 

Our conversation touched on varied 
subjects. We strolled^ figuratively speaking, 
over a wide countryside, examining the varied 
landscapes as we passed* She expressed to us 
her lifers views from various angles in words 
of wide human eomprehensibility* 

With amazing candor she spoke to us on 
something real^ native to her character and 
derived from what she has seen and felt and 
thought. Indeed, it was an adventure, a voyage 



2 

so to speaks into the realm of colorful 
thoughts, of wit, of creative ideas c 

I jot down the gist of what she said: 
I ^ always advise my daughters to study hardc 
By concantrating their minds in their studies 
no foolish ideas v/ill have the chance to creep 
into their j-j/:jads„ Their study is a preparation 
to real life to meet future unforeseen even- 
tualities ^ 

I tell them we are not rich* While we 
are alive ^ we are giving them all the oppor- 
tunities that education can affords In the 
future v/hen they get married should- it happen 
that their husbands ^ for causes v^rhich are not 
of their own making ^ can not h^ve enough income 
to support their families ^ they should be 
ready and able to take their place and earn 
what is necessary for the expenses of the 
family. 

I do not want my daughters to be society 
girls. When one is a society girl^ she would 
not seem to have enough work to do at home* 



Whan a girl is not busy working or studying, 
as a general rulO; foolisli ideas enter into 
her head. She of tentiijcies becomes lova-foolish 
or suffers from foolish love^ This usually 
leads to future disappointments, 

I know this possibility is not «r far- 
fetched. And let me give you two concrete 
examples. I have a friend who has a daughter 
who separated from her husband, because of pol 
itical feuds betv/een their parents. The hus- 
band was sent to the States to study ^ The 
wife Y/aSj naturally^ taken back by her parents 
She, of course^ has all the food she needs, 
but at the same time she needs extra money 
for her own personal expenses and that of her 
child. It is J you know^ quite embarrassing 
for her to ask those expenses from her parents 
Fortunaisely in her school days^ she finished 
the eight -grade piano teacher's course. So 
she could give piano lessons in her house* 
Consequently J she did not only earn enough 
for hor nG3ds and those of her child, but 



^ 4 ^ 

'she was also able to save a little for the 
rainy days • Had she not had this vocational 
preparation where should she and her child be! 

There is another concrete example that I 
could give along the same line^ The wife of 
a distinguished public official, who occupied 
several positions of distinction in the past, 
had to teach v/hile her husband was waiting to 
be appointed to a position which is not below 
his category* Had she not, while in a foreign 
country, taken up hone economics in her spare 
moments which later proved their salvation, 
what would have become of them? 

Hence, I always emphasize this as a serious 
matter in my conversation^ with my daughters. I 
am preparing them for future lifers grim real- 
ities. Preparedness now is the answer to lifers 
unforeseen eventualities. They should be pre- 
pared to face their future without worry and 
without 1 ^ar . 

My eldest daughter is taking up law. 
She is fond of all subjects, but she does not 



- 5 - 

care very much <^ mathomatics ; while my 
younger daughter Is very fond of mathematics 
and finds exceptional pleasure in solving com- 
plicated problems- fefeat- m o qt gilipina — g4r-3.3 
jtffQuld^ not ca ^o— 1 0 ^ t t e apt . She is taking up 
her A, B. course majoring in iaa^he-mat-i-ca . My 
son is attending the La Salle College. He has 
not yet shown his preferences. Perhaps he is 
too young to choose his lifers vocation. 

Both my daughters are exceptionally strong 
in social science subjects, such as sociology, 
psychology and philosophy. They are wide 
readers and find solace in reading and studying 
their lessons. They are attending the summer 
classes here in Baguio undor special tutors - 
their professors in the University of Santo 
Tomas, so that even if they travel abroad with 
me for eight months or so, they will not get 
behind their studies. Their university profes- 
sors are Rev. Evergisto Bazaco, 0, P., in philo- 
sophy; Rev. Ciriaco Pedrosa, 0. P., in mathematics 
V 

aav-._Ie^.us - - $a 1-buena ^-^^r-P-.-, ■ i n oo & nomi c s ; ^av . 
■±tt-r^3rio Balbu ena^T-Prr-^ V aw ; -Rmrr-^ or f i r i o 



« 6 - 

-Bjb€^— and Rg : g , J u an Ilia, 0, P , ^ in Roman law^ 
It is interesting to note Father Baaaco's 
experience in his class • He is their professor 
in philosophy* There are, naturally, dull and 
bright students in any class, but idui-d up llm 

'4idi-jQrLe*, But Father -Bazaco ' has ~no patience 
with the dull ones. He advances his classes 
regularly with the conse<iuonce that these dull 
ones can not catch up with the lessons* If the 
bright ones are separated from the dull ones, it 
would be to the disadvantage of the latter as 
they would be deprived of the benefit derived 
from hearing and having intelligent recitations 
and discussions. 

My daughters enjoy discussing with their 
professors, especially in philosophy. One of 
the humorous questions asked by my elder daughter 
is this: 

Kiss Q - ^^Is JTudas in Heaven or in Hell?'' 
p "^*None can tell where he is exactly just 
now/' 

Miss Q, - "I can give you a definite answer 



- 7 - 

to this question later. When I go 
to Heaven I will send for him and tell 
hiia what a nice place Heaven is!" 
I have told ay daughters that while they 
are learning from hooks everyday, I am also 
learning everyday, not from books but from 
human experience. Everyday I am studying and 
observing individuals; I am studying and observ- 
ing peoples - ■fchoso who succeed as well as those 
who fail» I analyze the causes, the reasons of 
their success as well as their failures. Like- 
wise, I am observing and studying myself, and I 
note the mistakes I make and the improvements I 
gain. With all the strength of my will, I at- 
tempt not to make the same mistakes twice. Hence, 
I also study in school - in the school of life, 
I also study from books - the books of human ex- 
perience. I believe my study is more effective 
in its result than my daughters. 

With reference to the particular point 
that she always trios with all her will never 
to make the same mistakes twice, we put in the 



- 8 - 

remark that it vms a lesson which should ho 
learnod by nations as well as by individuals , 
that if Gvery nation of the world will only 
attempt not to make the same mistake twice 
we shall hayo no fear of war* On this she 
enlarged and expressed herself as follows: 
Yea^ nations nowadays commit the same errors 
which their rulers committed in the past. 
Because they are living in a different epoch 
and because their procedure is modernized 
they believed that what thoy aro doing is 
different from what their predecessors did 
when they plunged the world into the war. But 
in reality the fundamentals aro the sarne^ 
Simply because the epoch is different and the 
procedure is different, it does not mean that 
the fundamental must be different. It remains 
the same. Hence, the saying: '^History repeats 
itself." 

^ii&T-^^^^:ews-x^ £ i nd ex g- ressr o n 

i^wig^^^jwha-^aay^ JILovja -is- always a gamble • 

Bndex^Jthre'--green -wood tree-or-bof ore-the--alta-iL, 



Like a stream that must wind its way 
through hills and valleys and forests and 
fields before reaching the sea, the conversa- 
tion has touched upon the shores of varied 
subjects. 

Now the theme has been shifted to books 
and libraries with their infinite riches for. 
the intellect - and to the unassuming libra- ^ 
rians - our library builders who, like our 
corals, silently and consistently build and 
build, collecting, sorting, classifying, index- 
ing all sorts of printed literature for conser- 
vation, for the use of the readers and for 
the use of the nation. 

By nature and by inclination as well as 
by love, Krs, Quezon is a librarian. She loves 
the work of the librarian. She loves the 
books the librarian collects.. Books Inspire, 
entertain, educate; they are "the children of 
the mind of men and women who have long passed 





- 10 - 

from the hiiman scene." She roads her books 
up to the depth of the night. Thoy aro hor 
sincere and uncomplaining friends who are 
mainly concerned with the broadening of .cne's 
horizon, tho cultivation of the mind and soul, 
and the appreciation of spiritual values. 

Ivirs. Quezon was, indeed ^ one of the 
earliest pioneer librarians wc have in the 
Philippines - in fact as early as some two 
and a half decades ago. She was the librarian 
of the Baler Reading Circlo in her historic 
little tov/n of Baler, nestled between tho 
Sierra ifedres and the Pacific. She had the 
teachers and students of Baler at the time as 
her readers. Like the ways of all librarians, 
she was happy when the books borrowed wore duly 
returned, and -eh«- peeved when they were lost 
or not duly returned - not to say getting them 
back with pages missing! 

She continued: "I studied in the Philip- 
pine Normal School in my younger days. It was 
then located at tho now Philippine General 



- 11 - 

Hospital grounds, knd the Normal School Girls 
Dormitory was on Flores Street, En?ilta. I 
began in the first grade. I had been promoted 
so frequently from time to timo and to such an 
extent that in two years I was already in the 
sixth grade. An American teacher had taken 
special interest in tho excellent progress of 
my school work and in my promotion. I did not 
only study the lessons assigned for the day but 
also those for the next several days or so. 
Seeing the necessity and merit of promoting me 
and not letting me be dragged back by my class- 
mates who had not made bettor showing, I was 
practically catapulted into the different < 
grades up to sixth. Icy^gohool Tooe-TavTari ox- 
OQllen iU I tell this to my daughters whenever 
I ask them to study well. 

" I love books. If I lose my Jewels, I 
simply take their loss for granted. But not 
so with my books. If I lose one or cannot 
locate it, I create all sorts of trouble until 
I find it, or it is located for mo. 



- 12 - 

"Books are my priceless possessions. I 
love them better than my jewels. One evening 
the President had been looking for a book, the 
Sitio de Baler, and went to my library to get it. 
But he could not open the shelves as they are 
all locked. The next morning ho asked mo why 
I locked my shelves as he could not get the 
book he needed. I told him I locked the shelves 
because I do not want to lose my books. 

"My love for books began since I attended 
school in my younger days. I preserved some of 
the textbooks I used in ray studies. They are 
still with me, c\ . 

"When I taught in -fehe— s^^^rool- of our home- 
town of Baler, we--^bj°n>-4:.ea f?J:i,fi rs organized a 
reading circl e, and we organized a library for 
the use of the teachers as well as the students. 
I was elected the libraria n of the circle . I 
listed all the books Lhat v/e had, and I required 
every borrower to sign his name on a notebook, 
and to write therein the title of the book he 
borrowed. I also required him to pay a fine 




- 13 ^ 

of fiva centavos a day if he failGd to ro^ 
turn the hook on tirxO. I still have these 
books in my possession J* 

Her Home Library has a collection of two 
thousand volvunos , mostly on Filipiniana and 
literature on various subjects properly cata- 
logued, classified and indexed. 

She resumed: '^Thero v;as a humorous in- 
cident that happened when I was the librarian 
of that Readin g Circle which I already mentioned. 
The Library was open from ton to twelve in the 
morning and three to four in the afternoon, V/e 
had a meeting and one of the subjects discussed 
was the improvement of the library service. A 
reader stood up and said, ^Ivlr, Chainnan, I move 
that the librarian be opened from three to six 
in the afternoon everyday instead of from throe 
to four,' A burst of laughter resounded in the 
room. When everything was calm I stood up and 
said J *What you meant is to open the library 
from three to six in the afternoon and not the 
librarian, ^ 



- 14 - 

"I am also preserving all tho letters of 
my husband and noraps of his writing, postal 
cards, notes, tGlograins and cables which ho had 
been sending mo for myself and for my children. 
And I began keeping thorn even when ho was yet 
a Resident Commissioner. Hence, I have a 
complete collection of all tho letters he wrote 
i*me. Unfortunately, however, the letters I 
wrote to him arc not in his possession, so 
they are not with mo." 

Mrs , Quezon showed us an enlarged picture 
of tho town of Baler taken way back in 1916, 
which was placed on the wall facing the entrance 
of her Baguio Mansion. - It was an enlarged 
snapshot taken at that time and focused on the 
plaza of the town and showing some homes includ- 
ing ilrs. Quezon's home, the church, the tower 
separated from tho church, both of nipa roof, 
the people coming home after attending the 
Sunday mass, with ladies dressed in the 1916 
stylo of "the rounded serpentina," one of 
whom Tyas Mrs. Quezon. It must bo one of the 



- 15 ^ 

piotiires dear to her heart, boing a souTonir 
photograph of hor historic little town taken 
moro than two decades ago, and of the very 
spot where she and the Presidoat saw the first 
light of day. Whether they are in tfelaoanan 
Palace or in the Great metropoliB of Washing- 
ton, Paris > London 3 the little towi of their 
birth is always in their mind. 

Baler formerly belonged to the province 
of Nuova Ecija. Por military reasons the dis- 
trict of Principe (composed of Casiguran, Depa- 
culao and Baler) was created by the Spanish 
authoritios in 1858 with Baler as tho capital. 
The military service in the district was under 
the charge of the officials of tho Spanish Army* 
The civil, ^^dicial and economio administration 
was, however, under the province of Nueva 
Eoija. Tho Franciscan Bathers were in charge 
of the souls of those towns in the district. 
Later they ware turned over to the Recollect 
Fathers who much later transferred them again 
to the Franciscans. 



- 15 - 



Tho Sioe;Q of Baley 

On Jimo E7, 1898, the Spanish garrison 
in Balor composed of four officers and fifty 
men, noticing tho townspeople abandoning the 
town know that trouble was in store for them. 
They then fixed up their quarters in the church 
and in tho convent. The church although small 
like a chapel, was however, strongly built with 
thick walls, and this, together with the con- 
vent, could serve as real fort for their gar- 
rison. The soldiers placed in the church all 
their ammunition and a moderate amount of sup- 
plies including seventy cavanos of rice. 

V/e should rooall that, prior to America's 
occupation of the Philippines, there were about 
eighteen thousand Spanish soldiers posted all 
over the country in small garrisons- When 
General Aguinaldo returned to tho Philippines 
from Hongkong on board the luoCullough in May, 
1898, the Spanish garrisons in Luzon were at 
once besieged by tho Filipino Revolutionary 
soldiers. Overpowered by tho sheer force of 



17 



numbers, the Spanish officers and soldiers 
were either captured or they surrendered. An 
exception however to these captures and sur- 
renders was made by the Spanish defense of 
Baler, The sound of Dewey's guns rang around 
the World on May 1, 1898. Manila was occupied 
on August 13 of the same year. Yet for nearly 
twelve months after those stirring events, the 
Spanish flag remained floating on the church- 
tower of Baler. On June S7, 1898, four Spanish 
officers and fifty men went into the church 
until June 2-, 1899, irfien two officers and 
thirty-one men marched out of it. All repre- 
sentations made to the garrison that the 
Philippines had passed to the United States 
and therefore no longer belonged to Spain, 
were rejected as a mere ruse intefid^d to. cause 
their surrender at the mercy of their enemies. 
The garrison had been deceived so many times 
that even the Spanish officer who was sent as an 
emissary from General Rios in Manila was not 
listened to. Not until June S, 1899, when the 



- 18 - 



lieutenant of the garrison, Saturnine Martin 
Corezo found time to glance over the head- 
linee of the newspapers thrown into their 
quarters by the emissary from the Spanish au- 
thorities in Ivlanila, did the garrison realize 
that they had been completely out of touch 
with the outside world for one year, and that 
among other things that had happened was that 
Cuba, Porto Rico and the Philippines were lost 
to Spain and that the only Spanish flag float- 
ing in Luzon for almost a year v;as the one on 
their church - Baler, Lieutenant Kartin ex- 
plained the situation to his men, then a truce 
with the Filipino ReYolutionary Army had been 
instituted, and negotiations wore entered into 
at once, and the valient soldiers, much deplet- 
ed, marched out of the church. Let us add 
that upon reaching Spain, the Queen Regent 
in the name of Alfonso II presented to these 
heroic soldiers "La Cruz do Honor de San 
Fernando" carrying with it a pension. 



- 19 - 



Early Baler 

Rev. F. Felix de Huorta in his Estado 
Osograf loo de la Prn yinoia do San Greaorio 
¥^^^0 printed in Manila in 1865, dosoribod 
Baler in this wise: 

"Baler enjoys a salutary, fresh and breezy 
climate. They provide themselves with drinking 
water from the river above cited (San Jose). 
The roads to border towns are bad, and during 
the rainy season they are extremely bad. This 
circumstance makes life insecure for the nimierous 

k 

infidels who live in those thickets, especially 
towards Casiguran and Binangonan, For this 
reason, and for the defense of the town, the 
Rev. Father Fray Jose do Esparragosa, built two 
castles in 1847, one on top of the mountain, 
and the other on the opposite side of the river, 
adjoining the shores, both of which structures 
were erected under the direction of the said 
priest and at the expense and help of the town. 
The mails are rocoivod from the provincial 
capital occasionally and far between. 



- so - 

'*TJac ohurcJa under tho protootion of tlio 
Bishop S. Luis was originally nade of bamboo 
and nipa, and lator constructed of raasonry. 
This was, howovor, ultimately roducod to ruins 
by tho incr easing soa waves earoady montionod. 
Lastly, tiiG ohuroh, like the convent, was con- 
structed of stono, and this is what exists 
to-day. The other houses, including the court- 
house v/herc a school endowed out of tho commu- 
nity coffers is located, are made of bamboo, 
of local style. The church is at present - 
1865 - administered by the Rov. Father Fray 
Pasoual Salvador, preacher, tv/enty-five years 
of age. 

The State of the Parochial Church 

Tributes 3S7 

Souls 1,367 

"Tho imnenso land that this town possesses 

is very appropriate for all kinds of production, 

but the inhabitants cultivate only a small 

portion which hardly produces enough rice and 

corn for their consumption. Ir, tJi^a year 1345, 

the already mentioned Father Esparragosa, after 



- 31 - 

overcoming n-unerous difficulties, oponod a 
canal of moro than one mile in length, capable 
of irrigating land for five or six thousand 
tributes. However, not more than twenty persons 
take advantage of this great benefit, and if 
they do, those are on a short scale. Their 
extensive and luxuriant forests produce all 
kinds of luiabor, bamboos, pains, rattan, hunt- 
ing and fowling, wax and honey. If they be ig- 
norant as to the existence of these resources, 
it is because the religious orders have explored 
but a minimum portion of the forests. Aiong its 
coasts exquisite fish may be found, especially 
sardines and tunny -fish, which undoubtedly are 
of the best quality in these Islands. The bay 
above mentionod is a good port for all kinds 
of vessels since it has from twelve to sixty 
fathoms in depth, and its mouth offers no 
danger except at the point in the south called 
"Enchanted," where there are various reefs 
called "Dainties." Those vessels can easily 
save themselves by going around the point 



- 22- 

within a distance of two miles. 

"The natives dedicate themselves to 
agriculture, fishing, collection of wax and 
to hunting. They transport their produce to 
the market of Gapan and even to the capital 
(San Isidro). In spite of the antiquity of 
this town, its fine climate and the fertility of 
its soil, it seems, however, destined to bo eter- 
nally a small town. Upon comparing the various 
records in our archives, we find that the births 
are three times greater than the number of 
deaths. In spite of this fact, however, there 
seems to bo no progress in the growth of the 
population. The cause is the exodus of many 
families in search of fields to till in other 
towns although their own remain untouched,'' 

The Philippines Historical Comitteo has 
prepared three markers for Baler: The Church 
of Baler, Roster of the Loyal Spanish Garrison 
at the Siege of the Church of Baler, and Lieut. 
Gilmore Rescue Party. 



- 23 ~ 

The conversation horo shifted to Baler, 
its schools, its problem of transportation 
with the rest of the province, the attempt 
of Nuova Vizoaya provincial officials to have 
it ceded to and incorporated with Nuova Vizcaya. 
The following are from Hrs. Quezon's account: 

"I was in Baler in 1916. Vfe erected its 
school by public contribution. The town people 
furnished the materials, like boards, lumber, 
etc., the pooplo freely contributing their 
time and labor. 

"I found the officials of Nueva Vizcaya 
province in Baler who had already succeeded 
in securing fhe consent of the inhabitants 
of Baler to the cession of their town to Nueva 
Vizcaya. In the public meeting I stood up and 
said, 'What can you officials of Nueva Vizcaya 
give to Baler which the province of Tayabas 
cannot give? In the first place Tayabas is a 
first class province with plenty of resources 
and Baler can get anything it needs from her. 
(That was the time of the coconut boom.) 



- 24 - 



Whoroa. Nuova Vizoaya is .oroly a special 
province, it cannot even oleot its governor 
and municipal proaiaonts. if the Baler pooplo 
want to convert their town into township like 
the towns in Nueva Vizcaya whore their offi- 
cials are not elected but only appointed, ,it 
is up to tho Baler people. But let me say 
that I see no benefit in this change, it is 
trading local independence or autonomy with 
autocracy , ^ " 

Then the people of Baler began to ask: 
"Ano ba ang kahulugan ng township ? Tao at 
saka ^ sheep', ano ang ibig sabihin niyan?" 
"Pugs iyan nga, kayong nga taga Baler ay ga- 
gawing »shoep* (tupa, taong walang isip) ng 
mga taga Nucva Vizcaya; mwawalan kayo ng liber- 
tad na gaya ng tinatamo ninyo ngayon." 

"The lack of transportation facilities 
between Baler and other towns is not due to 
the fact that Tayabas province cannot or does 
not wish to extend those facilities but to 
the cirourastance that the ocGan is so rough 
and turbulent for six months that Baler can 



- 85 - 

only be roaclxod during the other six months 
of the year," 

Tho conversation at this point touchGd 
upon the visit of His Excollency, tho Prosidont, 
to the North, whoroin wg expressed our anxiety 
to learn tho truth of what was published in the 
papers that he succumbed frora the effect of ex- 
cessive heat before roaching the tunnel in Abra, 
Krs, Quezon related: 

"Yes , the trip had been very hard for tho 
President. It was too st:?enuous for hin. Upon 
reaching Santa Ilaria vdiovG he was nnde to 
alight from his car and had to v/alic quite a 
distance in order to hear the choir that was 
to sing in his honor at the patio of the 
church. The President cov.ld not disappoint 
the people and he granted "their request. He 
had to walk in tho sun for solio distance, and 
his exposure to the intense heat subsequently 
made him feel bad for quite a vjhile until wo 
reached that little hut before the entrance 
to the tunnel where ho laid dovm in a papag 



- E6 - 

3ust big enough to fin tho little space and 
from where we sent for ice and applied it 
to him." 

One of us remarked: "In the United 
States, the President must be well guarded 
as it is dangerous for him to sleep in a 
cottage like that," 

Dona Aurora answered, "In the United 
States the people shoot their, president, but 
in the Philippines the people love their 
president. Here the president can associate 
with the people, walk among them, visit places 
and none attempts to kill him." 

We replied, "Our president has a very big 
heart. The people love him and they mil do 
whatever is within their powor not only to 
protect him but also to serve him at any time. 
He is one of the people. So he loves them so 
much and never refuses their wishes even at 
the peril of his health-" 

Mrs. Quezon continued, "Let it not bo 
said that because the president is my husband 



- E7 - 

I am stating this: He is the man who is not 
afraid to recognize any mistalce he has done. 
V/honcvcr he comes to know that he committed 
wrong against anyone, ho never hesitates to 
ask forgiveness, whether that one is a muchacho 
or a laborer in the street. He does not believe 
that he is belittling himself #ien he recog- 
nizes his. errors. Accordingly he corrects them, 

"He forgives and forgets easily whatever ' 
wrong others have done to them. V/hen his at- 
tention wcr-ld be called by his friends and 
he was asked why he was appointing so and so 
to this elevated position, and so and so to 
that high office ^/\4ien they v;ere his bitter 
•enemies who acrimoniously criticized him in 
the H-H-C controversy, he would answer: 'I 
•am doing this not for my personal self but 
for the best interest of the nation. The life 
of la. L, Q. is not eternal. He has but few 
years to live. But the life of the nation 
goes on forever. So it is the nation that 
should concern our interest. Not M. L. Q. 



-sa- 
vory wGll said. Could thore be any 
better expression of the innor soul of the man? 

"My religion? Yes, my religion is dear- 
est in my life, it is life itself, i cannot 
change my religion, if, porchance, a power- 
ful man comes to mo and says, •Change your 
religion lest I'll kill you.« I will tell 
him, »I can never change my religion. It is 
my life. It is dearer than my own life. I 
prefer to be killed than to change it.» 

To her, "Religion is the final center of 
repose; the goal to which all things tend; 
apart from which man is a shadow, his very 
existence a riddle, and the stupendous scenes 
of nature which surround him as unmeaning as 
the leaves which the sybil scattered in the 
wind . " 

On her recent pleasure trip to foreign 
countries she said, *'The President told me 
that if the children and I leave away he will 
abandon IVIalacanan as it will be too big for 
him alone to stay there. He will either stay 
in Pasay or in the Casiana . 'I have been 



- S9 ^ 

used to leaving ny faiaily homo but not my 
fariily loaving me,» HoncG tiio trip iias to 
bo postponed ^ for other bettor tirno.*^^ 

Advising ono who^ booause of luck or 
othGiTwise, bad united himsolf in wedlock 
with a foreigner especially with an Anoricanj 
she said that the best norm of conduct to bo 
followed is to stay in tho United States and 
never bring the family in the Philippines 
except for brief visits, so that his wife 
can see the actual conditions of his folks 
and of his home. Likewise, in speaking to 
his wife about Philippine life, ho should 
not picture only its bright sides and ho 
should be careful not to exaggerate so that 
the disappointment will not be so marked or 
so shocking* He should not forget that there 
are factors in this rnatter that cannot be 
disregarded - tho environriiont , the differences 
in the sanitary practices of both peoples, not 
to mention the economic problem which v/ill 
surely arise as the high standard of living 



30 - 



to which the wife has been accustomed should 
be satisfied. 

Hence a 5" ilipino -American couple should 
have in mind what Chaucer said: 



"Thou shall make castles then in Spain 
And dream of joy, all but in vain." 



V/e came to visit her in order to pay our 
respects. It was with unspeakable joy in our 
hearts . 

The visit was a splendid treasury of deep 
thought, of life, of history, of literature, 
of charming conversations. 



END 



/egs 




j 



r 



