■1 


\ 




. t 


\' 


In Replying, Refer to 




COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

ARMY HEADQUARTERS 


MANILA 


January 7„ 1937 


MEMORANDUM 

Colonel James B. Ord: 

nils morning I conferred with the Chief of Staff regarding 
First Lieutenant Jaime C. Velasquez and his lineal number in the 
roster. Lieut. Velasquez was born on April 4, 1907. He graduated 
from the United States Military Academy on June 10, 1931 a class= 
mate of First Lieut. Rufo C. Romero of the Philippine Scouts. 

During his stay at West Point Lieut. Velasquez was an outstanding 
student. He finished No. 2 in Mathematics and graduated No. 17 
of his class. I am informed that he was selected as one of the 
members of a team that was sent to Europe to compete in mathemaH cs 
against European institutions. Because of^slight lung affection 
contracted as a result of a fractured clavicle acquired while play- 
ing "rugby" he was not eonmissioned in the Philippine Scouts upon 
his graduation. On October 27 „ 1931 after a thorough examination 
has; been made of him, he was appointed third lieutenant of the 
Philippine Constabulary and assigned to the Constabulary Academy 
at Baguio as instructor in mathematics. He was later transferred 
to the District of Minadanao and Sulu with station in Lonao. 


I understood from you that Lieuts. R. C. Romero and Emmanuel 
Cepeda of the Philippine Scouts when transferred to the Philippine 
Army will be commissioned as Captains. I wish to invite your at- 
tention to the fact that this will be very unfair to Lieut. Velasquez 
inasmuch as Lieut. Romero was his classmate at West Point while 
Lieut. Cepeda graduated two years later. I believe it would be 
unfair to penalize Lieut. Velasquez for having served the Philippine 
Government instead of the American Army. Moreover the services 
that this officer has had with the Philippine Constabulary while 
stationed in Mindanao have given him a thorough knowledge of con- 
ditions in the Islands. For this reason I hold the opinion, which 
is concurred in by the Chief of Staff, that he is entitled to the 
rank of Captain as much as the above mentioned lieutenants of the 
Philippine Scouts. 

Lieut. Velasquez has an excellent record in the Philippine 
Constabulary and is far superior in all respects to seme of the 
lieutenants that an being considered for promotion to the rank 
of Captain. 

The Chief of Staff agrees with me that under the above circums- 
tances Lieut. Velasquez should be considered for promotion to the 
rank of Captain, and has asked me to submit his case for approval.^ 



