S?3EC*»pF HIS SXGSLLENCY^H33 
JSIDTSfc? TITS .VHILIPPINS3 WHSN HiS «&i> 
V - ftU^TrarrP • G0I3X3SI0K3R FROM * 

1907 to 1919 " 
• » 4 • • *• * \jk 

v r 



Bales*, T&yaoaa 
PHilippine3 



- TABLE OF CONTENTS- 

SPEECH OF HON. MANUEL L. QUEZON RESIDENT COMMISSIONER 
PROM THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, IN THE AMERICAN HDUSE OF 
REPRESENTATIVES, January 27, 1913.. I 

MR. QUEZON'S ADDRESS (Delivered before the Philippine 
Society at New YorK City, June 10, 1913 II 

SPEECH OF HON. MANUEL QUEZON, Resident Commissioner 

from the Philippines before the U. S. Senate 

Committee on the Philippines, January .1914 HI 

SPEECH DELIVERED IN THE AM RICAN CONGRESS BY 

MANUEL L. QUEZON ON OCTOBER 2, 1914... jy 

PART OF AN ADDRESS DELIVERED BY HON. MANUEL L QUEZON 
BEFORE THE L: KE MOHONK CONFERENCE October 15, 1914..' V 
*■* V 

DELIVERED IN TfiE- AMERICAN HOUSE OF REPRESENTA- 
TIVES. December- '29, 1914 VI 

GOOD GOVERNMENT FOR THE PHILIPPINE -By Manuel 
L. Quezon^iosident Commissioner from the rhilippines. VII 



THE PHILIPPINES -WHAT THEY ARE AND WHAT THEY WOULD 

BE. By Manuel L. Quezon, Resident Commissioner 

from the Philippines yiJl 

ADDRESS*. DELIVERED BY HON. MANUEL L. QUEZON AT A 
BANQUE*T*GIVEN IN HIS HOI* It AT THE HOTEL DE FRANCE 
SEPTEMBER 28, 1918, FOR THE CELEBRATION OF THE " ' 
iiEI^AfiTMENT OF THE JONES LAW VIV 

SPEECHES OF MR. QUEZON IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESEN- 
. TATIVSS OF AMERICA. January 13, 1916 .X 

DELIVERED BEFORE THE AMERICAN HOUSE OF REPRESENTA- 
TIVE jpAugust 18, 1916 XI 

INAUGURAL ADDRESS OF PRESIDENT QUEZON OF THE SENATE... XIT 
(October 16, 1916. ) " A 

SPEECH OF QUEZON IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES*' 

Monday May 1, 1916 ' XTII 



^JgJJgANHWS ^ADDRESS OF QUEZON DELIVERED BEFORE 

4 NEW YORK CITY, APRIL 19, 1919. \ . 777. 7,77. .XIV 



JBp]E OF FREE NATIONS ASSOCIATION, HOTEL CC'"- 
:.HJO#P; 1IE\ ' •• 

FILIPINOS WANT INDEPENDENCE. 



XV 



AND THE COMlTT^R^nw^ 11 
IKSULf R AFFAIRS HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES H iD JOI fW v 

MONDAY, JUNE 2, 1919 -U-nHLLY 

* XV I 




- I - 



SPEECH OF HON. MANUEL L. QUEZON RE- 
SIDENT COMMISSIONER PROM THE PHILIPPINE 
ISLANDS, IN THE AMERICAN HOUSE OF REPRESEN- 
TATIVES, January 27, 1913. 

MR. QUEZON. - Mr. Chairman, today's morning 
papers publish a dispatch from Manila to the ef- 
fect that on the 23rd of January there was an en- ( 
gagement between the Pioros on the one hand and 
the scouts and constabulary on the other, and in 
connection with this report it is stated that 
Aguinaldo and other Filipinos are engaged in po- 
litical activities and preparing for a revolt. 
During the last two months, and immediately fol- 
lowing the victory of the Democratic Party, re- 
ports of this character have been published al- 
most daily throughout the United States, appa- 
rentlv with the purpose of defeating the Demo- 
cratic proposition to give the Filipinos their 
independence, by impressing the American people 
with the fact that independence will be followed 
by a revolution in the islands. 

THE TRUTH ABOUT THE MORO TROUBLE 

It is my- desire to comment but little upon 
the engagement between the Moros and the scouts 
and the constabulary. 5:obody need be alarmed 
about it. Those who are familiar with what is 
p-oinp on in Jolr and Mindanao will find nothing 
new in this case, I know of no time when there 
was not an occasional outbreak among the i.'.oros, 
except when they were under the wise and gentle 
hand of Gen. Wood, as governor of Mindanao, if or 
the last two years there has been a regular war- 
fare between the Mores and the American troops, 
due to ah'' ill-considered policy of the official 
in charge of the Moros ; but it was then to the 
interest of somebody to conceal this fact from 
the American people and no reports were there- 
fore given out to the press about it. xhe ex- 
planation of this well-planned secrecy will, per- 
haps, be found in the following speeches deli- 
vered at Zamboanga two years ago before ex- Se- 
cretary of War Dickinson by two scarcely edu- 
cated fibres : 

First. "We have only a little to say, and 
that^s that we are happy to be under the sove- 
reirntv of the Americans. There has been some 
talking about that the Filipinos- want: to tear 
themselves off #from Americans, and that they 
want to tear us away too, thus tear us away with 
them. If the Americans should give the Moro 
country over to the Filipinos they would be res- 
ponsible to God for the blood that would be shed, 
because it would be the same thing as if you put 
two fighting cocks into one bag, for there would 
be fighting sure. 11 



Second. " x x x She Secretary of War must 
look the matter in the face. We are a different 
race; we have a different religion; we are Moham- 
medans, and if we should be given over to the Fi- 
lipinos how much more would they treat us badly, 
v/hen they have treated even the Spanish badly who 
were their own mothers and their own fathers in 
generation? How did they treat them? Think about 
it. Think twice. We far prefer to be in the 
hand of the Americans who are father and mother 
to us now than to be turned over to another people." 

Of course, after wide circulation was given 
throughout the United States of these protestations 
of friendship and love, and they were printed even 
in the CONGRESSIONAL RECORD, the warfare that fol- 
lowed soon afterwards between the I'ioros and their 
American "fathers and mothers" could not be given 
out to the press, lest the report should convey to 
the American people an accurate idea of the ter- 
rific manner in which a Moro shows his friendship 
and love . (Laughter ) . 

But two years have gone by. The result de- 
sired at the tine has been accomplished, to wit: 
To show the American people that the united States 
was a blessing to the Moros. It is now thought 
that any report of disturbance in the Philippine 
Islands" will foster the policy of retaining the 
islanders under American control, especially if, 
in connection with it, it could be said that a 
general revolt is being contemplated by the Fili- 
pinos, and an insignificant clash between a group 
of Moros and a small detachment of scouts and 
constabulary is promptly given to the press. 
This same clash, if it had happened a year ago, 
would not have been published, or, if it had to 
be published at all, would have been reported as 
an engagement between "police officers" and "out- 
laws "$ now it is said to be between "American 
troops" and "rebels". 

The whole truth about the Moro situation is 
this: They have never been content under their 
present rulers; they will be better satisfied un- 
der a Philippine government; and, at the v/or3t, 
they can be governed by the Filipinos in the 
same way that they are governed toady. 

FALSE DISPATCHES ABOUT ACUINALDO 

But, as I said before, I do not wish to dis- 
cuss at present these Moro troubles. They are 
not as serious today as they were a year ago, 
when nothing was said about them. What I do wish 
to call to the attention of the House are the mal- 
icious and absolutely false dispatches printed 
in the newspapers of this country about Aguinal- 
do and other Filipinos being engaged in revolu- 
tionary preparations. 



- 3 - 

The following is what the morning papers 

saw on this subject, after giving an account of 
the Moro outbreak: 

Emilio Aguinaldi, the leader of the revolt 
against the United States after the Spanish- Ame- 
rican War, and who has reentered politics, is 
reported to be taking an active part in revolu- 
tionary propaganda. There are many rumors that 
the Katipunan, a Filipino secret society, is re- 
newing its activities against the Americans. 
Aguinaldo has been insistent in the conferences, 
of the native chieftains that his sole purpose 
in renewing his activities has been to organize 
them to accomplish their independence. 

AGUINALDO 1 S POSSIBLE MOTIVE 

It is possible that Aguilando's real mo- 
tive for his activity comes from a fear that the 
Jones Bill, providing for Filipino independence, 
may not be passed, and that he is scheming to 
forestall control of the expected discontent of 
the natives. 

The foregoing dispatch reads very much like 
the one published in the New York Sun of January 
34 from its Manila correspondent, which is as 
follows : 

(Special cable dispatch to the Sun) 

Manila, January 23. 

Aguilando, the infamous leader of the re- 
volt against American in the Philippines, has 
reentered politics while all the tine protesting 
against being interrupted in his farm work. He 
has frequent conferences with Filipino revolu- 
tionary committees of chieftains ostensibly for 
the purpose of organizing the militia preparato- 
ry to the accomplishment of independence of the 
Islands. It is believed, however, that the real 
motive for the activity of Aguinaldo is an out- 
growth of the fear that the Jones bill provid- 
ing for Philippine independence may not be passed 
and he is promoted by the desire to forestall con 
trol of the anticipated discontent among Filipi- 
nos because of the non-fulfillment of the pro- 
mise of politicians. 

Mr. Chairman, the statements contained in 
these dispatches are both false and salnderous. 
There are no Filipino revolutionary committees, 
and if there were, Aguinaldo would be the last 
man to connect himself with them. It is true 
that Aguinaldo attended the monster meeting held 
at Manila to celebrate the Democratic victory in 
the United States, but so did thousands of other 
prominent Filipinos and some Americans. Of this 
meeting Justice Moreland, of tie. Supreme court, 
said to me: 



If the American people could have witnessed 
this great demonstration they would give you your 
sight to witness such a great gathering so order- 
ly that not even one policeman was necessary to 
preserve order. 

Justice Gar sons and Trent both indorsed 
this view. 

Gen* Agulnaldo was not one of the selected 
speaker a , but he responded very briefly to tfla 
call made upon him for a speech* He spoke scarce- 
ly a minute, and what he said was this: 

I am pleased to join you in celebrating the 
victory of the Democratic Party, which means to 
us that the day of our independence is approach- 
ing; but I wish to impress upon you that you must 
cure that independence. You must show the world 
by your actions tlat you are capable of governing 
yourselves. 

WHO SENT THESE DISPATCHES 

These were almost his exact words, and yet 
for saying them he has been shamefully abused and 
misrepresented by an American correspondent of a 
New York newspaper, who has been guilty of con- 
duct so outrageous that he has been driven out 
of office* This man is now revenging himself 
upon my people for exposing his conduct by send- 
ing such dispatches as these to America* 

AGUINALDO r 3 DENIAL 

I have today received the following cablegram 
from Senor Osmena, speaker of the Philippine As- 
sembly, which I shall published in the Record in 
this connection* It contains the indignant denial 
of Gen. Aguinaldo, who, whatever his enemies may 
say of him, has never been investigated for and 
found guilty of grafting: 

Manila, January 27, 1913. 
QUEZON, Washington, D. C. : 

The following from Aguinaldo: "Please deny 
very strongly the truth of the dispatches from Ma- 
nila accusing me of political agitation preparato- 
ry to a revolt. On the contrary, I am trying to 
help preserve union among all elements to insure 
public order, which is necessary to the stability 
of a future Filipino government, because I am con- 
fident, and the people are also confident, that 
the Jones bill will be passed. I say this in 
spite of the possible machinations of the enemies 



- 5 - 



of Philippine independence, who are said to be 
trying to brew all sorts of disturbances and to 
employ all means to prevent the passing of said 
bill . ■ 

OSMENA 

THE FILIPINO PEOPLE WILL NOT REVOLT 
AGAINST THE UNITED STATES. 

Now, iMr* Chairman, I want to say right here 
to the American people that the Filipinos are not 
preparing for revolt* They have faith in the sense 
of justice of the American people, and they expect 
to get from the generosity of the American people 
their freedom" and independence* They will never 
fight the United States (applause }, and much less 
will they fight the United States after the Demo- 
cratic Party has come into power (applause), the 
party that is solemnly pledged to give the Philip- 
pine Islands Independence* In spite of the fact 
that it is occasionally said that your political 
platforms mean nothing - 

The CHAIRMAN. The time of the gentleman from 
the Philippine Islands has expired. 

Mr. BORLAND. Mr* Chairman, I ask that the 
gentleman have five minutes more. 

The CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Missouri 
(Mr* BORLAND-) asks unanimous consent that the gen- 
tleman from the Philippine Islands have five mi- 
nutes more. IS there objection? 

There was no objection. 

THE FILIPINO PE0J3LE BELIEVE THE DEMOCRATIC 
PARTY WILL GRANT THEM INDEPENDENCE 

Mr. QUEZON In spite of the fact, I say, 
that we are being told tfiat your party platforms 
mean nothing, we have a different conception of 
the great political parties of the Unites States. 
We believe that those parties stand by what they 
say to their people and to our people- We can 
not believe that your national platforms are mean- 
ingless. We believe that they are the official 
and responsible statements to the American people 
and to the world of what the party that is coming 
into power is going to do. (Applause), Is it 
conceivable that under these conditions, believ- 
ing as we do most Implicitly in the promises and 
pledges of the Democratic party, that my people 
will take up arms against the United States? What 
possible reasons could there be for such an unna- 
tural and suicidal course? Can any sensible Ameri- 
can, wiiether he believes the Filipinos capable of 
self-government or not, credit these untruthful 
and inspired reports? Unfortunately we have learned 
from the saddest of experience.3 v/hst armed opposi- 
tion to the power of the United States means. It 
has cost us hundred of thousands of lives drenched 



- 6 - 



our fair land with blood, and destroyed millions 
of dollars worth of property. We have, I say 
again, learned from a hard experience what it 
means to opoose with arms the force of America, 

Mr. SHERWOOD* Mr. Chairman. If the gen- 
tleman will permit, how many lives have been 
lost in the Philippine Islands? 

QUEZON* Well , according to a newspaper 
report attributed to Gen* Bell, the present com- 
manding general of tie Philippines, in the island 
of Luzon alone 600 , 0 C0 men, women, and children 
were killed during the war or died as a result 
thereof* 

Mr. DIES. Mr. Chairman, will the gentleman 
yield for a question? 

The CHAIRMAN. Does the gentleman yield? 

Mr. QUEZON* Yes. 

Mr. DIES. You understand, of course, that 
in killing your people we did it for their good? 
(Laughter) 

Mr* QUEZON. Mr. Chairman, I do nor care to 
speak of these harrowing incidents except for the 
purpose of convincing the House, if that "be neces- 
sary, that it is impossible for us to again think 
of such a thing as engaging in an armed conflict 
with American troops, evan if there were some 
reasons for revolting againgt the United States, 
because we know too well what the result would 
be; such being the case, how any sane person could 
conceive of us revolting when there is no reason 
today for so d6ing - and I hope that there will 
never be any reason for so doing, because the 
administration shortly to come into power in the 
United States is pledged to grant the Philippine 
independence. I hope that if the Filipinos ever 
go to war they will go to war in support of the 
United States and not against the United States. 
■ (Applause) 

And it is very easy to accomplish this. It 
is very easy to make every Filipino ready to die 
for the American flag, if you will only heed their 
cry and give them what they are asking for and 
longing for - their independence. (Applause) 

If this is done, and the time should ever 
come when you should have a war in the Far East 
gentlemen, you will find every man, woman, and' * 
child in my country fighting for you and for your 
flag, (Applause* ) 



Lc/ 



- II 



MR. QUEZON'S ADDRESS 

(Delivered before the Philippine Society at 
New York City, June 10, 1913. ) 



Mr. Quezon spoke as follows: 

Mr. Toastmaster, Guests, Gentlemen of the Philippine 
Society: 

It seems rather too presumptuous on my part to 
have accepted the invitation to address this distin- 
guished gathering in company with such prominent 
speakers as those who have preceded me and v/ill fo- 
llow me; but since I read the story of Henry Ward 
Beecher I have never hesitated to speak in public 
merely because of my acquired poor English. The stor 
ry goes that a stenographer once proposed to Mr. 
Beecher that he be allowed extra pay for reporting 
Mr. Beecher' s sermons in consideration of correcting 
grammatical errors. "And hov; many errors did fcrou 
find in this discourse of mine?" asked the great 
preachers. ^Just two hundred and sixteen." "Young 
man," asked Mr. Beecher solemnly, "when the English 
language gets in my way it doesn't stand a chance." 

Gentlemen, I do not think that I could show my 
appreciation of the very high compliment paid me at 
being one of the chosen speakers this evening better 
than by opening my mind and my heart to you, and it 
is my purpose to do so. This is tathering of prac- 
tical business men, and I would be wasting your time 
and my own if I tried to appeal to your sentiments 
instead of giving you bare facts. If in the c ourse 
of my remarks I should utter any word that may be 
construed as c iticism of persons or policies, pray, 
remember, that I do not mean to offend anybody, for 
I entertain due respect for those whose views are a t 
variance with mine on the subject I am about to dis- 
cuss. ± do not i.-'pugn the motives of those who are 
in disaccord with me on the Philippine question, but, 
of course, I assert that they are wrong. 



PEELING OF FILIPINOS 



"I would rather starve a free man than be fed 
a mere thing." These are not my own words, but I 
cordially endorse them, neither are they the words • 
of an ignorant man, but of a great President of a 
famous University. Indeed, they are not the words 
of an irresponsible demagogue, but of a man now hold- 
ing the highest public office in the greatest Repu- 
blic of modern times. "I would rather starve a free 
man than be fed a mere thing," says .V/oodrow Wilson 
in his article, "The New Freedom." These words ex-'' 
press the sentiment of every man, no matter under 
what sky he is born, if he has the right kind of stuff 
in him, if he has the proper sense of Mian's dignity 
Moreover, those words express the sentiment of °e very 
people the world around who are conscious of their 



- 2 - 

own nationality. Surely, those words express the 
sentiment of every man, indeed of the whole people 
of the Philippine Islands, and in- the true meaning 
of those words you will find the explanation of the 
discontent of the Filipinos with their present poli- 
tical status. And until this fact is fully realized, 
but not until then shall we have found the key that 
will open an ara of better understanding between the 
Filipinos and the Americans who are interested in 
Philippine affairs 1 * 

I might well consider my task this evening fi- 
nished with the foregoing remarks and let you ponder 
upon them. But I wish' to be more explicit. 

Ever since American occupation of the Islands 
two differndnt policies have been proposed by the two 
great political parties then in existence in the United 
States. One policy was to indefinitely retain the 
control of the Islands in view of the assumed unfit- 
ness of the people thereof to take care of themselves 
until some unknown century when the said people shall 
be fit for self-government and in the interim to de- 
velop the natural resources of the Archipelago through 
American capital and establish schools and build all 
sorts of means of transportation and communication. 
This policy considered the question of independence 
for which we fought one after the other, both the 
Spanish and American domination as something that the 
Filipinos of today may properly continue to have in 
mind, but they must have "out of sight." The other 
policy was to grant Philippine Independence as it has 
been granted to Cuba. Inasmuch as the sponsors of the 
first policy were in power when the United States 
took possession of the Archipelago and remained in 
power until last March, they consistently proceeded 
to put into practice their policy; they induced Ame- 
rican capital to come into the Islands; they built 
schools, roads, railroads, telegraphs, telephones, 
etc., they made a successful effort to have free trade 
between the Philippines and the United States. At the 
very beginning of this policy they prophesied that in 
proportion to the increase of our trade with the 
United States our content and satisfaction to live 
-under American tutelage would increase, and they pre- 
dicted the day when the Filipinos of their own desire 
would never serve their connection v/ith the United 
States. In order that they may not prove to be false 
prophets, those who thought thus coupled their fore- 
cast with the astounding reasoning that the Filipinos 
wanted independence now because they were not ready 
for it, but when they were fit to take care of them- 
selves they would prefer to continue to be the wards 
of this great nation. 



POLICY OF DEVELOPI/IENT 

On the thirteenth of next August the United States 
will have been in the Philippines for fifteen years, 



- 3 - 



and on that same, date, thirteen years of ^broken 
peaceful domination by this country oyer the Islands 
will have clasped. During all this time the polxoy 
of material development has been consistently P^rsuec.. 
Although at the cost of increasing our taxes, besides 
bonding ourselvesKmd our sons, the Oovernment succeed- 
ed in providing the Islands with more and better 
schools, more and better means of communication, and 
our trade has increased manifold. I shall not occu- 
7w mv lime by enumerating what has been d °ne in the 
Philippines along those lines, for nothing about the 
Islands is better known in the United Statee and the 
rest of tte world than these so-called accomplish- 
ments of the Philippine Government. Government of fi- 
nals and private persons, supporters of this policy, 
Sive filled official documents, books, magazines* 
nflwananers and whatnot, with detailed accounts of the 
S acne since American occupation, always giving 
the whole credit to American officials and using this 
tSe as strong arugment for the perpetual preservation 
£tn of the regime and the individuals in office who 
Saim the responsibility for such wonderful achieve- 
ments. Far be it from me to minimize the merit m 
this respect of those whose policy I am now discussing. 
But is it fair to forget that nothing could have been 
done in the Islands without the enthusiastic co-opera- 
tion of the Filipino people? Who pai d and is paying 
for thsao improvements? Who has made them? "™ld 
any increase in our trade have been possible had we 
not tilled the soiled and multipled our production. 
?ou boast yourselves, and rightfully so with having 
done in the Philippines in a few years what has not 
been done in other countries in- generations-. But 
while this speaks of your energy and wisdom, ^ also 
speaks of ours and of our advancement in civilization 
when you came to the Islands. 

FILIPINOS NOT WANTED 

THis simply shows that we should not be consi- 
dered as wardTblcause we are ^H^r own responsible 
people. Consider and compare th< : h f g 0 ^ f at h ^ 
been made by pour real wards m this °°^^ y - MUnd to 
welfare and prosperity you are more in duty oound to 
look after because they are also *neric 
dians and the negroes have had all the advantages 01 

iSJlSive/of your help, of your personal exam- 
rile of vour unlimited resources; they are here living 
in the nidSt of your wonderful civilization yet how 
mch have they progressed? How many generations have 
vou been taking c a? e of them? Does not the contrast 
oTwhThafb^en accomplished in the Philippines em- 
nhatica-'ly demonstrate that the effects ootained there 
are due'to the existence in this case of a progressive, 
intelligent people, alive to their responsibilities 
and rights? It is evident that neither you nor any- 
body else could do anything for us without our own 
because no one can be helped if he does not help him- 
self also; but it is n6t proven that we could not have 
done the same thing that has been done in the last 



- 4 - 

decade without the establishment of American sover- 
eignty in the Insland. But let me return to my point: 
I was" saying that the material development policy 
has beeb going on for the last thirteen years. Yet 
the predicted satisfaction of the Filipinos has not 
appeared- anywhere and there are no signs of it3 appear- 
ing in the far distant horizon. 

In 1903, the then Governor -General of the Philip- 
pines, in a public speech made before the Union Head- 
ing College, alluded with" regrets to the ill-feeling 
between imier leans and Filipinos in the. Islands, but 
expressed his conviction that the next decade will 
change that condition. In 1909 another * Governor-Ge- 
neral, before the Quill Club, deplored that the gulf 
between Americans and Filipinos was growing wider. 
-L-ast i*ay an American who has lived for nearly ton 
years in the Philippines wrote in one of the magazines: 
"Our yoke today Is far more odious to the native edu- 
cated and uneducated, than when we started. 11 

GROWTH OF PREJUDICE 



.ft. These statements show that every year that has 
.rolled by with the policy so far pursued has witnessed 
S a\gr owing misunderstanding between the Filipinos and 
•*€he|ct American associates. 

': From this it should be clear to all thinking men 
'tfe^ilaterial prosperity alone will not satisfy the 
i''£lUj8:mos. Dr. Barrows, once Director of Education 
oSfHe Philippines, in an article published In the 
•Journal of Race Development, of October, 1910, among 
otfcer things, wrote: 

"The opening of American markets to their products 
in unquestionably bringing a new era of business pros- 
perity the Philippines x x x. Everywhere there is 
increased industrial activity. The present adminis- 
tration in laying great emphasis on the material de- 
velopment of the Islands, many millions of pesos have 
been spent on roads; other millions for permanent 
buildings, for harbor improvements, for the txsautiii- 
cation of Manila. Newly constructed reilroads are 
operating. Added exertions are being made xor the 
suppression of human and animal disease. The peace 
which has obtained in practically all parts of the 
Ardhipelago since 1906 continues unbroken. Xet this 
prosperity is not a solution of the Philippines prob- 
lem, nor 6b these economic successes, striking as 
they are, meet the real expectation of the people 
themselves x x x 

"The Philippines have been properous before. 
There were leng periods under Spanish rule when trade 
rapidly increased, when each year added new areas to 
productive cultivation, when settlers and adventurers 
from Spain crowded the Islands, and yet the real so- 
cial discontent was not changed, and revolution was 



■M 

• + * : t 



- 5 - 

not averted. No more economic policy is adequate to 
the growing aspirations for such a race as the Fili- 
pino s" * 

And Dr. Barrows is right in what I have quoted. 
Despite the increase of our trade, the large number 
of our schools, the improvement of our means of com- 
munication and transportation, and other social and 
religious activities we are more dissatisfied with 
the "present regime. What then do we need? What do 
we want? We need, we want to accomplish that which 
alone can really make a people, happy: our own self- 
mastery. In the language of President Wilson, f, We 
would rather starve a free people than be fed a mere 
thing. 1 ' 

In other words, it is not your philanthrophy, 
your religious, commercial or governmental aid that 
we need or desired; it is your recognition of our 
right to claim and to enjoy that which is most dear 
to you: Freedom* 



OBJECTION TO FREEDOM . 

I know there are to forthcoming answers to this 
remark; to this remark of mine. I have heard them 
man^r a time; I have read them in print: First, that 
it is not true that the masses of the Filipino people 
want independence; that, on the contrary, they are 
perfectly content to live under American rule; that 
they do not know what independence means, and would 
not know what to do with it if they had it; that only 
a small and noisy group of irresponsible demagogues, 
office-seekers and politicians who hope or expect to 
be in power in the event of Philijspine independence 
is crying loudly against American rule. 

Second: That the words of President Wilson are 
not applicable to the present condition of the Fili- 
pinos, because, although they do not possess politi- 
cal independence, they have individual freedom* 

To those who hold the first theory, let me say, 
chat they are wholly wrong. The Filipinos have given 
all possible evidences in words as well as in deeds 
of their unanimous and very earnest desire of becoming 
an independent nation. Only an inexplicable blind- 
ness can fail to see this fact. Force and very supe- 
rior force alone can keep the Filipinos in subjection. 

To those who assert that the Filipinos, although 
under American guardianship are a free people, let 
me say that freedom and guardianship are two incom- . 
pa tibia ideas. The fact that the Filipinos are given 
in the Organic Act the same individual rights that 
the American citizens have, with the exception of the 
right to bear arms and be tried by jury, does not 
make the Filipinos as free as an American yk%$izen, 
as has been alleged. A free man is he whose rights 



- 6 - 



are secured by himself and cannot be taken away from 
hin at will. Our so-called individual rights are 
granted to us by Congress, which has reserved the 
right to take them away from us at any time. 

The case of Canada Australia and other self- 
n-overning British colonies has been cited to prove 
that a people may not have national independence and 
vet be free. But the people of these colonies are 
a free peoole because their very loose connection 
with Gret-t Britain is of their own will and the mo- 
ther country may not interfere with their affairs. 
Our status is wholly at variance with the Canadians 
or Australians. We are not free, neither as a people 
nor as individuals. 



13D CCLIPTICUISS POSSIBLE 



>fow, Gentlemen, I am sure that I am correct 
when I'say that nothing short of Philippine xndepen- 
dnece granted now, or promised to be granted within 
a comparatively short time will satisfy the Filipinos, 
and eve-y day's delay in doing this makes the Filipi- 
noa more unhappy and discontented. And my knowledge 
of the feeling of my people cannot be successfully ■ 
challenged. 1 have been fortunate enough to be asso- 
ciated with all classes of Filipinos. I have mingled 
with the poor as well as with the rich, uoreover, 
I have witnessed from my childhool this growing sen- 
timent of nationality and desire for independence. 
I was -eared by that same feeling. When I express the 
feeling of my people X am sure that X am not wrong 
because I am expressing my own feelings; and when X 
excess my own feelings X know that X am expressing 
?no~se of my people because mine have been inspired by 
the national spir t that fills the atmosphere through- 
out the Islands. 

The trouble with mpny right-minded Americans is 
that they refuse to take notice of what we /^P 1 ™ 3 
say. Because they have lived in the Islanas for a 
short or long oeriod of time, they feel that they 
know an about' the Filipinos when they really donM; 
know anything or know very little about them. And 
If hey 7 would ask themselves how they have acquired 
their alleged knowledge of the Islanders they will 
fiS that theirs is but second-hand information, no 
matter how long they have lived in the islands. Be- 
cause ierican\esidents in the Philippines do not 
mingle intimately with the people especially if they 
are menoccupying high positions in the government 
in the church, whether protestant or catholic, or in 
business. 

If you want to know how we feel and what we think, 
vou must take our words' for it. You cannot learn it 
in any other way. Do not always attribute to us self- 
ish motives. 



- 7 - 



The Philippine Assembly, the only national re- 
presentative -body of the Archipelago, has several 
times peiti toned Congress to grant the islands inde- 
pendence. Every municipality in the Islands has done 
the sane thing. The election of President Wilson was 
celebrated as no other event has ever been clebrated 
by the Filipinos, simply because they understood the 
coming into power of the Democratic Party as meaning 
the fulfilment of the other policy proposed for the 
Islands, to which I have referred, viz: the recogni- 
tion of their national independence. 

And if this policy is put into practicw with the 
same earnestness as the other policy of material de- 
velopment has been tried, an era of good will, of con- 
fidence, of live, will immediately start among the. Fi- 
lipinos toward the United States and the Americans in 
the Philippines. And this policy should be at once 
carried out for our benefit as much as for yours. What 
a disappointment for us if, God forbid the Present 
administration should fail to redeem its platform pledge 
with re-ard to the Island*! Where then shall we turn 
our> faith?- But we have no doubta of the purpose of 
this Government. We have absolute faith in the man 
at its head. 

We are apprehensive, however, of the final out- 
come, because we see a very strong and combined cam- 
paign being made interested parties to create a 
public opinion in this country adverse to Philippine 
independence. Since the triump of the Democratic 
party, all sorts of influences are being brought to 
bear upon the powers that be to disuade them from 
keeping faith with their party promises. American 
papers in the Islands last year printed editorials 
ur^inp every American residing therein to write to 
his parents^ relatives and friends at home, asking 
them to appeal to their respective representatives in 
Congress to vote against Independence. Speaking of 
lobbyists, the lobby on the tariff is a joke as com- 
pared with that lobby against independence. Since 
the election of President Wilson, especially since 
he expressed his hope of depriving yourselves of the 
Philippines as your frontier, the newspapers and ma- 
pazines have been loaded with literature ^ misrepre- 
tenting and abusing the Filipinos, describing them 
as uncivilized people with all human vices wi tnout 
compensat ng virtues and foretelling a state of ge- 
neral anarchy in the islands in the event of indepen- 
dence. 1 have said on different occasions almost 
everything that there is to be said on this subject 
and it Is i not worth our while to discuss it. ttie Fi- 
lipinos are satisfied that they have given amply 
proofs of their capecity to run their af lairs. They 
are convinced that the facts when i partially exam- 
ined speak very loud of their fitness to govern- them- 
selves. They know that, while they are not any bet- 
ter neither are they any worse than the other inha- 
bitants of the globe, I merely wish to remark that 



8 



it is with profound sorrow that I have seen so ma- 
lign a campaign against independence carried out, 
because it only embitters the Filipinos and affords 
no advantage to anybody. How can the Filipinos help 
resenting such unwarranted attack upon them? I sin- 
cerely deplore the fact that the immense majority of 
Americans interested in the Philippines should believe 
thing in their power to defeat the aspirations of 
the Filipinos. 

There is really only one class of Americans in 
the Islands whose personal well -being may be jeopar- 
dized by the granting of Philippine independence: 
there are the employees of the Philippine Government: 
but even these, they will not necessarily be all af- 
fected, becau s e an independent Philippine Government 
may find it convenient to retain their services: the 
school teachers, for instance, engineers and other 
technical employees may be needed for sometime yet as 
they were needed in Japan for many years. As to the 
other who have to be dismissed because Filipinos can 
take their peaces there can be found some way of pro- 
tecting their interests when they leave the service • 
The other Americans, priests, missionaries, ministers 
or business men have no real reason to fear that their 
respective conditions will suffer in the 1 ast by the 
adoption of a policy frankly looking toward early in- 
dependence* Why should the American priest, minis- 
ter or missionary need the backing of his Government 
to make converts to his church in the Philippine Is- 
lands? Why should an American merchant need the pre- 
sence of his flat to do business with us? 

Their opposition is ill-advised. The success 
of their respective undertakings requires the good 
will of the Filipino people, and they are rapidly 
alienating them with their well-lpiown attitude. 

Let me utter a word of friendly caution, '^his 
Society is now composed of those who are interested 
in the Islands in several capacities, and its avowed 
purpose is "to create a more sympathetic understanding 
between the Filipinos and the American people. If as 
individuals .you wish to succeed in your enterprise 
in the Islands or as an organization you propose to 
accomplish your proclaimed purpose, do not allow 
yourselves, individually 6r through this organization 
to partake directly or indirectly in this-.campaijgn of 
misrepresentation and abuse of the Filipino people. 
It is not only your patriotic duty but it will also 
be your profit to give the American people a true con- 
ception of the Filipinos, so that the day of final ad- 
justment of our mutual interests and rights may no 
longer be deferred* 

Be sure that American enterprises in the Islands, 
whether philanthropic, religious or commercial can 
succeed only on the basis of just treatment of the 
Filipinos by this Government. And just treatment to 



- 9 - 

us means "but one thing: the recognition that we have 
as much right as Cuba and as the United States has 
to independent national existence. 

Governor -General Taft, in a speech made in 1903 
before the Union Reading College at Manila said: 

"The American trade in these islands-and by 
. that 1 mean the demand of Americans for goods and 
supplies-can never exceed that of 20,000 people in 
addition to the soldiers- who may be here. The demand 
of the Filipino people will be a demand, when created 
and encouraged, of seven and one-half million persons. 
The only hope, the only possible source, of real busi- 
ness and of real trade that can be dignified by the 
name, which the United State s or any of our merchants, 
whether living in the United States or in these is- 
lands, can have is with the Filipino people, x x x 
It that be true, does it need a business man to tell- 
may not a laymen say with the utmost confidence - that 
a policy which embitters and renders hostile a whole 
people to the American merchants in these islands 
must necessarily defeat all hopes of increasing the 
American busiinsss here?" 

This is but a commonplace tru h. if it has not 
been verified as yet, it is not only due to the pa- 
tience and self-control of the Filipinos, which is 
almost unlimited, but because in spite of what ha3 been 
said and done, to offend them, they have not lost 
their faith in the American people. The truth of $r. 
Taft's quoted words has not been rpove^. becua se the 
- ilipino's hoped to stir up the sense of justice of 
the American people in their favor. T hey have co- 
operated with* the government; they have welcomed Ame- 
rican priests and missionaries, they have worked for 
and transacted business with American capitalists, 
because they thought that by so doing they were giving 
proofs of their capabilities as a nation and would 
thus convince the American people that they should 
be allowed to govern themselves. 

Their ambition to have a national existence has 
been the overwhelming force that make them strive to 
acquire education, to better their sanitation, to 
increase and acctimulate wealth and raise their stand- 
ard of living. Thi3 same force has been the magic 
and secret cause that made possible the work of three - 
generations done in a single decade. Do not allow 
the present administration to carry out its avowed 
policy of granting Philippine independence; disappoint 
in this manner the Filipino peopoej let them know that 
no one of the living will see their country free and 
you will kill them as a body politic. The|r enthu- 
siasm for advancement will die out. They will not do 
as much business; for what is the use of wealth if we 
cannot look at our fellowmen as equal to equal? Their 
children will lose the eager interest for learning 
they now have; for what is the use of knowing the 



- 10 - 



rights of man and of people if you cannot enjoy them? 
An educated man is more unhappy if he is not free 
than an ignorant man under the same conditions. But 
let U3 have independence and our progress will receive 
the greatest impulse. 

Conditions ? You may impose what you will, for 
the granting of that boon* There is nothing that we 
are not prepared to do or give to accomplish our na- 
tional mabition. Do you want to make the Philippines 
the scene of your religious activities? You will be 
perfectly welcome to' do so. We. shall guarantee full 
protection to your priests and ministers. Do you want 
our market for your goods and do you wish to use it as 
your base of supply for your Oriental trade? We shall 
give you every facility you need. Do you want to de- 
velop our natural resources? We shall open to you 
our mines and our forests, and shall give you our labor. 
-It is not better for you to deal with us as friends in 
whatever field we may meet? 

we can be £*iedds only, if we are not your 
subjects. There can be no friendship between the ru- 
ler and the ruled. There can be no friendship unless 
there is mutual respect. - And you can not respect us, 
while we are treated as your wards. These are no per- 
functory words. Every American familiar with condi- 
tions in the Philippine Islands knows' with what hard- 
ly concealed contempt the natives are treated by the 
American there. The attitude of superiority, which 
is natural in an Anglo- Saxon is augmented by the 
feeling of political mastery which necessarily is felt 
by col nial administrators. And this is, of course, 
offensive to the Filipinos, and it is an offense that 
reaches the inner-most of a man's soul. This evil 
can only be remedied by the recognition of the right 
of the Filipinos to be free from all foreign rule. 

My closing words, therefore, are: If you w ant 
to have a good market in the Philippines; if you want 
to exercise there the influence of your ministers 
and priests; if you v/ant your institutions admired; 
if you want to gain our love-there is only one poli- 
cy that can accomplish this-that of immediately taking 
the steps for the speedy granting of Philippine inde- 
pendence. 



Lc/ 



- Ill 



SPEECH OF HON. MANUEL QUEZON, 
Resident Commissioner from the Philippines 
■before the U. S. Senate Committee 
on the Philippines, January 1914. ' 



fThe preamble must remain in the bill if it is 
desired by this Government in providing a new orga- 
nic law for the Philippine Islands to have the lo- 
yal cooperation of the Filipino people in the gov- 
ernment created by that law. In the relations 
among peoples, as well as among individuals, the 
basis of cooperation is confidence, and confidence 
can be duly had when promises are kept in good 
faith. No matter what might be said to the contra- 
ry, it is a fact that the Filipinos are positively 
convinced that they have been repeatedly and con- 
sistently assured hy high executive officials of 
the United States that the ultimate purpose of the 
American people in the Philippine Islands is to 
grant them independence. To be sure, Mr. Taft has 
never failed, as was the case with Ex-President 
Roosevelt, when they spoke of ultimate independence 
for the Philippine to add that when the tine came 
when the Filipinos were fit to decide for themsel- 
ves whether they want independence or not, they 
might find it ti their interest to establish "between 
themselves and the United States such a bond as 
exist between Canada and England, in which case in- 
dependence should not be granted. I noticed that in 
his testimony ex-President Taft stated that he made 
no promise of independence to the Filipino people. 
Not to mention others I shall refer the committee 
to the special report of Mr. Taft, as Secretary of 
War, to the President of the United States, written 
when he came back from the Philippines to inaugura- 
te the Philippine Assembly. In that report he con- 
cretely stated that many Filipinos were anxious to 
find out what the policy of the United States affect 
ing the Filipinos should he, and this is his answer: 

"There are in the Philippines many who wish 
that the Government shall declare a definite policy 
in respect to the islands, so, that they may know 
wfrafcLthat policy is. 1 do not see how nay more defi 
nite policy can be declared than was declared by 
President McKinley in his instructions to Secreta- 
ry Hoot for the guidance of the Philippine Commis- 
sion, which was incorporated into law by the orga- 
nic act of the Philippine Government, adopted July 
1, 1902. That policy is declared to be tte exten- 
sion of self-government to the Philippine Islands 
by gradual 3teps from time to time as the people of 
the "islands shall show themselves fit to receive 
the additional responsibility, x x x x It neces- 
sarily involves in its ultimate conclusion as the 
toward self-government become greater and greater 



i 



- 2 - 

the ultimate independence of the island." 
A CLEAR PLEDGE. 

Isn't this language clear enough'? Perhaps we 
do Hot understand English well, but the construct- 
ion we place upon that language is that independen- 
ce shall he granted to us as the gradual extension 
of self-government reaches its limit. Indeed it 
was not even necessary for Mr. Taft to say so ex- 
plicity, as he does, since the natural outcome of 
your policy in the Philippine Islands, inaugurated 
the Philippines. Were it not for the fact that 
there are Americans, especially in the Philippines, 
who claim now that we should never he and shall not 
be necessary for this Congress, in enacting this 
bill, to state that it is the purpose of the United 
States to grant independence to the islands, What 
have you been doing in the Philippines? You have 
been educating the people; you are giving them educa- 
tion; and in your schools you are teaching them in- 
dividual and political liberty. Together with this 
education you gave them autonomy, first in the mu- 
nicipalities and later in the Provinces; then you 
created an assembly, and now they control the legis- 
lature, because they have a majority in the commis- 
sion. If you are going to be consistent, there must 
come the day vAien, in the gradual advance of this po- 
licy you will reach the point where all govermental 
powers will be placed in their hands; and since it 
is inconceivable that when they have assumed full 
control of that government, you would still prefer 
to retain cover eignty over them, with the responsi- 
bility to protect them from foreign aggression with- 
out any authority, the logical conclusion is that 
policy, which has been followed so far, will 
naturally lead to Independence. 

You might say, what, then, is the use of decla- 
ring in this preamble that it is the purpose of 
the United States to grant Philippine independence 
if that outcome is the logical conclusion of your 
present policy'? The trouble is that there are now 
Americans who say that you should never give the 
Philippines their independence, and in view of this 
fact, if you should strike out the preamble, we shall 
be forced to believe that you have done so, because 
you do not propose to grant us independence; that, 
while you have started a policy tlat naturally would 
lead to independence, you have now changed your opi- 
nion at the behest of t he American and other foreign 
business men in the Philippine islands, because tho- 
se are the interests that come to you and tell you: 
"We do not want you to leave the Philippines." 



MEANING OF PUEAKBLE. 



The fair and sensible interpretation of that 
preamble, which is the interpretation that the Fill- 



3 



pino people will give to it, is this: that it is 
purpose of the United States to grant to the Phi- 
lippines their independence, not when the Filipi- 
nos believe that they are ready for independence - 
-be cause they have believed that all the time, and 
if their opinion on the subject were to be the fi- 
nal say this would not have been the bill before 
the Congress at this time, it would have been an 
immediate independence bill; but when in the opi- 
nion of the Congress we have conducted the govern- 
ment that you provide in this bill in a way that 
will justify the reasonable presumption that we 
shall establish and maintain a fairly decent gov- 
ernment, a government that would keep order and 
offer protection to the rights of the people. 

I am very anxious to see this bill enacted 
this session, and so are my people. After three 
years of service in Congress, I have reason to 
fear that if you begin amending this bill now it 
wll"> not become law at this time. In the H 0 use 
of Representatives this bill went through wxth a 
great majority - five to one- but those in the 
House who are opposed to this or any other pream- 
ble containing some premise for Philippine iniepen- 
dence would fight this bill when it returns to the 
House from the conference committee, a procedure 
that must take place if the Senate amend the pre- 
amble. This is a short session. The appropriation 
bills are in the way, and it seems to me practica- 
lly impossible to secure the passage of the bill 
should there be important amendments thereto. So 
X prefer this pre arable and this bill, with its 
alight defects, to any change in the legislation 
whatever. After all, perhaps, from the informa- 
tion that this committee has in its possession to- 
day, you can not be more definite in expressing 
your Philippine policy than this -preamble is. 

I am the last nan to charge insincerity to 
the American people. The first speech 1 deliver- 
ed upon the floor of the House was in acknowledg- 
ment of the high purposes of the American people 
in the Philippine Islands, and I know that my 
peonle do not charge the American people with in- 
sincerity in dealing with the Philippines, lhat 
would be a very serious and unfounded charge, and 
it would speak very poorly of our sense of grati- 
tude. Mr. Taft himself paid the other day a very 
- appropriate compliment to the sense of gratitude 
of the Filipinos when he spoke of those poor men 
who had been in jail, and the first thing they 
did upon their liberation was to send a modest pre- 
sent to Mr. Taft to 3how their appreciation of his 
intervention in the preparation of the writ of ha- 
beas corpus. Gratitude is one of the char at eris- 
tics of the Filipino people. Without charging the 
American people at large with insincerity, a Fili- 
pino may well believe that unle33 tie does every- 
thing in his power to secure a congressional dec- 
laration regarding Philippines independence the 
day may come when the purpose of the American people 



- 4 - 

may not "be carried out. The Philippines are 10, 
noo,000 miles away from the United States, . . 
and the American people have no active interest 
in them. I have crossed this continent from 
one end to the other; I have delivered public ad- 
dresses, and I have talked with the people; and 
I am glad to say that everywhere I went I have 
found that the sentiment of ishis country has 
been favorable to Philippine independence. It 
has really impressed me deeply to see that the 
consensus of opinion in the United States is to 
do evervthing to help the Philippines. But with 
it all/ real, active interest in Philippine af- 
fairs there is none. Ifow, how is legislation 
enacted in self-governing countries like the Uni- 
ted States? Through the pressure of public opi- 
nion. Since there is not and there will never 
be a strong pressure of puhlic opinion in regard 
to Philippine legislation, a few Americans voicing 
their individual sentiments may defeat legislation 
for us. 

If we let things go for years and years with- 
out a fixed policy expressly declared by ■ the Con- 
gress as to vhat is going to be done in the Philip- 
pines- the purpose of the American people, which 
in my opinion is at present to grant Philippine in- 
dependence, may he defeated hy those who want to 
keep the islands, simply because there isnot 
enough interest among the general public in Philip- 
pine affairs. That is the cause of our anxiety. 

EII£ JUSTIFIED. 

As to the bill itself, whether the Filipino 
people are ready for immediate independence or 
not the enactment of this bill is justified by 
the fact- and in this case very much more litera- 
lly than in the case of the pre arable- that the an- 
nounced policy of MP. Taft and Mr. Roosevelt is 
the gradual extension of self-government to the Fi- 
lipino people. We have had an assembly since 
1007. We think the assembly has done well. And we 
believe that the time in now ripe to take another step 
namely, the election of the Senate. I have noti- 
ced that criticisms have been made here of_some 
laws enacted by the Philippine Assemoly, I do not 
suppose it is necessary for me to say, speaking 
before Senators of the United States, that the ad- 
verse iudgnent of anybody upon legislation is not 
always conclusive. No ... . so-called party 
measures are ever enacted by the Congress without 
Q eing denounced as unwise legislation. So i shall 
iiot undertake to answer those criticisms of our le- 
gislative actions except by the statement that I 
hope the merit of those criticisms will be careful- 
ly examined. 

To me t his preamble as it is only means one 
thing, and that is that it is an assurance that it 
is the purpose of the American people to give the 



t 



- 5 - 

Philippines independence, when conditions in the 
islands are such that you may reasonably expect 
that we shall be able to establish a stable gov- 
ernment. And that general announcement can be 
made now, because it implies another legislative 
steo before independence is granted* Of course, 
there is a possible discussion as to what the 
word stable government means, but even if you 
use the words of Mr* Taft - that is to say, that 
you will give to the Filipino people their inde- 
pendence when they are capable of self-government 
- that language itself is subject to discussion. 
Any language used, unless it be a fixed date, 
which you say you can not now determine, is sub- 
ject to discussion. But I am trying to explain 
what construction will be placed by the Filipinos 
upon this preamble and I say that it is a declara- 
tion that you intend to give us some day our inde- 
pendence; a declaration made solemnly and in good 
faith. As to the actual granting of that indepen- 
dence we know that it will not depend upon the 
noise that we Filipinos may make, tout upon the facts 
that we may present to you in favor of our conten- 
tion that the time has arrived when we shall be gi- 
ven independence. 

VIEWS OF MR. R003ELVELT. 

I/It?* Roosevelt says that the United states, 
when it does p;rant Philippine independence, should 
depart entirely from the islands and retain no res- 
ponsibility whatever for the Philippines, I have 
heard it stated by several gentlemen that Mien the 
Filipinos speak of independence they mean by that 
they want to be allowed to do in the Philippines as 
they please, while the United States Navy is in 
the harbor of Manila keeping foreign nations from 
coming in, Mr. Chairman, in fairness to the Filipi- 
no people, I want to say that we do not think of 
such a thing as that, we never have thought of it. 
It is true that many of us have been advocating the 
neutralization of the islands as the mean of guaran- 
teeing Philippine independence, but we have never 
thought of making such neutralization a condition 
sine qua non of our independence* In other words, 
our independence is not to depend upon a neutrali- 
zation treaty, and much less tipon any protection 
from the United States* . Ytfe understand that if we 
want independence we must assume its burdens. We 
must take the risk and the responsibilities, We 
are not the first people to have taken the risk of 
being independent, and if we really prize freedom* 
as we do, we should be glad and courageous enough to 
face the consequences of the situation. 

We do not want any protectorate if we get in- 
dependence. You would not want it, because it 
would be unfair and unjust to the United States* 
and we would not, because protection can never be 
afforded without impairment of the absolute free- 



- 6 - 



dom of the protected States, and, we are more concern- 
ed about the substance of freedom than about the world 
independence. If we are going to have independence, 
we want real independence and not merely nominal in- 
dependence. 

The Filipinos can not be made to fight one 
against the other. One man may be purchased <ffr 
fifty men, perhaps. That is an easy thing to do 
anywhere. The Philippines are not free from bad 
men, men who have no notion of patriotism or any- 
thing of that kind; but no intrigues can ever do 
anything in the Philippines that would cause se- 
rious quarrel between a large portion of the popu- 
lation and another. I know there are people who 
would want to believe that there is no sense of 
solidarity, no community of interest among the Fi- 
lipinos; that they are jaelous of one another; 
that they are not bound by any common tie. You 
have been told that there is no such thing as Fi- 
lipino people. Such statements as these are, at 
best, evidences of ignorance on the part of those 
who style themselves experts in Philippine affairs. 

This bill, outside of the preamble, may be di- 
vided into two rjarts. The first parf* that which 
grants new npowers to the Philippine government, and 
the second part that which confers the old powers 
as well as these new powers of that government lar- 
gely upon the Filipino people themselves. 

It seems that all those who have appeared be- 
fore the committee have agreed that the provisions 
of the bill granting more powers to the Philippine 
povernment are wise; therefore X shall not take up 
the time of the committee in showing why these new 
powers should be granted. It just want to say this 
Such in connection with this subject: contrary to 
the common impression in the United States, our ad- 
vance in economic affairs has not been as great as 
our advance in education and, we might say, ^ po- 
litical affairs. While the figures of our exports 
tnd imports have more than doubled during American 
regime, they are misleading in that ^he production 
of the country has by no means increased proportio- 
nately. The rice, as well as the sugar, that we 
used to produce in Spanish times was more than we 
produce today. To be sure, we get more money for 
our sugar now than we got then, simply because we 
have e better market, and this accounts in part 
for the difference in the total amount of money 
that comes to the Philippine Islands from our ex- 
ports. Copra, it is true has increased both in qua- 
lity and in price. Copra is the dried meat of the 
coconut. But ouij production of copra has increased 
not because of any special help rendered by the Gov- 
ernment but because of the increase of coconut plan- 
tations, which was due to the better price of that 
article, resulting from new discoveries of its many 
applications. 



- 7 - 



LACK OP ECONOMIC POWER. 

The reason why the Philippine government has 
been unable to help the economic development of 
the country is that it did not have the necessary 
powers to do. so. It did not have the power to re- 
gulate the tariff or the use of the natural re- 
sources. In the case of public lands, iweldo not 
believe in selling these lands in large tracts. 
This is the unanimous opinion among us Filipino s- 
-tbat our public domain should be kept for the peo- 
ple - not only the people of today, but the peo- 
ple of tomorrow e and that means that we shoiild 
not alienate or sell those lands in large tracts 
to corporations or indidivuals, whether foreigners 
or natives. But, at the same time, we can not 
overlook the fact that in order to introduce in 
the Philippine Islands new methods of agricultural ma- 
re, for instance, we need large parcels of land 
devoted to agriculture if money Is to be spend pro- 
fitably in the acquisition of new agricultural ma- 
chinery. Therefore it would ameliorate the agricul- 
tural situation of the country if we could lease 
government lands in larger tracts for a certain pe- 
riod of time than can be done now under the organic 
act. 

I believe that to provide in this bill the crea- 
tion cf a senate and deprive it of the power of con- 
firmation knowing, as we know in the Philippines, 
that the Senate here has the power to confirm appoint- 
ments, would only be taken as evidence that there 
is of confidence in the good judgment of the Philip- 
pine Senate that is to be created, an unnecessary 
and unjustified offense to this new body. This is 
itself may induce the senate to try to interfere, 
anyway, with the appointments of the governor. True, 
the senate would not have the right to confirm the 
appointments, but It has the right to partake in 
the legislation affecting appropriations, and it 
may indirectly thus place the governor in a position 
where he had to listen to the will of the senate 
about his appointments. If I may put it in diffe- 
rent words, suppose you create this Philippine Legis- 
lature, composed of a senate and house of represen- 
tatives, and the governor has the power to appoint 
the officers of the Philippine Government regardless 
of the santet. If the Govenor General appointed a 
man who was not agreeable to the sante, all that the 
senate would have to do, would be to abolish in the 
appropriation bill the position of that man. Now, 
of course' the govennor would veto that appropria- 
tion bill, as he has the power to veto it, and tills 
would provoke friction. There is every reason to 
have confidence in the Philippine Senate in that 
it would exercise that power wisely. My only fear 
Is that the senate might not exercise as freely its 
power of confirmation as the Senate of the United 
States does, because they will be afraid in case 
they disapprove of an appointment, that their ac- 
tion will be used as an argument to show that they 
are incapable of governing themselves," 



Lc/ 



SBEECH DELIVERED IN THE 
AMERICAN CONGRESS BY 
MANUEL L. QUEZON ON OCT- 
OBER 2, 1914. 



Mr. QUEZON. Mr. Chairman, X wish to say a few 
words in behalf of Geh. Aguinaldo. I was at one ti- 
me an officer in the Philippine Army. I was little 
more than a' boy then. I left college in response to 
the call of my country to fight under her flag. I 
foun-ht two years during the Philippine revolution. 
It was a horrible war, as all wars are. The Phil- 
ionine Army was scarcely armed, clothed and fed, and 
it was feeing one of the best-equipped, best drilled 
most gallant" armies of the world. I took part in 
manv a battle. For several months I was on the 
staff of Gen. Aguinaldo, then President of the Phil- 
ippine Republic and comanding general of its army. 
Of course I had occasion to know Gen. Aguinaldo well 
and intimately, and from personal observation 1 
say that he is a man of high character and patrio- 
tism. 

The revolution against Spain was the outcome 
of a long peaceful campaign carried on, not preci- 
sely for'independence, but to secure from tne 
Spain Crown a more liberal government in the 
Philippine Islands. The revolution started on 
1396 and in 1897 the Spanish governor general 
at Uanila sought to secure peace by entering 
into ah agreement with the Filipino leaders of 
the rebellion. It was agreed that the demands 
for governmental reforms should be granted and 
that £800,000 in Mexican money, which was then 
the currency of the Philippine islands, should 
be <*iven to the revolutionists, as indemnity 
for'the damages done to them and their families 
on account of that war, and as a payment for 
the ™na that they surrendered, and - as it was 
agretd^hey should leave the Philippine Islands - 
also as a means of providing for their support 
and maintenance abroad. In view of the fact 
that the .Spanish Government had agreed to grant 
all the liberal reforms asked for by the *ilipi- 
nos before the revolution, started no one can 
Question the right, may the duty, of trie l ill- 
pino revolutionists to end a contest which was 
causing so much lose of life and property to our 
cou^t^y, and which evidently, at that time could 
not accomplish more than what Spain had prlmosed 
to concede. Aguinaldo, therefore, and his fol- 
lowers agreed to leace their country arid not to 
return to the land that they had wished to live 
and die in. But they were willing to make ohxs 
sacrifice, and to go far from their beloved ones, 
so that their people might receive and enjoy in 
Deace the liberal reforms that were promised 
them If thene Filipinos exiles, who had fought 
for their country, and who were to be denied the 
right to live in it, had in fact used the money 
paid them by the Spanish Government for their own 
purposes, can anyone question their right to do 
so? Could they not properly have divided this 
money among themselves, that they might conforta- 
bly live thereon? 



I have no doubt that if the Filipinos people 



2 - 



had been asked to vote on the question whether of 
not these men should receive that money, they would 
have decided that it be given to them. Yet Aguinal- 
do and his companions did not make such a use of 
the fund s placed in their hands. They deposited 
the money paid to them - which never reached the 
total sum promised - in the bank and only used 
the interest, They live in Hongkong in almost com- 
plete poverty. Why did they do this? Because 
they did not know whether Spain would or would not 
actually comply with the agreement. They were accus 
tomed to see promises broken by that Government, 
and" therefore they kept the fund intact for patrio- 
tic purposes, They decided that if Spain, after 
they had left the Philippines should fail to grant 
to the people of the Philippine Islands the liberal 
reforms that were promised, they would as was their 
right, use the money to buy guns, and would by 
force compel the Spanish Government, that had betra- 
yed the$i, to comply with the agreement. 

Mr. HUMPHREY of Washington, Will the gen- 
tleman yield? 

Hr. QUEZON* With pleasure. 

Mr. HUMPHREY of Washington. X just wish 
to ask a question for information. ' Wh:; was it 
considered that it was necessary for Aguinaldo 
and his associates to leave the Philippine Is- 

land Mr. QUEZON. Because the Spanish Government 
feared that if they remained in the Philippines 
actually used to buy guns. 

THE CHAIRMAN. The tin e of the gentleman 
from the Philippine islands has expired. 

Mr. CRISP. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous 
conseW'that the gentleman be allowed five mi- 
nutes more. 

THE CHAIRMAN. The gentleman from Georgia 
asks unanimous eonsent that the gentleman from 
the Philippines have five minutes more, is there 
objection? 

Mr. .MANN . Reserving the right to object, I 
would like to ask the gentleman from Virginia how 
late he expects to run this evening 1 ? 

Mr. JONES. Not much after 5 o'clock, I 
think* 

THE CHAIRMAN. Is there objection to the re- 
quest of the gentleman from Georgia? 
There was no objection. 

Mr. QUEZON. I was saying, Mr. Chairman, that 
this money, when Spain did not amply with her 
part of the bargain, when she refused to intro- 
duce in the Philippines those reforms that were 
asked, was used by Aguinaldo to buy guns, and with 
these 'guns we helped the United 3tates in prosecu- 
ting her war with Spain. Our aim in that v/ar is 
well known, and I shall not discuss it. But I 
want to say that we had retaken every town garri- 
soned by the Spanish, with the exception of Mani- 
la, which we were besieging, so that when the 
United States sent her troops there all she needed 
was a few thousands men, and with those few thou- 
sand men she compelled the surrender of the garri- 
son of Manila. 



— 3 — 



I went to say another word about Gen* Agui- 
naldo* As I said before, I know him personally. 
I had served under him v/hen I was little more 
than a boy. Gentlemen, Aguinaldo at one time 
wielded great power in the Philippines* During 
the revolution, of course, he was the principal 
military chief , with the ppwers of a dictator, 
just as the President of .the United States would 
be a dictator feere in case of war* He had all 
power, both civil and military, in his hands dur- 
ing the war, he had in his pocket the key to the 
treasury of the then independent Philippine govern- 
ment, including both that raised by taxation and 
that received from contributions* He had the con- 
fidence of the people? Wo body asked him what 
he was doing with the money* The time came 
when he was captured by Gen* Puna ton. He had 
then been exercising his authority for more 
than two years, but when the war v/aa over Agui- 
naldo was as poor as he v/as when the war star- 
ted (Applause on the Democratic side.) 

Ur. Chairman, I waat the gentleman on 
this floor to bear in mind this fact; I do 
not wish to make invidious comparisons with 
others, but I want to ask you how many re- 
volutionary chiefs in other parts of the 
world who had the opportunity would have 
done what Aguinaldo** did? How many would 
have been willing to go back to their homes 
as poor as ever after having had in their 
possession so much money that they could 
have appropriated without question? Aguinal- 
do is poor to-day. He is a simple farmer. 
Aguinaldo has not even accepted any position 
from the American Government, although it v/as 
ready to give him a good position. He has 
not even gone into politics. He has not iried 
to gain political preferment, even through the 
popular vote. 

Why? He wanted to show the world that he 
fought for his country, not because of desire 
of personal profit* or power, but our of patrio- 
tism, and that when he could not fight any 
longer he could go to hi 3 home and lead a pea- 
ceful and modest life, the life of a good citi- 
zen, working upon his farm, as he is doing now, 
Thus Aguinaldo has demostrated that the Filipi- 
nos who had known how to fight know likewise 
how to work in time of peace. I need say no more. 
(Applause on the Democratic side. ) 



Lc/ 




- V 



PART OF AN ADDRESS DELIVERED 
BY HON. MANUEL L» QUEZON, 
BEFORE THE LAKE MO HONK CONFERENCE 
OCTOBER 15, 1914. 



Commissioner Quezon spoke in part as follows: 

I consider it a great privilege to "be here to- 
night and to partake as one of the speaker in the 
proceedings of this conference. 

Inasmuch as this is the first time in many years 
that a duly authorized spokesman of the Filipino peo- 
ple addresses you, it is appropriate that he should 
voice the heartfelt sense of gratitude that the people 
of the Philippine Islands entertain for that great 
would, that' noble spirit, the late Mr. Smiley, \±tose 
high regard for our welfare was shown by the fact 
that he~ selected as one of the important topics of 
this conference the problem confronting the United 
States in our far distant country. 

I shall offer you tonight an exception to that 
rule, for ray topic will be the administration of our 
present povernor general. Governor -General Harrison 
has been 'now in the Philippine Islands one full year 
and he has accomplished, something that had been done 
by none of his predecessors in anything like So full 
a measure - he has gained for himself and for the 
nation he represents the confidence and good will of 
the Filipino people. (Applause). Nevertheless the 
policies of Governor Harrison have been criticised 
and denounced, notwithstanding that those very poli- 
cies have for the first time since the American occu- 
pation of the islands produced better understanding, 
more kindly appreciation on the part of the United 
States in assuming sovereignty over the archipielago. 
Why should the governor be criticised on this score? 
Can it be the desire of the American people to pre- 
vent the Filipinos from becoming reconciled to their 
presence? Is It not the paramount duty of every Ame- 
rican in the Islands <Bo do his share to bring about 
more cordial relations between the inhabitants of 
that country and the Insular government? 

Governor Harrison did not go to the Philippines 
as a D e mocrat. He went as the representative of the 
American people; feeling as strongly as the most pa* 
triotic American could. feel that it was his duty to 
help in redeeming the pledges of his country, and 
that as -overnor -general it was his privilege no less 
than his' obligation to give the islands an adminis- 
tration that would be fo\mded on generosity, wisdom, 
gustice and the principles of self -gov ernment, The 
governor gave us an administration of that kind and 
he found a ready response on the part of the Filipino 
people. 



- 2 - 



Now, aa to the Jones bill. One important end 
is accomplished by this bill. It will settle in the 
only practical and possible way the controversy re- 
garding the capacity of the Filipino people for self- 
government. " The Bill is so framed that, while the 
Filipinos will have ample opportunity to demo str ate 
their wisdom and patriotism, the powers reserved to 
the TJnited States are sufficient to prevent, in case 
of .'a failure in this test, any serious harm to the 
people of the Islands themselves or to the United 
States. 

what I have said relates shiefly to the adminis- 
trative features of the bill. As to its preamble I 
have this to say: it is the one feature that ivith 
very few exceptions has incurred strong opposition 
from the Republican members of the House of Represen- 
tatives. Many reasons for this opposition were assign- 
ed. Some have called the preamble meaningless; all 
have asserted that it was not legally a part of the 
bill. If it be in fact meaningless, I see no reason 
why there should be serious objection to it. At the 
very worst, it would do not harm. Why not then let 
it stand since it is urgently desired by the Filipino 
people and it will make them happy*? Another form of 
opposition to the preamble was voiced by those who, 
while asserting that they believe In Philippine in- 
dependence, yet contend that the time has not arrived 
when the Filipino people should be granted indepen- 
dence. It is the opinion of those who expressed such 
views that the preamble is misleading because it holds 
out to the Filipinos a hope for early independence 
that will not be realized and will therefore cause 
disappointment and fflis satisfaction. For this reason 
they have said the preamble should be voted down. My 
answer to the proponents of this view is simple: The 
preamble does not promise either Immediate or remote 
independence. It set forth no definite date; it re- 
quires a condition upon whose fulfillment independence 
shall be granted, regardless of the time taken in 
bringing about such a condition. The preamble plain- 
ly states that this independence is to follow as soon 
as a stable government shall have been established. In 
the islands. The language is abundantly clear and no 
one who possesses any conception of government will 
be misled thereby. The Filipinos know what stability 
in government means. If the preamble be voted down, 
that fact in itself will cause the disappointment and 
discontent now feared by those who advocate the view 
X am discussing. They -can place but one construction 
upon such action on the part of Congress, namely, 
that the promise of independence made be every presi- 
dent of the United States from and Including Presi- 
dent McKInley to and including President Wilson has- 
been repudiated. No thing that could be done by the 
United States would have the, dreadful effect of des- 
troying the confidence of the Filipino people a3 would 
such repudiation. 

The Filipino people will be the more warranted 
in construing the defeat of the preamble as sure evi- 



- 3 



dence that the permanent annextlon of ^/^f^® 3 
as a colony of the United States is intended, by the 
?act that there had been several speakers on the Re- 
publican side of the House who during the discussion 

niloS Bill frankly advocated the policy of per- 
manent retention of the Philippine Islands. Notable 
anonr those who spoke to this purport is the leader 
of this minority himself, Mr. Mann. I need not tell 
vou the nature of Mr. Mann's suggestion, because his 
Leech was printed in every metropolitan newspaper 
an? was indorsed, so far as it referred to the per- 
manent retention of the islands, by the majority of 
the strongest journals of this country. You have 
doubtless read both Mr. Mann's speech and the news- 
paper comments thereon. 

Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Mann's policy ^ new, 
nrt is revolutionary from the standpoint of the 
African people. Aside from the fact that it vould 
reverse the Philippine independence P° ^P/J jf" 
ward by McKInley, continued by Roosevelt and Taft 
and reiterated by Wilson, it would cornmit the bnited 
States frankly to a policy of imperialism wholly in- 
concistent with the basic principle ?P°n *'^h this 
Republic is founded. But I shall not undertake to 
So into this aspect of Mann's policy, I am ad- 
dressing an audience of scientific, nonpartisan men 
asnd v/omin who have more knowledge on this point then 
I. You have all studied government in ^ *°£°ols 
and doubtless some of you, at least, have taught it. 
SSatTam interested in combatting from this platform 
is the illusion of Mr. Mann that you can repudiate 
tour early Pledge of independence by voting down the 
lrZJ>le to the° Jones Bill, and at the same time make 
autonomous government in so far as their domestic 
ffa™are S concerned, thereby weaning these people 
from their desire for independence. Ladies and gen 
tleSen, the Filipino people do want and do urge in- 
ni^nri Pnce of the United States now. I think they 
'w??ra?ways° £ and n ?orever want and urge ^def ndence. 
I tm however, dispassionate enough to admit a pos si 
biSty that x'may be wrong ^ this last Prediction 
and that Mr. Mann may be right. But if the Filipino 
people are ever to prefer American sovereignty to 
their own. as Mr. Mann forecasts, it will not oe ^nen 
the^rea^ble to the Jones Bill has been voted down, 
but/ on the contrary, only on condition that it shall 

le voted only the Bill. If ^VS5°tS e£ so mu?h 
Deonle that they shall have none of their so ^ucn 
ioSid independence they will the more °^ye f or =Lt. 
tt is another case of forbideen f ^t , lodi ej and 
gentlemen. (Laughter and applause. ) But /^ther, 
there is this other important reason, Hie PiXipino 
neonle are now on the road toward their freddom. You 

allowed them to take some first steps even at 
^I tSe when thSir subjugation by military force had 
iust been accomplished. The bill of rights is now as 
r^uch a S of Philippine citizenship. You have 



- 4 - 



given them an elective assembly and Mp* Mann proposes, 
that they be given more and larger governmental powers. 
The progress toward freedom never stops when once 
begun until it reaches its culmination. The Filipino 
people will never be satisfied with any concession 
from the United States short of their complet freedom 
as a people. Such being the case, they will not be 
satisfied until you shall have placed in their own 
hands the decisions whether or not they shall be po- 
litically independent from the United States. The 
theory that a nation may be dependent upon another 
and yet be free holds true only when mxoh dependence 
lias been brought about with the consent, and by the 
free accord of the dependency. No matter how much 
of individual liberty or of self-government in domes- 
tic affairs a people may have, that people if subject 
to another not by reason of its own will but by sheer 
power of the latter so that the local government they 
possess is merely a concession of the part of the 
sovereign, is not free in Tact or in theory. The Fi- 
lipino people can truly be free under American sover- 
eignty only if this nation shall say to themi "You 
may be an independent nation if you choose, or you 
may retain a political relationship with us, if you 
prefer. In either case you will have your own auto- 
nomous government with such a constitution as you 
yourself shall establish, and we shall claim no power 
to deprive you of either, the limitations of your 
autonomy being those only that are necessary for the 
exercise of our sovereignty in your international 
affairs." When the people of the Islands shall have 
obtained all those rights that belong to them by grace 
of God aa a nation and a people, they may decide to 
remain beneath the American flag and to prove Mr. Mann 
a true prophet, but never otherwise. 



Lc/ 



9 HI, - 



DELIVERED IN THE AMERICAN HOUSE OP 
REPRESENTATIVES 



December 29, 1914* 



Mr* Quezon: 

Mr. Chairman, as If the European wad did 
not afford enough sensational news, there have 
been sent during the past week toy newspaper 
correspondents at Manila or from some other 
source dispatches that must have put the 
nerves of many readers in this as well as ±n 
my own country to a, severe test. I refer to 
the current reports of an uprising among the 
Filipinos* 

It is my purpose to call the attention 
of the House and of the American people to 
the true nature and purpose of these reports* 
A review of them will furnish a fair idea of 
what the so-called revolt nov; annaunced real- 
ly is* <!n. December 18 the following telegram 
was printed in the ^ew York Herald and elsewhere. 



Ilanila, Thursday, 

"American and foreign business men here 
express the fear that the promises contained 
in tho Jones Bill providing for a measure of 
independence for the Philippines might lead to 
an uprising of the natives, u 

This dispatch is very significant, be- 
cause It* at once affords the means for an 
interpretation of the other dispatches. We 
are told, in effect, that in the opinion of 
the American and foreign business men in the 
Philippines there will be an insurrection there 
should the preamble of the Jones bill, which 
contains this promise of independence, be ap- 
proved by the Senate, where the bill is nov/ 
pending. Wio these American and foreign busi- 
ness men may be we are not told; why they fear 
an uprising of the natives should the islands 
be promo sed independence we are left to guess. 
Only one thing Is apparent from the dispatches 
- the Senate is advised to strike out the 
preamble of the Jones bill lest it produce a 
revolt among the natives. As to this I desire 
only to note that if there is one feature in 
the Jones bill that meets with practically uni- 
versal approval on the part of the Filipino 
people It is the preamble of the bill. Why, 
then, should they revolt if the Congress of the 
United States should satisfy their desired 
I do not suppose and the correspondent of the 
Herald or his informants - if he had any - 
will ever be able to ive U3 any adequate 
explanation of so absurb a conclusion* 

But let me continue: At the time this dis- 
patch was sent from Manila there was as yet 
no apparent sign of impending revolt; ther.e 
was only the assertion that revolt would <msuo 
upon the passage of the Jones bill, providad"^ 
it contained a promise of independence. At 
the very earliest this bill could not get thru 
the Senate before the month, of February, so 



- 2 - 



that we who had been forewarned of this Impen- 
ding outbreak could not look for the threatened 
trouble before that time, and then only in case the 

preamble had not been defeated in response to the 
suggestion contained in this dispatch* 

Alas I On December 21, just three days 

after the above-referred- to dispatch saw the 

light in this country, the New York Times 

published the following cablegram: 

Manila, December 20* 

"Soldiers arriving from Corregidor Is- 
land report that too companies of Scouts 
there have been disarmed and that American 
soldiers have been supplied with full ammu- 
nition • They allege that a plot has been 
discovered to free the prisoners and start an 
uprising* 

The military is silent, but the wildest 
rumors are current * n 

I* any other newspapers published this same 
story, some of them with such details that the 
War Department deemed it necessary to inquire 
of the Governor General what truth there may 
be in these dispatches* ♦Consequently the 
department sent to the Governor General the 
following cablepjram: 

"Special dispatch to New York 1A .raid, 
December 17* reports threatened revolt Fili- 
pinos* Special dispatch New York Times, 
.December 20 reports two companies Scouts on 
Uorregidor Island have been disarmed and that 
plot has been discovered to free prisoners 
and start an uprising." 

. To which the Governor General answered; 
Referring to telegram from your office 
of 21st instant, no foundation whatever known 
here for either report." 

It thus appears that neigher the dispatch 
to the New York Herald nor that printed by the 
New York Times had any foundation in fact* 
How could such a disregard for trtuh be pos- 
sibleV In the dispatch to the Tiroes we are 
given the number of companies that have been 
disarmed and the place where the attempted up- 
rising took place r and yet there was not even 
a shadow of foundation for the whole thing* 
But this is not the worst* After the American 
authorities at Llanila - the Governor General 
and the Commanding general - had officially 
denied that there had been any attempt on the 
part of the Scouts to make trouble, those who 
sent these messages to the newspapers I have 
quoted, instead of honestly acknowledging their 
misinformation, sought to make the American 
public believe that they told the truth, but 
that the -military authorities were concealing 
it, as can be seen from the following cablegram 
published in the New York Tribune of December 
24: 



- 3 - 



Manila, December 23, 



"Trustworthy but unofficial reports de- 
clare that Artemid Kicarte is in the Philip- 
pines directing the sedilionists. Tagalogs, 
it is stated, are drilling openly, and Cavite 
is a hotbed of revolutionists, Governor Gen- 
eral harrison is taking no action, but the 
military authorities are preparing for an out- 
break. The infantry at Manila are sleeping 
on their arms. It is denied by military of- 
ficers that they have discovered a plot among 
the Filipino "Scouts on Corregidor Island under 
Ricarte's direction, to liberate prisoners, 
seize the treasury; and send money to Hongkong 
to finance a Philippine revolt: The report 
however, is credited by others. The government 
has issued arms to civilians on Fratle and Ca- 
rabao Islands." 

This cable reiterates the alleged plot 
among the Filipino Scouts, and asserts that 
while it is denied by the military authorities, 
"the report is credited by others". Can any 
reasonable person fail tq recognize the un- 
fairness - may, the evident malice - of this 
di spatch? 

It is to be noted not only that in this 
latest report the story of a plot among the 
Scouts is reiterated, but that other more 
alarming news is given. "Artemio Uicarte," 
it is asserted "is in Manila directing the 
seditionists. The Tagalogs are drilling open- 
ly, and Cavite is a hotbed of revolutionists. 
Gov. Gen. Harrison is taking no action, but the 
military. authorities are preparing for an 
outbreak. The infantry at Manila are sleeping 
on their arms." 

Mr. Chairman, I must pause here for an 
instant to sound my most energetic protect 
against the infamous suggestion contained In 
this telegram, that Go. Gen. Harrison is 
-•uilty either of criminal negligence oi his 
duties or of disloyalty to his own Government 
@ the Government of which he is the official 
representative in the - insular administration. 
Such a suggestion as this should provoke the 
just indignation of every self-respecting 
American. Vihile I am a Filipino, and while 
Ss everybody knows, I advocate early with-_ 
drawal of America, sovereignty over the Phil- 
ippines, yet so long as the American flag is 
there I owe allegiance to that flag, and 
therefore I resent this cowardly and absolute- 
ly baseless aspersion upon the integrity of 
the man who represents this Nation in my 
country. 



_ 4 - 

Bdt the Www York Tribune is not the only 
newspaper which has been furnished such news 5 
On December 23 the New York Times submitted 
to the Secretary of* War the following cable- 
grain which had been received by it from Manila* 

"Riot guns are being distributed to Ame- 
rican civilians on Carabao and Fraile Islands, 
and 100 rounds, with full equipment, has been 
distributed to soldiers in Manila, Barrels 
supposed to contain cement were shipped to 
Corregidor and found to contain bolos. Two 
native scout officers and companies were dis- 
armed and confined in Correal dor. 

The plan was to free prisoners by a sud- 
den night attack, overpowering scout guard 
and capturing the island. The day was fixed 
for between Christmas and Mew Year* In the 
past few months there has been notable increase 
se-called boy scout organizations, composed 
mostly of grown men, drilling throughout 
Manila Provinces." 

Thereupon the Secretary of War, on Decem- 
ber 24, sent to the Gov. Ceneral the following 
cablegram: 

New York Tribune publishes cable to-day 
from Manila announcing preparations military 
to prevent carrying out plot followers of 
iUcarte for insurrection and disarmament two 
companies scouts at corregidor and armament 
civilians in the islands in I.ianila narbor. New 
York Tribune has cable as follows: 

"Riot o-uns are being distributed to 
American civilians on Carabao -Frail e Islands, 
and 100 rounds, with full equipment, has been 
distributed to soldiers in Lanila. Barrels 
supposed to contain cement were shpped to 
Corregidor and found to contain bolos. Two 
natives scout officers and companies were at fl- 
amed and confined on Corregidor. lhe pman 
was to free prisoners by a sudden nirht at- 
tack, overpowering scout guard and capturing 
the Island. The day was fixed for between 
Christmas and Hew Year. In the past few 
months there has been notable increase so- 
called boy scout organizations, ?^° a ?£ J^*" 
ly'of grown men, drilling throughout Manila 
Province. " 

New York Times says the above information 
was received on high authority. Publication 
of this was probably suppressed because ot 
strong statement of the Secretary of War to 
Washington representative of New York Times. 



The Secretary of War desires to know 
whether there is any foundation whatever 
for reports of this character, recently 
become frequent. 

,'hile the War Department was awaiting the 
answer of the Governor General practically 
every newspaper in the United States published 
on December 2G, the story that an outbreak had 
taken place in Manila on Christmas Eve* 

Let me read one of these stories: 

REVOLT PLOT IN THE PHILIPPINES WAS SERIOUS - 
10,000 FILIPINOS IN MANILA PLANNED TO ATTACK 
PORTS - OUTBREAKS IN THE PROVINCES. 

Manila, December 26* 

Sight Filipinos have been arrested on the 
charge of sedition as a result of an abortive 
rising in Manila and its environs Thursday 
night, Further arrests are probable. 

Prom Army sources it is leanred that a 
general warning was sent to all officers 
Thursday afternoon that fully 10,000 Filipinos 
in Manila alone were ready Tor a concerted 
attack on Port Santiago the Cuartel Espafia, 
the Cuartel Infanteria, and the medical depot. 

Military units were immediately prepared, 
and a street patrol was started at dusk. 

Constabulary agents who are members of 
the secret societies disclosed the plans 
for an uprising, thus enabling a force of con- 
stabulary and police to disperse gatherings 
at ^agumbayan, r aco, and Havotas, near ^alabob. 

SAILORS FIGHT WITK CHAIRS 

At Caloocan a squad of American sailors 
seized chairs when a force of ^ilipinon ap- 
proached a dance hall which they were gathered 
and, using the chairs as weapons, routed the 
Filipinos, of whom quite a number were injured. 

The rising was evidently poorly organized 
and lacked leaders. x t was composed mostly of 
persons implicitly trusting Artemio Ricarte, a 
revolutionary, who conducts a continual propa- 
ganda, from Hongkong, to which he was banished by 
American authorities 3ome time ago. 

Ricarte, it is said, advised that the anti- 
American attempt be made on Christmas Eve, when 
American officers would be celebrating the 
holiday.' 



Reports from the Province tell of minor 
risings and occasional violence, but details 
are lacking. 

SITUATION WELL UNDER CONTROL 

The situation to-day, from all appear- 
ances, and according to official statements 
is well under control* 

In more or less the same language this 
3tory was printed in many newspapers and was 
apparently taken very seriously by many edit- 
ors, since it called forth editorials point- 
ing out the unwisdom of enacting at this time 
any measure granting more self -govern ,ent to 
the Filipinos and looking : to .ward independence. 
This result is exactly what the authors of 
these dispatches have be-on trying to accomplish. 
In order to influence American public opinion 
against any liberal legislation for the Philip- 
pines they' told of uprisings said to be probable 
if such legislation should be written into the 
statute books; then, of a plot of scout soldiers, 
of the arming of civilians by military author- 
ities, and finally of an actual general revolt 
said to have occurred on Christmas Eve. 

I have already demonstrated that both the 
civil government and the Army headquarters 
have denied that any plot on the part of the 
scouts has been discovered, and that there had 
been any arming of civilians. Let me now ana- 
lize the character of t£is general outbreak, 
as disclosed by the story itself as I have 
read it. The dispatch says that "fully 10,000 
Filipinos in ■Manila alone were ready for a con- 
certed attack on /or 3 ntiago, the Cuartel de 
Espafia. the Cuartel de' Infanteria, and the 
medical depot". This sounds like a very serious 
uprising, does it not? . Teh thousand Filipinos 
ready for a concerted attack on all the garri- 
sons at Manila? And yet note the statement ol 
the paragraph immediately preceding, which" says: 
"Eight S'ilipinos have been arrested on the charge 
of sedition as a result of an abortive rising in 
-anila and its environs Thursday night. 
Eight Filipinos arrested! What became of the 
remaining 9,992 rebels? Does not the arrest of 
eight men point rather to some infraction of a 
municipal ordinance - a common occurrence any- 
where, especially on Christmas Eve - than to a 
general rebellion? 

Let us examine another paragraph: 

At Caloocan a squad of American sailors 
seized chairs when a force of Filipinos ap- 
proached a dance 'hall in which they were 



- 7 - 



gathered, and using the chairs as weapons 
routed the Filipinos, of whom quite a number 
were injured, j 

Mr. Chairman, how it is possible for any 
man with common sense to give serious credence 
to such news of revolt as this is beyond my 
comprehension. Think of it I Rebel picking 
out as their point of attack a dance hall 
and are met and repulsed with chairs by the 
dancers. The whole thing should be considered 
a joke, were it not for the serious consequences 
that stories of this kiitd might sooner or later 
bring about, unless the originators be unmask- 
ed. Do the writers of these stories realize 
that what they say is a reflection upon the 
Government of the United States ? What has 
become of your work in the Philippines, pro- 
claimed as altogether good, if after 15 years 
of American admini strati on you are likely al- 
most any day to be confronted with a revolt 
there 1 ? (Applause) 

The Chairman; The time of the gentleman 
has expired. 

hr. Moon* Does the gentleman want more time? 

Mr. Quezon: Yes; If I co\ild have more I 
should appreciate it very much. 

The Chairman: How much more time does 
the gentleman yield? 

Mr. Moon: I yield the gentleman ?five minutes, 

The Chairman: The gentleman from the Phil- 
ippine Islands is recognized for five minutes 
more. 

M P . Quezon: What has become of your, police 
orpanization said to be so magnificent ? What 
has become of the proclaimed beneficence of your 
Government in the Philippine Islands if it does 
not at least serve to establish there an order- 
ly government? 

Mr*. Chairman, the Governor General, after 
these stories had been published, responded to 
the cablegram of inquiry from the War Department 
as follows: 

Referring to telegram from your office of 
the 24th Instant, Army headquarters state there 
is absolutely no truth in the reports about 
Corregidor, Carabao, and Praile alleged oc- 
currences. 



On Christmas eve there was a snail and 
unsuccessful movement In Ilanila, connectea 
with the Ricarte campaign. Ricarte has tor 
several years conducted from rlongkong revolu- 
tionary propaganda, appealing to themos t Ig- 
norant classes of Filipinos, and selling thru 
his agents in the islands commissions In 
his so-called army for sums from a peseta to 
10 pesos. During the past three months five of 
the Ricarte leaders have heen arrested and 
sentenced to four and six years, including 
Uicarte's right-hand man, it has been re- 
garded as a grafting scheme under a revolu- 
tionary guise, taut from ti*e to time arouses 
excitement among uneducated classes. 

Christmas eve about 75 men, extremely ig- 
norant, without firearms, met at the Botanic 
Garden in Manila and were dispersed by the 
rmnicipa-i police without disorder, except that 
Xeo shot? were fired into the air by police 
and 20 men arrested. Eight of the latter 
v/cre held upon the charge of carrying conceal- 
ed weapons I knives and bolos. Nobody was 
iniured, except one man shot by a police 
^Titter in the night in another part ot the 
city when he attacked policeman with oolo. 

I-ovoments of similar character occurred 
at Havotas, 10 miles from Manila, where about 
S n*n assembled and endeavored unsuccess- 
fully to loot municipal safe , taking pr ovin- 
cial -overnor prisoner, who afterwards escaped 
uninjurld. Twenty of this party captured by 
constabulary or municipal police. 

Ten men with two firearms in Laguna de^Bay 
afi-pn^ted to make trouble last night, with no 

Ss! Everything quiet now and vigorous at- 
tempt will be made to secure leaders, chie i oi 
whom believed to be man ™f£ s^nce £X*1. 
prisonment for homicide *ho has jumped ^ 
iiobody of any standing or xnfluence is 
in this movement. 

Mr. Cooper: What is the date of that? 
Mr. Quezon: This was sent from Manila on 

December h ^fS^2^' ^S^S^ 
ter reiterating his previous ca^x storlea 

the lack of f^^^eSSor^a^e alleged 
about a n ^ i g° ang i S n C °the Carabao and Fraile 
- S5SS. f S^oTto Explain what happened in 
^anlla on Christmas eve. *e says. 

Christmas eve about 75 me.n, extr^oly ig- 
norant without firearms, met at the botanic 
Garden in Manila and were dispersed by the 



- 9 - 



municipal police without disprder, except 
SS th?ee P shots were fired in the air^by the 
police, and 20 men were arrested, *ight of the 
latter held upon charge of carrying concealed 
weapons: knives and bolos. Nobody was in- 
jured except one man shot by a pllxceman later 
in the night in another part of the city when 
he attacked policeman with bolo. 

It is thus seen that the "revolt" in Ma- 
nila, wherein 10,000 Filipinos were to take 
part according to newspaper °° n £i£: 
Sd, after all, in a gathering of "75 men with- 
out firearms/' according to the cablegram of 
?Se Governor General* The p&lice fired three 
shots Into the air, and the rebels Aspersed 
without disorder. Sight men were arrested on 
the charge of carrying concealed weapons. 

What kind of a ".revolt" is this that can 
bo dispersed by three shots in the air, with- 
out disorder, and in which the rebels are 
wllhou? arms? As to the eight men who were 
chafed with carrying concealed weapons, it 
must *e noted that in the Philippines the police 
cSuld if they chose, if they chose put into 
iail the wholl population of the archipelago 
in the charge of carrying bolos and knives, 
becauleTaStioally the laboring people 

■ 0 „ w either knives or bolos as a tool, rniiB 
?act y is wSxx known to everybody familiar with 
Filipino life, and there is now law xn the 
PhiiiDPines prohibiting the use or carrying of 
kSves P o? bolos. Who, knowing the location and 
nature of the Manila Botanic Garden, could 
SSvhJvo tta t would-be rebels would pick out as 

"SgS ^ tSi — 1 apprehension at so 
p ,? 1 feat-herine 1 ' »hv should the police Aire 
Ti\ ?„ 6 ?le ai? to disperse the asswnblase? 

of the Po^Je^VSSB^-control, thot 
gether an officer lost nxs and 

it was txme, to be ready lor r - id iculous! 

started ^^mexubSedf ~£ 6hairraan, that ihis 
it must be reraf^rea* nl ace on Christmas 

deplorable ^ ld *f t ^°^ted states, the mu- 
eve w hen even xn the unxtea k d > stimbancea 

nicipal * ollo ,V that here no one thinks 

°of r'evoit 0r iul'in*thf pSliPPiBes some one had 

^^^^^^^ affairs to 
justify his desire^to show that there was a 



- 10 - 



revolution. Now, a word about Ricarte, the 
alleged, head of this conspiracy. Ricarte is 
in Hongkong now, not in Manila, aa stated by 
these reports. He has been carrying on his 
propaganda for many years. Governor General 
Wright, Smith, and Forbes all knew of it. 
And to show that there is absolutely nothing 
new in this matter, let me quote a part of a 
cablegram sent by Go. Gon. Wright to the 
Secretary of War in 190 4. It is as follows: 

He is now reported to be in Ho cos Norte, 
and having followed closely. Am satisfied 
that he can accomplish little. Times and 
^ablenews are trying to make a great sensation 
and have probably sent wild telegrams to the 
United States, hence detailed. Yifith the ex- 
ception indicated everything wired as usual. 

So the game is not new. 3ensational 
stories of this kind have been reported in the 
oast on the part of some people in the Philip- 
pines as handy means to accomplish certain 
purposes. Never, Mr. Chairman, since American 
occupation, have the Filipino people been so 
convinced of the high purposes of this Govern- 
ment toward them as they are now, and therefore 
never has there been so little discontent as 
there is now. As I recently said to the repre- 
sentative of a newspaper in this city, who as*ed 
me about this revolution, if every American sol- 
dier were taken away today from the Philippines, 
we, the Filipinos, would defend the American 
flag against possible invaders. (Applause) 

The policy of President Wilson th | policy 
of Gov. Gen. Harrison has *^eox every till 
y,-i^n b -r^al friend of the United states, we 
SnSw ?hat we need not despair; that our nation- 
al Imbit ions are on the road to realization, 
and we are not going to do toe very thing tta t 

alone would defeat it. We kn f^^L united 
that a revolt on our part against the united 
States would mean the ruin of our oountey, the 
slaughter of defenseless and innocent men, 
a & \„a ^ii^fln For these reasons, ii lor 

f saf these stories of revolution 
areihfmost Sageout falsehoods that could 
be invented. (APPLAUSE) 



Lc/ 



■ - VII - * 

GOOD GOVERNMENT FOR THE PHILIPPINES 



^ By Manuel L, Quezon. 
Resident Commissioner*£rom the Philip- 
pines * 

unDublisW P h^ S ote r Fa f fc of g**#m address hitherto 
aSSlcitt^n J? Commissioner Quezon, which has a special 
application to present conditions. 

w ho studies the history of the world sees • 
that no government was ever able, permanently, to en- 
dure, which denies the fundamental truth, that the 
Golden Rule governs the life of nations as well as 
of men, and since it was laid down by Christ, no man 
no nation has ever succeeded unless their conduct ' 
was in accord with that Rule. 

First, it was the imperialism of Rome that fell* 
then it was the feudalism of medieaval Europe; then * 
it was the paternalism of the Stuarts and Bourbons: 
then it was the paeudo -imperialism, of Napoleon Bona- 
parte. Imperialism, the rule of the strong over the 
weak,- the master over the slave; feudalis, the rule 
of overlord over vassal; paternalisn, the rule of ths 
monarch claiming divine rights over his subjects; 
aristocracy, the rule of a social caste over the mob, 
are all forms .of government which do not stand the 
test of time, because they are inimical to the Golden 
ffule which means equal justice and equal privilege to 
all mankind, precisely the same theory upon whihh 
your political institutions and government are founded. 

It has been frequently said that American occu- 
pation of the Philippines was a reat benefit to my 
people. I am glad to admit that it has been. 1 had 

r the honor last year of saying the same on the floor 

* of the House of Representatives, and e xpressing the 
.gratitude of the Filipinos toward the American people 

- fer what good it has been to us. Still, those bene- 
fits, -graat as they may have been can never make the 

*' i^lipinoa forget that they are not governed by them- 
r - selves but are under foreign rule. We contend, more- 

l over, that an independent Philippine government would 
have been more beneficial to the Filipinos than any 

| kind of American government. 



* 
J 



THE TRUE TEST OF GOOD GOVERM.iENT 

■ 
* 

jThat which, is good gqvernment for one people 
rgight *not he good for another, '^hat is a good govern- 
ment \jhi<jh hest secures the happiness and prosperity 
of the people which is governs* To accomplish this, 
a government must know the needs of the country and 
must not itmly feel its responsibility to the country 
but must, love it as well. We give the Americans cre- 
dit for trying to do their best in the Islands to 
make the Filipino s. happy .and prosperous, but the wisest 
American will never know the Filipino as the Filipino 
knows himself,, and the most altruistic American can 
never love the Philippines as much as the Filipinos 



MR. QUEZON'S ADDRESS BEFORE THE COSMOPO- 
LITAN CLUB OF NEW 1BK 



(Especial Correspondence) 

New York, Dec. 9, 1914. 

"It is a truism that every people in whatever 
nart of the world prefers its own government to that 
imposed by another power, even though its own govern- 
ment may prove the weaker." 

With this statement Mr. Quezon, Resident Commi- 
a <Hnner of the Philippine Islands in the U. S. A., 
nSSSasaed himself to a gathering of more than a hun- 
^S collegf students at the Columbia University Coa- 

Club last evening. Mr. Quezon appeared as 
mopolitan ^luo last 3tu dents of the Club and upon 
the guest of miippxne Btua His 3ubject 

^"iS^^i^X^weiiionce; 11 his audience a body of 
Su^SS^^S ™ representing nearly thirty 
nations of the world. 

In a very attractive manner Mr. Quezon Proceeded 

SSltS ft ohavloter and life that characterise them 
today ana cause them to fe»l their nationality. 

been planted. 

Speaking of the ^^^^'S^^ 
can war he aaid "-No sta ^f ^ deny the splendid 
dent and enthusiastic patriot / done ln 

work which the unitQ ^5 t ^ e ^ n 5er-eatiiaate the high- 
S the islands. No* would we under eatima^ Actaini3tratiori 

ra ind>d and liberal VO^Y oi Cg o p r tQ &ny 

•.both at Washington and ^anila. it is countr y 

of e^%?S£^lSaS^^" ^ ,,;it 
that leada them to ask lor -™<=P d-aire which is 

i is rarefy the reappearance of to > * s ^ erican3 and 
. found in the heart of ™.* 1X #£ desire to conduct 
' every 

liberty loving peop£, - : He remark ed 
^^tfSSE^W £1 today l/the Philippines 
the 'spirit of 1914' • 

' * %| f s it hat the «£l f SS 0 ^^ toe pre- 

, undergo^" be "^J^^v^oh has "caught up the 
sent policy of x ^ialism ^ natlon needs the 

nations of Europe iaoha * f * * r * rful na tion.» He «- 

■ protection of the ^eana p in ^ ita ble result 

gained the present conflic ^ lth power 

SLSf ^SjlS at o*e ano^er - a, throat. 



Lc/ 



love their own country. I-t- ■? *> +-i 

impossible for an American refoi?e ' manifestly 

pines to be as sucMssm a f I^PMiT the rhlli P" 
government will be. «w 0 m«« ? rru -->-ippine.. independent 

another without that other's" consent t° s ° vern 

I learn-and this ^spa^c, _ , , 
among the American peop^ £ n len«U° ?f 5 he Session 
nos are right in desiring tn SSS! ral - that the Filipi- 
that they Should S^^tf dTSo^Mf 1 ^ 8 and 
tion seems to be as to whether rS Sit Jf e only ques " 
capable of self - f5 o Vermel To ?Lse who^h^f, 7St 
tend to believe that the Fiiipi^^f ^ "g"" 
to assume the responsibilities of an Indent™? Si 
tion and that therefore, they mus ^e^f^uX^ne 
argument is the eternal argument ever used by ever v 
peopoe that had another people in subjugatioL ThJ 

oTthis county. ^ tryinS t0 CUrtaU thS ^dependence 



FILIPINOS ARE REaDY 

But, as a matter of fact, the Filipinos have 
shows that they are, now and at any time will be, well 
prepared for the full enjoyment of a national life. 
The first sign a country gives of its fitness for self- 
government is its very love for liberty. People are 
like men, it being the congregation of individuals. 
In men, with maturity comes the first longing for free- 
dom. The boy while he is a boy is content to remain 
at home under the care of his parents, but as soon as 
he becomes a man, to matter how tender his parents 
; are to him, he wants to leave their home and make his 
own aay in the world. With manhood he becomes self- 
reliant and wishes to be self-supporting. A nation 
is the same. When it begins to feel the love of li- 
berty and to struggle for it, and incur all sorts of 
sacrifices to attain it, it is a sure sign that that 
country has attained it 3 political manhood and that 
soon it must be made an independent community. 

For three hundred years, the Filipinos, in spite, 
of the Sapnish misrule, were resigned if not contented, 
never trying to become free, there being no Spanish 
army in the Islands except regiments of native soldiers, 
while the Spanish government was recognized throughout 
the Archipelago. The reason why the ^P^os patent- 
ly bore the burden of Spanish misgovernment is that 
'they had not yet learned what freedom meant. 

As time advanced and educat ion spr ^Jf^^Jhe 
Islands the Filipinos began to feel burden of for 
sign rule and resorted to that 7^^^ e ^e which 
written in your own Declaration °f Jndepe ^ n 
declares that then the connection of ^ £°ther^oun 
try becomes burdensome to the P^P^.f connection". * 
the people have the right to sever the connection. 
Then we revolted against Spam, and in the struggx 



— 3 — 



that followed, you and we were fighting from the same 
fields and against a common enemy* Later, after we 
had conquered the Islands from the Spaniards and es- 
tablished a gove nment of our own with a democratic 
constitution, we engaged in war against this country. 
We had at the time a full knowledge of the power and 
strength of our new enemies and were aware of our own 
weakness, lie know that the v.-ar v;ao suicidal on our 
part. We never dreamed that we could win against the 
ever-victorious Unit edoSt ate s arrays , but we "fought, and 
sacrificed lives and fortunes simply because we had 
tasted the blessings of liberty and felt that wealth 
and life were nothing as compared with it. 

When we were told that the intention of this 
country" was to emancipate us and not to subjugate us; 
that the history of the United States was an eloquent 
testimony of her righteousness and justice; that the 
granting of our independence which would be given us 
as soon'as we showed our qualifications for self- 
government, was only a question of time, we yielded 
and surrendered, awaiting patiently arid hopefully the 
day when this government should ful fill t that promise. 

FILIPINOS A LIBERTY-LOVING NATION 

THESE wars speak loudly of the Filipinos as a 
liberty-loving people. They fought for their freedom 
and Gallantly 4e to this sacred cause everythmng 
?hev haa. But this is not all. We have shown, m a 
tactical war, and to the extent that we have been 
practical way, an & liberty- 

permitted to do so, jmj ™ govern ourselves 

laving PO^e., out ^ ™ ™, e have mU nici P al go- 
to make use of uhat ^ D ^ u /* piniT , lnos V /ho are elect- 
vernment composed entire 1 y of °^ w ™ ar out the 

ed by direct tore. Off iaial J^ports f ~ » a£ul and 
statement that these municipalises are sue ^ 
work weil. Municipal government is the 100 
government and the touch-stone o . the aoili y 

people to ^™^S^r^r£nt you have 
a long experience of ^ff^a^ernments which can 
in this country some ^P^?;7 for oU r munloipa- 
not be pointed out as e oo J /Jf^eJ. to run a nata- 
lities. This is because it is easier n 
al than a municipal government. 

The provinces in the H^^^ffi^a? 
elected Filipinos, ^he f vernor s ar 
the order in their provinces ana l p inolal go - 
administer their f ina »5??: lv A gSied by American offi- 
vernments have been .P^?;^Hi^ture is composed of two 
cials. The HiiUppinf ^ egisla tur Qf eighty _ one 

brances, the low er house being m V ^ Aaaem _ 
Filipinos elected by the P®°P velt stated in a 
bly had convened, Resident Ro ose ^ Qf m ^ 3 _ 

message toCongess tha ^ devote d 



- 4 - 

NO SELF -BO VHiNMENT SAVE THROUGH SXPSRMCE 

you put him in the water. Givrthe^^SLor'to- 1683 
morrow, the power to elect the uoper house of ' 
■Philippine Legislature and they gg elect SL^est 
men ana the men best qualified to serve our count™ 
who will do everything at their command to make the 
Filipinos happy and properous. 

Gi J?, u L t ^ e J .?' 1 S ht to el9ct the Governor -General 
and we will find tnousands of men to choose from with 
executive ability, wisdom and patriotism to administer 
and execute the laws without preference and with equal 
regard to all. Give us the right to establish a na- 
tional, independent government and we will frame a 
democratic constitution which will best suit the needs 
and ideas of the Filipinos. 

But it is said that should the United States 
leave the Islands to-morrow, they would immediately 
become the prey of hungry neighbors, while if there 
was the prestige of the American flag, it would serve 
to keep other countries out. Granting that it is 
true that the American flat is enough to prevent any 
country from interfering in the affairs of the Philip- 
pines, why can not the United States leave the Islands 
tomorrow and say to the other nations of the world, 
"Leave the Philippines alone and let them work out 
their own destiny?" You have done it for Cuba, you 
have done it for South America, and you have not yet 
seen any case in which this country has been led to 
war for this policy. 



NEUTRALIZATION 

It is not necessary to discuss this question to 
it 3 full extent. You all know that the independence 
of the Philippines can be easily assured by interna- 
tional agreement neutralizing the Islands, as Switzer- 
land is neutralized, or by American protectorate. 
That we should be free is a self-evident proposition 
to any American mind. It Is rather strange that a 
Filipinos, who by being such Is supposed to have very 
confuted knowledge, if any, of democratic instxtutlons, 
should address an American audience on ^e subject of 
the rio-ht of every country to be self-governing, 
^Ssfo? jou.h*. learned from ^£^-^3, 

leave to your 'own Judgment, developed as it byfre 
education^ and to your own feelings , /ormed - they 
are by your torn love °f liherty,^ Filipinos 

^titted* 0 ^ «SSh SHhT&cans are, to their 
om fSS^nS^Srnment, and that they are so enti- 
tled, not away in the future, but to-day. 



ee 



- 5 - 

There ia one proposition on which everyone of 
us can and will certainly agree: Whether the Filipi- 
nos are to be independent or not, it is but fair to 
the American people and just to the Pilipinis, that 
both be notified of the fact, whatever that fact may 
be. The uncertainty as to our future is the daily 
trouble of the ^'ilipino m ind. j appeal to everyone 
of you, to those who think that the Filipinos ought 
to be independent to-day or in the near future, and 
to those who think that they ought not to be indepen- 
dent at all, to exert your influence to bring Congress 
to say one way or another what is going to be done. 



Lc/ 

__acts. Forests untrod- 
v,x man are found on every side, the 
— A . ; ,j.nes being the sixth country in the world in 
wealth of forest products. In no other place are woods 
of such richness and variety to be had, with their 
remarkable coloring, size and durability, and it has 
been declared by experts in these matters that the 
amount of wood now growing, at the present price, is 
worth easily six and one -half billions of dollars. 
In various parts of the archipelago there are valuable 
mines of good and silver and rich deposits of lead, 
iron, coal and petroleum. The Pacific Ocean and the 
China Sea, v/hich bathe dur shores on the east and on 
the west, contain unnumbered species of food fish and 
in the Suly Sea are found shells and peai\Ls in large 
commercial quantities. The Islands are traversed by 
many mighty rivers which dould be converted into mo- 
tive power sufficient to supply immense industries 
in every town. Our imports and exports are already 
attaining important figures. 

For the tourist who seeks charming views and 
beautiful panoramas we have sunsets superior to any 
other in the world, moonlight scense and stormy nights 
of which the most ambitious painter could not even 
dream, much less succeed in reproducing. The road 
from Camp One to ^enguet and from Lueena to Atimonan 
present an indescribable spectacle in the richness of 
the surrounding vegetation and in the multiplicity of 
colors. Cascades, precipices, lakes, valleys, rivers, 
mountains and volcano s with which Mature has pre- 
pared her scenery there demand the admiration of every 
one who is fortunate enough to see them. 

ANCIENT CIVILIZATION 
And on all sides one sees the stamp of an ancient 



- VIII 



THE PHILIPPICS—WHAT THEY ARE AND 
WHAT THEY WOULD EE 

By Manuel L. Quezon, Resident Commissioner from the 

Philippines 

(E ^draddress:) ?art °* & rec3ant > tut hitherto unpublish 



lo^-hJ*! o?o ^ T PP i^ es are an archipelago lying between 
latitudes aio ^rth and 40 No rth and between Meridians 
1160 ari d 127o East longitude. On these Islands Hature 
aas oe stowed with ganerous hand and in harmonious com- 
bination her ciches and her beauties. More than 
73,000,000 acres are farm land, where numerous classes 
of products abound, and of these, only 7,000,000 acres 
are already privaNe property. Cotton, coca, coffee, 
sugarcane, tobacco^ coconuts, rice, hemp, sisal and 
other articles are being produced today and can be 
grown in practically unlimited quantities with but a 
reasonable amount of effort. Rubber could also readily 
become one of our principal products. Forests untrod- 
den by the foot of man are found on every side, the 
Philippines being the rdxth country in the world in 
wealth of forest products. In no other place are woods 
of such richness and variety to be had, with their 
remarkable coloring, size and durability, and it has 
been declared by experts in these matters that the 
amount of wood now growing, at the present price, is 
worth easily six and one-half, billions of dollars. 
In various parts of the archipelago there are valuable 
mines of good and silver and rich deposits of lead, 
iron, coal and petroleum. The Pacific Ocean and the 
China Sea, which bathe dur shores on the cast and on 
the west, contain unnumbered species of food fish and 
in the Suly Sea are found shells and pearls In large 
commercial quantities. The Islands are traversed by 
many mighty rivers which aould be converted into mo- 
tive power sufficient to supply immense industries 
in every town. Our imports and exports are already 
attaining important figures. 

For the tourist who seeks charming views and 
beautiful panoraraas we have sunsets superior to any 
other in the world, moonlight scense and stormy nights 
of which the most ambitious painter could not even 
dream, much less succeed in reproducing. J?he road 
from Camp One to ^enguet and from Lueena to Atimonan 
present an indescribahle spectacle in the richness of 
the surrounding vegetation and In the multiplicity of 
colors. Cascades, precipices, 3akes, valleys, rivers, 
mountains and volcano s with which Mature has pre- 
mounoains ^ ^^°ff demand the admiration of every 
pared her scenery there aemuxiu. «uo <> 
one who is fortunate enough to see them. 

ANCIENT CIVILIZATION 
And on all sides one sees the stamp of an ancient 



- 2 - 



European civilization- churches and cathedrals of 
beautiful and solid architecture; stone bridges which 
have stood the ravages of centuries; colleges and 
universities. Of more recent constructions have 
roads and t ran -ways, railroads, telegraphs, telephone 
systems, harbors, lighthouses, docks, schools in every 
village, where over 600,000 Filipino youths get the 
benefit of free, public education — in a word, all that 
is necessary for the rapid development of modern com- 
merce, industry, science and intellectual training. 
An excellent system of sanitation with splendid hos- 
pitals and laboratories has been established. Public 
order throughout the Islands is maintained, and the 
local governments, administered by Filipinos elected 
by the people, are a complete and gratifying success. 

This country' is inhabited by a people of the Ha- 
lay race, over 3,000,000' in number, and all Christians 
with the exception of some half million, who are Mo- 
hammedans in the Islands of Mindanao, and other non- 
Christians in one or two of the northern provinces. 

What my countrymen of all classes, ages and walks 
in life most fr event ly desire is the right to govern 
themselves and to become, without restriction of ^ any 
kind, a free and Independent nation. Whether this 
result shall bo most expedited by an international 
agreement providing for the neutralization of the Is- 
lands or vmether the speedier course would be through 
the- -establishment of an American protectorates I ao 
not here pretend to say, bfct whatever the method^ se- 
lected to bring about this result, the fact remains 
that the Filipino people look confidently forward to 
the early, realization of their most cherished ideals. 
Fortunately this most legitimate aspiration is In 
perfect accord with the democratic interests, with 
the liberal and humanitarian theories, and with the 
Sstory of the American people. Since the days when 
the American fleet first entered the harbor of ^nila 
and Scrican troops first landed on the sh ^ gose 
Islands the Filipino people have regarded the lul^- 
mpnt of the pledge then held out to them as a matter 
of l^nor on the part of this nation and as the only 
means for permanently realising their happiness and 
material well-being. 

PROSPERITY HAMPSRED 

1 - The Filipino people cannot be content so long as 
their future is v^a?ped in impenetrable doubt whether 
Shey are to be sold to some other nation kept in 
tney are to co i on ial possession, or disposed of 

?n r some"other manne? tha/the one to which they aspire. 
£ £ too much to say that the material development 
and Prosperity of the Islands is today seriously hnndi- 
capped oy lie uncertainty and doubt regarding the po- 
licy of this government toward them? 

Everyone saus that all we need rapidly to deve- 
lop the natural resources of the Philippines is capi- 



- 3 - 



tal. Capital is always very conservative.; it does 
not go, it will not go where no stable government with 
a difinite policy has been established. On the other ■ 
hand, the Filipinos themselves are opposed to the in- 
vestment of large suras of foreign capital in the Is- 
lands lest that very procedure should become an ex- 
cuse for a pretext for postponing or even putting off 
indefinitely the da of their national independence* 
Where the Philippines independent tomorrow or were 
the: given a promise of independence at an early date 
by Congress^ the Filipino would welcome if not try 
very hard to induce, the coming of capital, it is 
not, therefore, that the Filipinos are unprogressive 
or that they desire to continue antiquated methods in 
culture, but it iw because they know so well the his- 
tory of the world in this respect, and knowing it Miey 
fear, and rightly fear, the introduction of large 
amounts of foreign capital into their country until 
their political future has been clearly and authori- 
tatively defined. 

It is true that high officials belonging to the 
Executive branch of the government, both here and 
there, have at times defined their ideas of vhat they 
conceive to be the policy of the American people with 
regard to the Philippines. But the expressions of 
the Executive Branch of your government, however sin- 
cere or well founded, can never be regarded by the 
Filipino or by the rest of the wrold with that respec 
and feeling of security which would result from a de- 
finite declaration by Congress upon this subject. 



CAPACITY OF FILIPIKOS 



W« have all heard the statement frequently made « 
that the Spino people are ^t capable of maintaxning 
a free and independent government, «f f**^ J^ 11 
oeded to then in the near future At is, of ^ourse, 

abSt ?he Un?tS Stages and even after 134 years of 

reputblxcan in stiwoiuxi V /ell may, because 

wer. Americans sia f le w a ^Sselv^s their weaknesses 
as Americans they know ^emselves , CQuld p03sl . 

and their powers reason ± and my country- 

bly know them. For ^V^miie also at this statement 
men, who know our people, 3 ^ntain and administer a 
that we would be unab le to main ta^ n mllpplnea . 
free and independent government in fitness we 

If it be asked what demonstrated the 

have given, answer precisely the same 

fact to e xactly the extend and ■ been af ford ed 

measure as the opportunity to do ^ n | no 
us by the American government. Lore ^ ^ 
people can do ; but of what we ha t conditions , 

ten years, under most pecuxiai j..y 



- 4 - 



I must leave the world to judge, pinting only to the 
unbroken testimony of every American Governor General 
who has served in these Islands from ^resident Taft 
down, as shown by their statements along this line 
made in numerous off iclaL reports. The Filipdno Assem- 
bly which was regarded with something akin, to horror 
by the conservative elements in this country, and among 
the /Americans and foreigners in the Philippines, has 
demonstrated that from the very outset a body of Fi- 
lipino citizens, elected by the direct vote -of the 
people, is capable of playing a prominent part in the 
conduct of their affairs with skill, dignity, firmness 
and, above all, with unswerving loyalty to the ideals 
of thei fellow-citizens. 



GRATITUDE TO THE UNITED STATES 

There is one point concerning the advantage to 
the United States of granting the independence of my 
people on which 1 wish to touch. i have said that 
my countrymen regard that oncession as a matter of 
honor with the American' people. If that pledge shall 
be fulfilled at an early date, there will be a great 
practical benefit to this country, for the Filipinos 
will naturally and properly feel a heavy debt of gra- 
titude for that boon, and with the political ana in- 
ternational situation as- it is in the Orient today, 
it might well become a matter of no little moaent to 
America to be at once relieved of the expense of main- 
taining her sovereignty in the Philippine ^l^s 
and at the same time be assured of the loyal f^PPOrt 
and assistance of the entire Filipino people xn the 
case of those ventualiities which ought not to, but 
which sometimes do, occur, 

IS it too much, them, to hope that today, though 
a denturv and a third have rolled by, American ears 
trTpf/^e stm open ^ « L f ^ -^eaSe 
£2 l^LrA SSarin'Uoh tjj. e state, 
and its people have Town so great and so strong. 



Lc/ 



- VIV - 



ADDRESS DELIVERED BY HON. MANUEL 
L. QUEZON AT A BANQUET GIVEN IN 
HIS HONOR AT THE HOTEL DE FRANCE. 
SEPTEMBER 28, 1918 FOR THE CELEB* 
RATION OF THE ENACTMENT OP THE 
JONES LAW. 



MR. TOASTilASTER, GENTLEMEN: 

You have struck one of the most sensitive chorda 
of my heart, x am too profoundly touched to express 
in the manner in which J- would like to do so the senti- 
ments of satisfaction and gratitude which your gene- 
rous demonstrations of esteem and affection hav© awakened 
in my innermost soul. Even were I a marble statue I could 
not have very long remained insensible to the honor and 
attention shown me since I arrived. Permit me to render 
you my sincerest thanks and to assure you that the 
remembrance of this day will accompany me into the grave. 

It is my desire, on an occasion so memorable 
to me as the present one, to do some -thihg more than 
to assure you of my gratitude, laud the excellencies 
of our new Organic ^aw, or sign the praises of our 
civic virtues. 1 should not properly respond to the 
confidence you repose in me, were I, from fear that 
it might cool your enthusiasm, to avoid all reference 
to the great and complicated problems which, in my 
judgment, we shall have to solve in order to make sure 
that the bases of our national edlfiice will be firm 
and lasting. 

I will therefore open my heart to you and commu- 
nicate to you my sincere, deliberate judgment with 
regard to the seriousness of the situation that con- 
fronts us. For this reason I now break with an in- 
veterate custom - that of not preparing my speeches 
in writing. My words will not be elegant; but they 
have been carefully thought over, and whatever your 
ludmnent of them may be, 1 pray you to grant them the 
merit of having been inspired by my sense of gratitude, 
my devo'tion to these people who. have so greatly hon- 
ied me and shown me such affection since my arrival. 

Ahl sentlemeri? I should be the most abonimable 
of norths If a? ter all that the Filipino people have 

done°?of me " Should allow M^^S^' 
my acts to be impelled' by motives unpatriotic. 

t+- -i * in truth, m F st and appropriate that the 
It is, m ™ uu ir* .^i phrate the enactment of the 
Filipino people should celetoaje tn ^ ^ 

Jones Bill with great rejoicing. o ^, gelvea over t0 
sufficient reasons for our \ ld in connection 

joy unconfined. The ff^*^ ^ nt ry and the re- 
with this new Organic -aw Ji our gai the gr a- 

solutions that have b J en ^f P^rican nation and to 
titude of the people to ^f^fcontributed to its 
entities and individuals that na ^ of , the in- 

enactment, speak highly in ia , appreciate 
telligence of the Alpine pe ^ w ^ a gna Charta of our 
the great importance oi 



- 2 - 



political liberties, but also of its 3ense of justice 
and gratitude, which have always constituted one of 
our most characteristic national qualities. 

The tfones Bin doubtless has its defects; no human 
labor is perfect. it is true, also, that it falls far 
short of satisfying our aspirations, ^o legislation has 
ever been written exactly in accord with the opinion- 
and the desires of even those who have fostered or re- 
quested it, because the laws, especially in countries 
with a democratic government, are the result of a ae- 
ries of compromises and mutual concessions among many 
deverse and sometimes contrary and opposed" opinions. 
Despite all this, the Jones Bill has substantial merits. 
1 will say more; it is of international transcendency. 
It marks out a new course for' the colored peoples sub- 
ject to foreign dominion. ?hat, in 3pite of 'this, the 
Bill has its detractors among s us is simply natural. 
There are no people on earth in which all the people 
think alike on matters of public interest. The contrary 
would reveal an abnormal sociological and psychological 
condition. 

The critics of the Jones Bill may, I believe, be 
divided into two groups: (1) those who fear that it 
grants political powers and liberties greater than those 
which the Filipino people are competent to exercise, 
and (2) those who say that it is a step backwerd instead 
of forward; that it represents retrogression instead 
of real progress. To the former we can easily give 
this answer: Keep your worries until the evil you con- 
lecture come3, because, as it is sure not to come, 
vou will thus save yourself a lot of unnecessary worry 
and anxiety. Fortunately the Jones Bill has removed 
the discussion of the capacity of the Filipino from 
the field of theory to that of practice, its enactment 
has converted the mere conjectures as to what ohe Fi- 
lipino people may do to the material demonstration of 
what td Filipino people will do. To the non-believers 
we therefore say; Wait, and you shall see, 

58°5St'ii a teneraf way, the principal differences . 
cetr,een this law and the Organic &a« which it has 

Z £*St situation under the eld lav,. 



™« principal defect of the past situation, a 
The prmcxpax u -Piously affected our moral 
defect which not only ^ progre3a wa3 

tranquility, ^* ^f.^rized declaration of the pri- 
the absence of a " ^L^^erican people had in view 
mordial object ^oh ^ ^rio^^P^^^ ^ 

upon assuming the s 0V f^ e *£ n *L thouti national cons- 

we been an ^rant people , Qur point of view, 

or™r,°in S tf our laok'of any point of view, 



- 3 - 



have mattered very little to us whether or not the 
reason for the new government imposed upon us was ex- 
plained to us, if W e had been allowed to live without 
being subject to physical maltreatment or deprived of 
the Iruits of our labor, we -would have lived* if not 
contentedly, yet at least indifferent to the nature 
and purposes of the rule established over us. The 
American Government, however, found in the Philippine 
islands a people that were already formed, a people 
conscious of national solidarity, with national as- 
pirations, and with sufficient dignity and valnr to 
have rebelled against a sovereignty that had been 
established here for many centuries and to resist a 
new sovereignty that came to reolace the old. We 
were perhaps, not quite so advanced as older, more 
experienced peoples, but we were the heirs of an oriental 
civilization that had existed for centuries when 
Spain came here, and of an occidental civilization 
acquired and assimilated during more than three centu- 
ries of Spanish rule, we had a clear conception 
of the rights belonging to us as a people by the laws 
of these rights. Being a* young people, we looked 
into the future with dreams of glory; we deemed our- 
selves capable and felt in us the determination to 
our descendants might live contented, prosperous, 
and free. Under such conditions we could not possibly 
be expected to feel satisfied under a government of 
whose satisfied under under a government of whose intentions 
in assuming control over us we had not been informed 
in authoritative mamner. It does not matter that the 
conduct of this government, from the first day when 
it assumed the sovereignty <$<§ the Archipelago, was 
one, to us at least, unprecedented in the history of 
the relations • between a victorious and a vanquished 
people, both of different race. The opening of pub- 
lic schools in which the children of the lowliest 
Filipino could acquire knowledge, the new facilities' 
givfcn to commerce, the aid extended to industry and* 
agriculture, the elevation of Filipinos to offices 
of responsibility and power, the creation of the Phil- 
ippine Assembly by which our people were for the first 
time given a participation In the national legislation - 
all this we appreciated and for all this we were 
greateful to the .American Government; yet, X repeat, 
all this was not sufficient to set at rest our minds 
which inquired constantly, what will be our future-? 

it is true that the highest ranking officials in 
these Islands, the various Secretaries of War, and 
even several Presdident of the United jtotea said that 
the American people had come to the Philippine Islands 
to emancipate, not to subjugate us; to give us new 
opportunities which, owning to circumstances beyond our 
control, we had not had in the past. These declarations, 
however were made in vague terms and represented after 
all but the personal opinion of the men wno made them, 

or during a peiiod of serious distur- 
.» ot the public order. 



thought these men were indeed persons of high official 
rank and powerful influence. Not even our knowledge 
of American history and institutions, which shows us 
that the people of the United State 3 have always been 
the foremost champions and upholders of human liberty, 
could put an end to our anxiety. We were full of 1 
apprehension: we did not look trustfully towards the 
future j we could not understand why Congress, the 
only entity empowered by the Constitution to decide 
the political status of the Filipino people, remained 
silent on a question for us "of such vital importance, 
though it had been stipulated in the Treaty of Paris 
that the Government of the United States would define 
that statue. Did America wish to be left at liberty 
to turn our country over to some other country or keep 
it, as she saw fit, disposing of us in the manner 
most convenient to her interest, without compromising 
her national honor? On the other hand, the Americans 
and foreigners who had interest here of intended to 
invest capital in this country, did not dare to under- 
take anything of importance, as they feared America 
might abandon the Islands at a moment's notice without 
even giving us time to establish a ^government of our 
own and provide for its maintenance. We were thus 
unable to obtain outside capital, the aid of which 
is essentially necessary for the development of the 
riches of our" soil. Host of us Filipinos worried but 
little about the possibility of a sudden departure 
of America, because we had full confidence that at 
any moment when the United States should withdraw from 
the country, the Filipino people would immediately 
proceed, with prudence and patriotism, to organize and 
establish a government of their own, It can not be 
denied, however, that even among ourselves these were 
persons who dreaded that possibility, considering it 
dangerous, at the least. 



The Jones Bill has changed this situation radi- 
cally/ The preamble to this Act tells us that it is 
the purpose of the American people to grant the P.hiJl* 
ppine Islands independence as soon as a stable govern- 
ment can be established here. 

What does this declaration signify? It signifies 
that American explicitly and solemnly recognizes that _ 
we are a people entitled, ■ like any other, to our liberty 
and national Independence, it signifies, further, that 
America has determined to allow us to exercise this 
riFht as" soon as the elements required for a stable 
P-overnment are at hand. It als- signifies that America 
has waived her right, sanctioned by international prac- 
tice, though contrary to all principles of ethics, to 
alienate these Islands by sale or transfer to some other 
foreign nation. This removes any possibility of Ame- 
rica's abandoning the Philippines before a duly consti- 
tuted Filipino Government has been inaugurated, while 
a war is pending or imminent in whfcch we may or might 
become involved, or during a period of serious distur- 
bance of the public order. 



- 5 - 



has r>owL 1 to a iA?iw^L 10Wever ' that subsequent Congress 
/^^v, I z^f 18 tr ue, bat such revocation 



Z 1 ?here d ?rg^° ry ?° 5 he Clonal honor °f A ^^a 
' ' ' ' 1 ; national honor 

may therefore 



M.hes? L?L™ ° P e °Pl, e ^Ids its national honor in 

highest esteem tnem the Americans. We may therefore 

rill T,Z'*^ 3e "2 Con ^ess will dare or desire to 
cast such a blot on the, honor of America. It is only 
possible that the policy enounced in the Jones Bill may 

^t^\? er °%™l e if the Pil iPino people themselves 7 
request it. If, for instance, the Filipino people 
should express to the American people its desires to 
remain perpetually under American soveriegnty then the 
united otates Oongress could decree our annexation with- 
out committing a breach of trust. So long, however, as 
we persist in our purpose to be completely independent 
some time, as sure as there is a sui in the firmanent 
will America redeem her promise* Gur mistrust of the 
past should therefore make way to confidence and our 
incertitude and anxiety to certitude and peace of mind, 
■^o tell you the truth, if the Jones Bill had done nothing 
but define the American policy in the Philippine Islands, 
that mere definition would already have bettered the 
condition of the Filipinos people, for several reasons. 
As you know, however, the Jones Bill has done more. It 
lias granted to the Philippine Government greater powers 
than those which it had under the Act of July 1st, 1902, 
and has placed that Government almost entirely in the 
hands of the people. 

Matters on which the Government of the Philippine 
Islands could not legislate, even in the days when the 
Commission was our only legislative body and its mem- 
bers where all american, have now been placed in the ha- 
nds of the legislature, both of the houses of which 
are elective. And the jurisdiction of this Legislature 
extends to every foot of the territory of the Philippine. 
Islands, while formerly the popular authority, as re- 
presented by the Assembly, did not extend to the ter- 
ritory inhabited by non-Christian Filipinos. So great 
is this popular authority that its sphere of influence 
extends even to certain acts of the Chief Executive - the 
local representative of the sovereign nation - such as 
the power of the Senate to, approve or reject appointments 
made and the power by the legislature to regulate^the 
conditions subject to which "oratories ^ heads of 
departments shall be appointed by said Uovernor-General. 
?hfHone e s Bil" as its^uthor has very eorrao tly 

confers the substance, although not the title, of self- 
government. 

Those who assert that the Jones Bill is a step 
ittose wno aaaex DOWer vested in the Governor- 

backward point to the veto P° wei ^r, , , t the 
General, to that vested in the ^ de 'f t i t]1 nY 
power reserved to Co^sto repeal, ^ W 
act passed by °ur Legislature. This crit 
apparent than real force. J-he veto P° w « existed 
dent and the power of Congress to reP 8 ^^ 8 0 ^ 
already under our former status. -n» vc y 



- 6 - 



Governor -General ia new, but I-t is a power Is as absolute 
than that of the Commission with respect to the legisla- 
tive acts of the Assembly, inasmuch as from the veto 
of the Commission there was no appeal to the President. 
Moreover, the Commission, being the other branch of 
the Legislature, could with greater liberty act con- 
trary to the popular will be refusing to pas 3 bills 
passed by the Assembly than' the Governor -General will 
consider himself authorized to do by vetoing acts of 
the new legislature. 

It is proper to suppose that in the exercise- of 
the powers conferred by the Jones Bill, the Governor- 
Genera" 1 , will act in accordance with the spirit, and 
not with the letter alone, of the Act. Now, it being 
iihe evident purpose of that Act to give ua ample op- 
portunity to solve our domestic problems according 
to our own ideas, the Governor -General will have to 
respect them unless, in his judgment, they involve 
a serious infringement upon the sovereignty legi- 
timately represented by him in these Islands. 

Ho colored people under foreign sovereignty 
has ever had the political power henceforth to be 
enjoyed by the Filipino people. What i 3 still more, 
there are countries in the Par East which, though nom- 
inally independent, are more subject to interference 
by foreign government than the Philippine islands 
are subject to interference in their domestic affairs 
on the part of the Government of the United States. 
The initiative and the determination of the reforms 
which are to give an impetus to the progress of our 
people in the various aspects of our own existence 
has been placed In our hands. This is to say, of 
course, that, in granting us such ample powers, the 
Jones Bill places upon our ahouldera the burden of 
the most serious responsibilities; and these respon- 
sibilities we must face, as 1 know the people will 
face them, conscientiously, with decision, valor, 
and complete devotion to the interests of the com- 
munity. We must take into account that our future 
and, perhaps, that of other peoples less fortunate 
thai ours and grievously subjugated, depends. upon 
our acts, our prudence, our pure patriotism. Be- 
cauae, gentlemen, we must not forget that if the 
oollcv of the United States with respect to the 
PhiliLine Islands turns out to be a complete suc- 
cess P soSner or later other governments possessing 
colonies will find themselves constrained to adopt the 
same 0n polioy: These are ^^ n d& %^ 

afge^ 

ally examine wi lltl x organization, in order to 
be Ze 30 to X satSfy P the former 2nd remedy the latter. 

The Pr^^ B ?°"f fS 1 ^"^ t^nber 
°1 f t °TiSen 3 : ^lirVt^fX^hoSd tend towards 
the tapro— t of the condition of the masses. 



7 



1 / "°* enter full y upon the grand labor of laying 
the foundations upon which the edifice of Filipino nation- 
al!** U to stand until time shall be no more. 

with "rea? f amwtf^f 6S ? d T Q&Va that rfienace *** P eo P lea 
with great ambitions, who feel they have the strength 

to work out a great future themselves, is that thef are 
^ D in a t°thL S ? 8atl »"«4 with themselves anftheir 

?S «^ \l ~l>l 0rf ' et ? r aiadal * the experience 6r resent 

S P SS plos with Sweater experience in the 

Zl ™f S *I^? n 5% l hG mo3t Canoed people on earth has 
not yet attained its complete and perfect development. 
.Svery nation has something to learn from the others, and 
any country which, systematically or from an excess 
of national pride, refuses to profit by the lessons and 
the experience of other countries and even other men, not 
only nurts itself, but even exposes itself to public 
ridicule. When I say other men, I say so advisedly. Es- 
pecially during the first years of our life the aid Of 
men from more advanced countries who have excelled in 
certain lines of government, work and whose services may 
be required for the construction of our national edifice, 
will be cordially solicited and received. To popy, with- 
out due examination and without taking into account 
whether or not it is adaptable to our way of being, that 
which is foreign, merely because it. is foreign, is as 
harmful as rejecting it in the ;iame manner and for the 
same reason. The example of Japan, repeatedly cited, 
may very oppor tuna'tely be cited a.^ain. Our neighboring 
nation owes its present eviable situation to the wisdom 
their own and assimilated the best they found in the 
foreign countries. 

We should be unworthy of the liberties and rights 
granted us by the Jones Bill, were we to make use of 
them for the promotion of selfish interests. The desire 
to hold public office is a laudable one when it is 
prompted by the desire to serve the public interests. 
The candidate or political party, however, that is 
nrompted by selfish motives alone is guilty of defraud- 
ing the nation. The people must in each case weigh in the 
bhlance the purity of the intentions of those who solicit 
their votes. rolitical parties are real necessity in all 
democratic government; but they are guilty of a crime if, 
in competing with each other for the confidence of the 
public, they conduct their campaign in a manner to cause 
deep dissensions in the country. The right of criticism 
is one of the safeguards of good government. However, 
when this right is made use of to denounce systematically 
as bad everything pertaining to the adversary, charging 
him in every instance with dishonesty or bad faith, 
whether with or without reason, it becomes as arm most 
destructive of the common welfare. Now more than ever 
before we Filipinos must be moved by one impulse; that 
of prucuring the happiness, prosperity, and true liberty 
of our country. Those in power as well as those of the 
opposition must, each in the performance of the mission 
conferred upon" him by his position, endeavor to render 
beneficent service. 



m 



- 8 - 



We have much to do* There is work for all. It 
la our good fortune that Divine Providence ha a given ua 
a country both beautiful and fertile. The wealth of 
our aotl may be aaid to be still intact. We must, with 
all the energy that is in us, embark upon the develop- 
ment of our natural resources. Do not let us forget 
that we live in a very critical epoch. After the hor- 
rible war which is now desolating Europe, international 
economic competition will be more intense than ever. So 
who have taken part in this horrible conflict will 
struggle more vigoriously than ever in order to re- 
gain what ^ they have lost. If we go to sleep or remain 
our ambition to see our country prosperous. Now is the 
time, therefore, to devete more than ever our attention 
and our efforts to the promotion of our commerce, our 
agriculture, our induatry. It will be needle as for me 
to say that neither politival rights nor laws, however 
wise these may be, are sufficient to bring progress and 
general well-being. V/e would suffer the worst disap- 
pointment were we to cherish the illusion that the es- 
tablishment of this new government in the Philippine 
Islands and the fact that the government will be 
popular one will automatically remedy the ills from 
which our country is now suffering. The government alone 
is powerless to give prosperity to the people. All 
it can ordinarily do ia to give the citizens an appor- 
tunity to utilize to their fullest extent their indivi- 
dual power of work in order to obtain the largest sum 
of benefit. In the last instance any progress we may 
make at any time must come from the people themselves. 

We have entered upon the most ciritical period 
in the history of our people. All we may do and a ay 
will be judged by friends and enemiea. The former will 
look for the sati a faction of the confidence which they 
have placed in ua and the latter for a justification 
for their mistruat. We must therefore be very careful 
in every step we take. It will be better to do but little, 
without reflection. 

Peoples have more relations with each other now 
than ever before. No nation is sufficient unto itself; 
it needs the friendship of the other countries and cor- 
dial relations with the same. Even the moat powerful 
nations of the world are anxious to gain the good will 
of the oth ra and we are especially constrained to fol- 
low this policy because we are a small people, fortu- 
nately for us, the Filipino people are a people without 
race prejudice andreceive every stranger with affection. 
It is our duty to perpetuate this beautiful as well as 
beneficient quality. 

Nothing would more certainly result in the complete 
failure of our labors than an offensive attitude on our 
part towards other peoples. We must endeavor especially 
to gain more and more the good will of the American people. 
This a people that have given ua repeated proofs that 
it is cordially itnereated in our future, and xt is 
simple justice that we ahould give it proofs of our 
gratitude, 



- 9 - 



I assure you that afW a 

the United State ( I r^ 0 ^ ° f . sev ™ ? e&V5 in 
not find a bet her * fri?nd tZ^^Y^f that We COuld 
every question oon^rnit Phil iT^I^l*' ° n 
ub to Con/re as +-h* tl > f Philippines that has come 

those who toted ?E« tt lth our opinion as wellas 
St they lilt sltLl ? e3? ** y i have * oted in ^e belief 
nrav vou U™£ «f < S / n our best interest. We must 

<>ive a vnf^f iSl f your thoughts aocross the seas and 

s£ e P :oS. te o?tS5^StS S5tS: altot v toe Constes3 ' and 

the a JS! ?5 Pe 5 a ?- ly ? m " dut ^ witn regard, to Mr. Jones, 
I nave £- hG b 1 i11 * aged and almost an invalid 

X have seen him work withour repose in order that the 
Filipino people might obtain these new concessions. With© 
out any hope. recompense except the satisfaction of duty 
well done, he has jeopardized his life, neglecting has 
broken health, in order that the American people might 
do us justice. Praise to Mr. Jones! Whatever we have 
done and may do for him will be but a scant reward. 

There is another person who has perhaps not been 
given all the credit due him for the aid which he has 
given to those who labored in 7/a shine; ton to ret us our 
new Organic -^aw.- That person is the Governor -General. 
Permit me, Mr. Governor, to tell you in the presence 
of this distinguished gathering .t hat I believe that 
without you we would not have had. a Jones Bill. The 
confidence which since the £irst day of your arrival 
on these shores you have reposed in the intelligence 
and patriotism of the Filipino people, the manner in 
which you have administered the affairs of this country, 
the recommendations which you have made to be President 
and to our friends in Congress, have contributed more 
than anything to bring about that the Filipino people 
are now in the enjoyment of the ample rights granted 
by the Jones Bill. In the name of my people and on 
my own behalf, X thank you most warmly. Your memory 
will be forever inscribed, not only in the annals of 
my country, but also in the heart of every Filipino 
citizens. 

The country is very fortunate to have had you at 
the head of this government not only during the time 
when the struggle was at its height, but also now that 
victory has come to us. Much will depend upon the policy 
of the Governor -General who will inaugurate the new 
government, in order that the Filipino people may 
enter upon the full enjoyment of the liberal provisions 
of the Jones Bill. The course outlined by you will 
serve for the guidance of your successors, whether they 
belong to your "own party or to the Republican party. 
We are well aware that you will endeavor to give the 
proposes to grant them. Gentlemen, I shall conclude. The 
moderation, prudence, patriotism, and devotion to duty 
of our municipal, provincial, and Insular officials, 
and especially of our Assembly, have won for us the vic- 
tory that we now celebrate. These same virtues will 
bring us in the future prosperity, well-being, and in- 
dependence. 



Lc/ 



- X - 



SPEECHES OP MR. QUEZON 
IN THE HOUSE OP REPRESENTATIVES 
OP AMERICA 



January 13, 1916. 



Mes Quezon: 



"Mr* Chairman, on January 7 there was In- 
serted in the Senate proceedings in the CONGRESS- 
IONAL RECORD an article alleged to have been 
written by a Member of this House, the gentle- 
man from Tennesses (Mr'. Austin). On the follow- 
ing day the distinguished Senator who had had. 
this article Inserted requested - and the request 
was granted by the Senate - that the paragraph 
of this article vrhich refers to me by stricken 
from the permanent RECORD. To this paragraph, 
I wish to call the attention of the House. The 
p ar agr aph s ay s : 

"The Governor General, the other part of the 
lawmaking and appointing machine has publicly pro- 
claimed his indebtedness to MANUEL QUEZON for 
his appointment, and QUEZON is the leader of 
the movement to throw off so-called American 
"oppression and tyranny," and -is the accredited 
custodian of the Philippine campaign fund, 
said to reach many thousands of dollars, collect- 
ed in the islands for some time fr om ^ he D ^ r ^ hprs 
aildis, clerks, officeholders, merchants, and others 
to "influence Congress" to pass the Jones or any 
othe- old bill providing for independence. 

oney cannot put legislation thru Congress and 
any statement that it is used to control Sena - 
tors or Members is a slander to our national law- 
makers and an imposition, upon the innocent and 

L !Tnnea *o "ive up their hard-earned money for 
coniidmg ones who <£™ * ld render a public 

3ai v^r P v?ndlcate i?s^ember sf anS pro tec ^hundreds 
sex-V3.ce, vacate J people by putting an end to 

of P 00 ^ n? this fund to "influence Congress' 1 . 

rinvestt"a°tLn^hou?d f be nade to ascertain 
An J-nvea^i^ttui or i r inated the scheme, the 

all the facts, ^l ori ^ n all su oscribers, whether 
names and occ ^^^° n ^ 0];i t r ?butions, the amounts, 
voluntary or forced co ^ fun ^ g are distri- 
ct aL^foTpersons to whom paid, etc. 

Mr« Chairman, I corf ^LfcoV 
read sounds r ^ h ^ e ^g 0 ^eSge of the intricacies 

SSeSS^t^rSSSaTto* be conveyed to 



- 2 - 

xf irSLS £• aUth °S ° f these statements. 

aileged or suggested that I or arw 
other person authorised by me or any other 
Sn?i 8 2n^ Wlth m7 knowle <^ was exited in 
avowe^vfor 0 ?^ in the 

to wSni sJ^? Purpose of using this money 
tq ?? °® nator3 Representatives? 

fr, Jkp pi-^? ?* su £S este <* that any person 
t^t f ^JfPP^o islands, under my autho- 
rity or with my knowledge, has been collect- 
ing lunds, informing the people from whom 
this money was collected that such funds 
for the purpose of controlling Senators and 
hepresentatives, and that I, knowing that 
this money has been so collected, have talc en 
that money, kept it in my possession, used 
it for that purpose, or for my own personal 
ends, or have not used it at all? 

Mr. Chairman, I have been holding the 
position of Resident Commissioner for the 
last five years, and i can say before God 
and man that my hand and my conscience are not only 
clean of any stain of improper conduct in the 
performance of my duties, but promote the interest 
that 1 was called upon to defend as I saw the path 
indicated by my duty. (Applause) X want to know 
if now or ever I have done anything with Members 
indicate that I was attempting unduly to in- 
fluence their minds in favor of the cause that I am 
representing here? If it is an improper action to 
argue with Members of Congress my views on the 
Philippine question, if it is illegitimate for me 
to act toward II embers of Congress as one gentle- 
man should act toward another, then I confess 
most willin;; that I am guilty of improper action. 
If it is a', crime to come here and advocate 
independence or any other policy that in my 
opinion should be advocated in the interest of my 
people, if it is a crime to propagate my views, 
if it is a crime to appeal to the hearts arid 
minds of Members, then I am guilty, But, Mr. 
Ch§irman, if there is any suggestion that I have 
endeavored to promote the cause that l represent 
by attempting improperly to influence members 
nf Congress by the use of money or in any other 
way? ?f ?here be such suggestions I want to say that 
iUs a slander upon ? e without the slightest 
foundation in fact. (APPLALS^) 



There is a committee, in the Philippine 
Islands composed of men prominent in their pro- 
fessions, in business, and in the government 
service which for some time has been collect- 
ing money, and the tr e a surer of this committee 
is Mr. Thomas Earnshaw, a brother of my col- 
league, the other Resident Commissioner from 



- 3 - 



the Philippine islands, who is a wealthy and an 
honest man. Actually the amount of money col- 
lect ad monthly amounts to ahout the large sum 
of $500. ihis money was collected for the purpose 
of sending out literature to propagate the views 
of those who believed in Philippine independence. 
Is it improper to use money for the purpose of 
informing the American people as to conditions 
really existing in the Philippine Islands? The 
only thing wrong about it, I think, Mr. Chairman, 
is that the sum is so ridiculously small in amount 
that very little can be done with it. l wish that 
instead of v 500 a month we had thousands of dollars 
a month. We then could and would be sedding books 
to every household in this country, written by 
eminent and distinguished Filipinos, especially 
the book3 of Dr. Hi sal, so that the American people 
might know that there are intelligent and able 
men in the Philippine Islands. V/e could and would 
have been sending photographs to every corner of this 
country, not of naked Igorots, which have been 
freely distributed in the past, leading the American 
people to believe that we i>re all naked, uncivilised 
men in the Philippine Islands, but photographs of our 
wonderful and old churches, that speak of our Chris- 
tian civilisation lasting 500 years; of our sahbols 
and colleges, both during the Spanish and the Ame- 
rican regime, that would speak of our education; of 
our houses, that would speak of our social life. 
We should be using that money not to control Members 
of Congress but to inform the American people as to 
our state of civilisation and as to our desires, so 
that the American public, which in the last resort 
has the final voice on the Philippine question, may int 
elligently pass upon that subject. Is there any- 
thing wrong about that? 

Mr. Chairman, I wish It could be -ascertained 
now much money has been expended to propagate 
views contrary to Philippine Independence, how 
much money has been expended to issue literates 
SescrSing conditions to the Philippine Ialands 
that contain statements reflecting upon the 1'ilipino 
people? And yet I do not criticise that campaign. 
Anyman has a right to present his views before 
the American people. 

- A boo, written two years a E o b yDean fester, 

lloZl "ITtH ^onsivfboo*, which has been distri 
Str/My thruou? thi. country and .enters 

one paid the price j-vioi-v 
there anything wrong a ©out that. 

Mr. Chairman not a cent of j***^^ 
^ Q 1 g e P ? f V-fi a e^o UJ (Krr,a?n3hav,) who is sitting 



- 4 - 



used or attempted to be u«5 ? T 1 > aa , b ?. en 
grass of either House (Z?. control .embers of Con- 
Sot been used to Inrtch^elfT' 917 " 
The Chairman: 

Mr! lerris- entlema * haa spared. 

How much more time does the gentleman wish? « 

Mr. Quezon- Can ± have 10 minutes more? 
There are nore things I v;ould like to call to the 
attention of the House. 

Mr. Ferris:- See if you can not conclude in 
five, minutes.; I yield to the gentleman five minutes 
more, 1,J r. Chairman. 

The Chairman.- The gentleman is recognized to 
five minutes more. 

Mr. Cooper of Wisconsin.- Mr. Chairman, will 
the gentleman permit an interruption? 

Mr. Quezon- 1 will. 

Mr. Cooper of Wisconsin.- I rise to ask the 
gentleman from Oklahoma (Mr-. Ferris) in view of 
the vast importance of this subject to the gentleman 
whose integrity has been impeached, or at least 
attacked in the public prints repeatedly during this 
last summer, and in view of the importance of the 
-subject to his contrymen, 3,000 miles away, if ho can 
not yield 10 minutes additional at thxs time? 

Mr. Ferris.- K r,. Chairman, I will take five 
minute; away from the committee, and 1 will yield 
to the gentleman io minutes. 

The Chairman. - The gentleman from the Phili- 
ino ^iia^ minutes, 
ppines is reco b ni^.w 

Mr . Que zon : 

r ^Qvp been in public life 
Now, Mr. Chairman i ^ e °^ n j c ^ e from a 
almost ever since x ^ Gft ^ snail town in the Phi- 
very modest f^ 1 ?/" ? a human being in the town 
lipplnes. There «not ^ knoW me and my people, 
where I was born who does no Frovince in 190 5. 
I was Sleeted as fi°!f ° t L 'and it is suggested 

here and now, i" ansv/er to *~ DU blic office by 
f nave never been elected *° a ^[ected Governor of 
W political machine. a ^ independent candxda, 



the 
and 
that 
own. 



-5 - 



After 1 was elected governor I entered the 
Nationalist ^arty. Why? x t waa mj dut y to pro- 
mote the interest of my Province and I 'wanted 
to be associated with those people who 'thought 
as x did, whoa© counsels I desired, and in 
whose integrity and honesty I had confidence. 
After having served some time as governor I 
resigned this position to' become a candidate 
for the assembly. Upon presenting my candidacy 
to the assembly I withdrew from the party once 
more, not wishing to be elected thur the use of — 
any political machinery. I presented mv candi- 
dacy as an independent. And, Mr; Chairman, I '1 
want to say that while I had a hard fight to 
become governor, because I waa not well known 
in my Province, I did not have to fight at all 
to be elected to the assembly, having been 
governor of Tayabas for a year and a half and 
the people laving had an opportunity to learn 
all about me and ray public work, 1 was unani- 
mously elected, by every voter in my district. 
(Applause) I say unanimously because my op- 
ponent received only the votes of his lmmedaite 
relatives, 20 or 30 persons. 

Once in the assembly, I again joined the 
Nationalist Party - the party whose principles 
I believed in. I did it not because I wanted 
to advance my political career, but because I 
could not play a solo by myself. (Laughter) 
It I was to write or help write legislation, X 
bad to cooperate with and have the cooperation 
of those who thot as I did. After serving some 
time in the assembly I was elected floor leader 
and two years later to the position I now hold. 
I have been twice unanimously reelected bj both 
houses of our legislature. H is true thai i 
an now and have been for some time one of the 
Naders of the Nationalist Party, but I have 

^aiT^r °to f says^fme on this sub- 
ject : 

~ fhp Conrn ssioners from 
" Q ? eZ S n In ?he A^LScan Congress, is very 
the islands to the ^ e ^r: T , allY 0 an xious to 
much in politics, and naturally^ ^ 
place as many of his pa- ^ |( 
ment pay roll as possible. 

It is suggested that I have bean *^f itical 
Governor General ^"J*! slands, Had X done 
followers in the /P;i^ e nothing wrong 
this, there would Have oee I dQ ^ owe 

about it, but th !j^ p p 0in trnent. It.has 
the governor a si ^^^aeneral Harrison 
been stated that Governor lnde btedness to me- 
publicly acknowledged his i General, 
for his appointment as (>o e me mo re 

Nothing, ^f^^h^people that 1 am of such 
than to be able to teix my 



- 6 - 

^ilS^i: 1 ^^ 1 ? count ry that X can secure the 
?AnSaisef iLL^l^ General on *V mere dictum. 
it P isT? ) ^n? f ° r ^ Ullate ?- y ' 1 can not sa ^ that, because 
it is not true. lo my knowled e Governor General 
garrison has hever made such a statement. X 
know he has not said it in my presence. True, he 
has stated that he was gratified to learn thai 
l was in favor of his appointment. But, %. 
Chairman, if it is true that the opinion of the 
Resident Ooirimissioner from the Philippine J-slands 
is consulted by the ^resident of the" United States 
or by any other officer of this Government on any 
question of importance affecting the islands, nothing 
could be more proper than that they should do so. 
What are we supposed to be here for? '..h do we 
represent the Philippines in the United States? 
(Applause) 

Are v/e supposed to come here and draw 
$7,500 a year, plus $2,000 for mileage, simply 
to sit around, and look pretty? (daughter) 
■The position of Resident Commissioner was created 
by an act of the Congfcess of the United States 
for the purpose of .giving the Filipino people 
an opportunity to be represented before the depart- 
ment of this Government, executive as well as legislative, 
Xf you- read the language of the law you will see 
this is a fact. Is "it a crime that our advice is 
sought? Is it a ctime for use to volunteer our 
opinion on matters affecting the islands? M r. 
Ctexman, I v;ill say right now that if I am supposed 
to be ' in" the United States -only to draw salary, and 
can not express what l believe to be the rights 
of my people; if I can not object to or indorse 
an appointment for the government of the Philippine 
Islands, then I want to resign my post, for ± should 
be ashamed to receive my salary; I shoula want to 
go home, because I do not see what good I coul^ do 
here. (Applause) 

The Chairman.- §xi time of the gentleman from 
the Philippines has again expired. 

-i „ »*> Chairman, X yield to the gen- 
±>ir» Ferris »- Sir* j 

tleman two minutes. 

The Chairman.- The gentleman is recognized for 
two minutes more. 

Mr. Quezon. - 

hpfore I proceed any further 
Mr, Chairman, oet ° v ° .% J B guested that I 
X want to say this: J-I , authorized anyone 
have done something ^ on £> comne ction with my 
to do something wrong* x qhall welcome an inves- 
work in this country, t a0O it u3e d to 

tigation. But X Jo not ^ ^ tQ dlvert the 
dealy Philippine p^^onle from the real Issue 
minds of the American peopi 
that is before them. 

*•+■/ tement in this arti- 
There la another J u r™ a fe w words, and 
cle about which x ff^s fast as I can. The 
X anting to read ^ fi g of me: 
gentleman from Tennesa 



- 7 - 



"Having served in the revolutionary army 
against the United States, we can imagine he 
is not shedding tears when the political guil- 
lotine decapitates fo m er American soldiers in 
the interest of his political supporters - <» 
And so on. 

Mr. Chairman, there is a su^restion here 
that I want to refute. It is hinted at, that 
because I have served in the Philippine Army, 
I am holding rancor in my heart toward Ameri- 
can veternas. My best American friends in the 
Philippine Islands are men against whom I 
fought during the war. (Applause) I have the 
greatest admiration for Americans who, in an- 
swer to the call of their country, have gone to 
the Philippine Islands and fought us, just as I 
believe - at least, I hope - that those Ameri- 
cans admire the Filipinos who had the courage 
to fight them. (Applause) There is no rancor 
in my heart. These men were doing their duty 
as I knew 1 was doing my duty. They tried to 
kill me during the war, and I tried to kill them. 
(Laughter) But men who have enough red blood 
in their veins to come out and fight for their 
country have big enough hearts to respect those 
against whom they are fighting. (APILAUSE) 

I want to say this again: My best Amer- 
ican friends in the islands are Judge Ross, 
who was a captain of Volunteers and Demo- 
crat, and Waj, Hartigan, a Republican. I 
could recite a long list of others, but that 
would take up too much of the time of the House. 

Mr. Chairman, my advocacy of independence 
is not inspired by rancor or ill will toward 
Americans, but by love of freedom, xhe c ay 
will yet come when it will be seen that I 
live been a good friend of the ^ri cans in 

.re taking an attitude o; posed to mxne. 

Oood name in man V«g>$> 

3la ^ ffiiSSf^pn. « "J sood name 
But ^ that Riches I emlohes him 

I!obs me pi ^nai „ i™-ipad. 
And makes me poor indeed. 

(Prolonged applause) 



Lc/ 



- XI - 

DELIVERED BEFORE THE AMERICAN 
HOUSE OB' REPRESENTATIVE 
August 13, 1916. 

4» ^w , -h^ eZ ° nJ Kr * Speaker, the bill which 
is now before you is practically the same as 
that which passed the House of Representatives 
on way 1st last, commonly known as the Jones bill. 
Therefore l feel justified in predicting that 
the conference report will be adopted. The long 
continuous, hard, and sometimes very better 
contest to enact this legislation shall thus 
have come to a successful end, and very 
friend of human liberty will have reason to rojoicf 
(Applause) 

This bill differs from the bill which 
passed the Senate of the United States on 
February 4, 1916, in two respects. On the 
subject of independence the Senate bill was 
more definite than this bill: since the Senate 
bill provided not only that the Philippines 
set the period within which that independence was 
to be granted: that is, from two to four* years. 
The bill as agreed upon the report to the 
Bouse by the conferees does not undertake to 
determine either the date or the period when 
independence shall be grnated, but it does 
delcare it to be the purpose of the people of 
the United Statew to grant the Philippines 
their independence "as soon as a stable gov- 
ernment can be established^ in the islands. 

With regard to -the provisions affecting 
the powers of the Philippine government and 
its control by the Filipino people, this bill 
is more liberal and more logical than the Se- 
nate bill. I stdiod by and fought for the ind- 
ependence clause of the Senate bill, namely, 
the Clarke amendment, as it is well known to 
you but I am fair enough to see and frank 
eno'gh to say that, even in its present form, 
this bill is a remarkable progress in the 
right direction. 

For more than three centureis the peo- 
ple of the Philippines were under the rule 
of Swain. During the long period of time 
^hevrSe held by the Spanish Government 
•cney \vcre "°- LU - i„±. a ori 5 we re «-iven no part in 
avowedly as subjec ^ ^^^fj The laws of 

it ne bv oeaceful means. Eighteen years ago 
it be oy peaceiu^L , succeeded by 

the sovereignty of sp*i» vaa * ^ thia whole 

that of the '^ te \ bt t?t ^st thrte years, the 
time, excepting only ^S^ly, almost 
Philippine government jas g*^ rleft J' offl _ 

exclusively, in the g^ eflldontj thepolicy 
cials appointed by tne r reaj , 

f f ^^^wfsSai S permanently held as 
know whether we ™ ot her power, or 

possessions, sold to ^omeou ^ 
eventually granted independence. 

-Moris which were 
Thank God, those c ° n ^ X ^e intolerable 
becoming every day m0 ^ v ^ d ^r9turn. (Applause) 
will soon disappear, never to 



Now, we have a lecis] n-M™ rt—n 
that it la the Durnoaf S !w declaration 
United States tTSSSt L mf 80 " 6 ° f -^ e 
pendenoe aa soon as a *«Wi 1 hlll PP lr > e a Inde- 
be established in th« ?^ bl 3 government can 

noS TonS +J? 5 domestic affairs. We may 
Sark Souds */ uto V^te with hope, ^i'he 
fvon 2 t,f certainty have been dispelled 
from our hon z on. Heretofore we have been 
the least and the last factor in Philippe 
affairs. -ereafter we shall be the fi?st and 
most important factor, heretofore things 
were done oy the Philippine government not 
only without the consent but on many occasions 
against the strong opposition of the Filipino 
people.- hereafter nothing will be done with- 
out our consent, much less In defiance of 
our opposition. So I say, t&u Speaker j this 
bill is a long and very decisive step toward 
the complete emancipation of the Filipino 
people. It marks an epoch in our national 
history. (Applause) We are convinced that 
the promise of independence contained in the 
bill will be faithfully fulfilled, for we 
know that we are dealing with a Nation to the 
truest sense jealous of its honor and its 
good name. (Applause) We are positive that 
when we have fully demonstrated that we can 
establish and maintain a government that will 
protect from lawlessness and from violence Its 
own citizens as well as those of other coun- 
tries who live or sojourn in the islands, the 
American people will consent to the eett ng 
up of a Philippine republic which will be a 
glory to the United States and a blessing to 
us. (Applause) 

Yes, the enactment of such a great piece 
of constructive legislation as this is to the 
everlasting credit of this Congress and this 
administration. You have done a noble work and 
you have every reason to feel satisfied with 
and proud of it, You can be ™ e * a 

future Cong^ss cuts forever the 1 ^ that as 
yet binds my country to yours, the 1'xlipmos 
plopS will not forget that " ^°^ e ° f 
this legislation that there will ^en have 

been brought ^"^^^ S^STW« 
consummation of your im-x^yy^ 

t •> ,,, t QM imieinp* the unanimous 
Mr. Speaker, I k ™J'^ f rom thS bottom of 
sentiment of my peoplw when nom ^ 
my heart I say to you ^e to-day we. ar 

grateful - P^J^^ess of the United States 

can people, to the Congress 01 o 

and to President Wilson for this measure 



- 3 - 

Mr. Speaker, ma.y I not be premitted, on 
this occasion, to transgress the rules of the 
pise so that I may address personally the 
gentleman from Virginia and say to him: Mr. 
Jones, I have witnessed your untiring work on 
this bill; 1 have seen your unselfish devotion 
to the cause of Philippine independence, honest- 
ly believing that it was demanded not only by 
God.! s own law, but also by the best interests 
of both your country and mine. As the chairman 
of the eommittee on Insular Affairs, which is 
in charge of legislation affecting the Phil- 
ippines, you have eon aider ed it to be your para- 
mount duty to write into law the convenant 
of your fathers, and the spirit of America - 
freedom for all. By this bill, which is the 
result of your hard labor - labor you have 
carried out at the risk of your own life, for 
you have been working In spite of ill -health - 
you are entitled, in my estimation, to a pro- 
minent place in the list of the advocates of 
human liberty. Surely your name will be writ- 
ten in letters of gold in the history of the 
Philippine Islands. You have earned not only 
the eternal gratitude but the love of every 
individual Filipino. God bless youl (Loud applause) 

Now, Mr. Speaker, just one word more 
of a personal character. Seven years ago 
next December I first entered the Halt: of the 
House of Representatives as the spokesman of 
the Filipino people. I came with a mandate 
to work for the immediate independence of the 
Philippine Islands. Ever since t hat day, to 
the boat of ray ability, I have done everything 
I could to carry out that mandate.- (Applause; 
To my knowledge I have been loyal to the will 
of mv people, and no opportunity have ± let 
% by SSSed that could be employed to promote 
fnei? welfare as 1 saw it. True 
secured their independence; but x s hall feel, 

- vail'. "ToL ad 
certain legislation events ^ 

rfee e f(nSined e to Xn fay that I an almost sur- 
prised tot I nave secured as much. 

■ Mr. Towner: Will the gentleman yield? 

" Mr. Quezon: Yes, sir. 

. t- do not desire to take the 
Mr. Towner: I do not perhaps be 

gentleman's, time. J think rlty t aay 

fitting -for a ;f ™ b ^ t ° alwaya been able to 
that while he has no fiway Philip- 
agree with the Oommissionor ir 



- 4 - 



pine Islands, he is ready to say that he has 
never known any man more devoted to the in- 
terests of his people, as he understood those 
interests, than has been the gentleman from the 
Philippine Islands. (Applause) In season and 
out of season, with an ability and persistence 
rare and creditable to any representative in 
any parliament in the world, this gentleman 
has worked for his people. 

And I desire to say that, so far a3 my 
belief is concerned, there never has been in 
any legislative body a representative of a 
people such as the Filipinos who has represent- 
ed them more ably and fithfully than has the 
gei tlemen who now addresses the House (Fa?* 
Que zon ) . ( Appl au s e ) 

Mr. Quezon: Mr. Speaker, I "thank the 
gentleman from Iowa for his very kind words, 
which I sincerely appreciate. 

Mr. Speaker, in the course of the campaign 
I have carried on to present before the American 
people the real aspirations of my country, I 
have been at times bitterly assailed and even 
slandered by persons who are too blind or too 
partisan to admit that anything but selfish 
motives can animate their ppponents. An 
earnest determination on the part of some of 
these to destroy me, politically, and even to 
ruin my reputation as an honest man failed thru 
no fault of theirs. I have never retorted in 
kind. The cause I advocate is too just, too 
sacred for me to permit it to be stained by 
base or merely personal animadversions. That 
I was only "trying to perpetuate myself in this 
Job", in advocating independence was the least 
charge made against me. Well, Kf. Speaker, now 
the opportunity presents itself of answering 
that charge, which up to this moment have 
ignored bf cause I always prefer to answer with 
deeds r-ather than with words. (Applause) J. 
could not very well quit my post while nothing 
was doSe by this Government to ameliorate con- 
ditions in the Islands. After having started 
i: ' fl(rht it would have seemed lack of dejer- 

has been won and the f ^™ e £j^ to show how 
comparatively l» 3 ^ r >J™ ^d how fearful I 
attached I am to my 3 ™ k reelection, 

am of l° 3in 6/ ffny olher public office. 

I do not Sd much more to my 

x can manage to HJJf f IA The only reason 

liking, as a P^^^fSecause j w Lted to 
why I sought this P^oe la Dccau * Qf th0 

be of service to my °XcTinP to it. Once I 
honor or the salary attaching to 



- 5 - 



h?£Zit m ? Q ?? untr y when there was nothing but 

5ES££%n 6Very kind of hardships, and 

danger to my life in the service. 

rJ^'J&F** 9 ^ P e °P le have been too ge- 

m f- 1 owe them more than I shall 
iZfZ T to re P a y» no matter what I might 

¥S ° r misht do ln thQ f »^e *<>r them. 

5? i 1 ^ my P peaen t office I do not propose 
to abandon my duty of cooperating in the work 
still to be done until the islands are complete- 
ly iree. l am only going to occupy that place 
wnere, in- my opinion, 1 can more effectively 
help, which, for the present, at least, seems 
to me to be that of a private citizen. 

Just a few parting words, and 1 shall be 
through. My service in this House, Mr. Speaker 
has been the most valuable experience in my life. 
Here 1 have met men in mind and in heart. I have 
formed here friendships that I treasure as 
beyond price. From everyone of you I have re- 
ceived the most courteous treatment. The 
days 1 spent among you will always be very 
dear to me. I thank you, Mr. Speaker: I thank 
the leader of the majority, the leader of the 
minority, and each one of the. Members of this 
great House, for you all have been extremely 
good to me. 1 want you all to know that I 
realize that each one of you, no matter how you 
vote on the Philippine question, is moved 
only by your earnest desire to do what you 
think is best for us. And so when -i- fo home 
I shall tell my people that they have no better 
friends than they possess in every Member of 
this body. (Applause) 

The Speaker; pro tempore. The time of 
the gentleman has expired. 

Mr. Quezon: I hope you will all come to 
the Philippines and visit me. (Prolonged applause) 



Lc/ 



- XII - 



INAUGURAL ADDRBSS OP PRESIDENT 
QUEZON OF THE SENATE. 



( October 15, 1915. ) 



Gentlemen of the Senate :- 

I feel overwhelmed by the distinction that has come 
to me. When, by unanimous acclamation, you chose me to 
be the first president of this august body, you conferred 
upon me an honor that has a special va|\ie at this pariod ' 
of our history. You are well aware that I did not seek 
of our history, _You are well aware that ^ did not seek 
the office, but I gratefully bow to your will. 

You expect me to maintain violate the dignity of 
this House, to preside over its deliberations with strict 
impartiality, and to faithfully carry out its resolutions. 
You may rest assured that I shall do so. 

The constitution of this Senate is a historical event 
for more than one reason: it is not only the first Sena- 
te of the Philippine Islands, but it is the first nation- 
al Senate of really popular character since its inceptxon. 
In Europe the senators, because of the elements from which 
they are drawn and the source of their authority, are gen- 
erally representatives of the privileged classes, of the 
nobility and the church. In America, the Senate was pro - 
v-ded to represent in Congress the sovereign interests of 
the several states composing the Union, in ^°P° 
Groxvn appointed and still appoints senators, who were and 
cliosen from amongst the dignataries ° £ .^?^ a °l£? 
members of the nobility. Xn ^ca the senator s^ere^ 

SfE/IS U pin it' wLlne^ople^who elected us by 
&2? sSK? Here we do ^^T^^ we 
classes, which, fur J^^*g t^ ^ ^ ^ 
present the people in ^ ene ^f-? s a ££ e int erest of the peo- 
answerable for our acts. It is tne in as 
pie which v/e have to safeguard, and 

a whole whom we have to SQ rve. electi- 
In substituting an ^f^f^^ign nation contem- 
ve Senate, the Governing of the sever g^ ^ 
elated something ™ore than of affairs totally opposed to . 
desired to create \*****^£J> n was there to serve our 
the former regime, f%^it served them from the point 
interests, to be sure, but it s t took of those inter- 

that, a senate i*^**^ bicameral /g'g'ti- 
popular house. 1 * e ^.„.„ 0 3e d to serve as a very 
the lower house is ?ui>poso the most ^fritavj ^ 
ve thermometer, reei^in t while the ^ 

porary changes |» ^^tuTe he 
must represent the soi ' words, tne 3 J"" f p0 pu- 
of public opinion, other ^ overflow ol pop 
a safe, immovable dam to con^ g ^/^thin the 
lar passion. J-he VOJ -^ a _. q a iudgment IUX '_ horr ihle 
God only when is expresses a J ^ The m03 i horri^ 
safe channels of serene reflec ^ ^ causea the hea 
crime recorded by history, 



- 2 - 



vens to weep and the earth to tremble, was a crime com- 
mitted at the instance of a people blinded by passion, 
at a moment when fanaticism had stifled reason and para- 
lyzed all human sentiment. I refer to the crime of Gol- 
totha. We must take a step forward only when we are su- 
re of ourselves, and such steps must necessarily be few. 
We must act when we are sure that we knows public opi- 
nion and that thi.3 opinion has been formed conscientious- 
ly. In cases of conflict between private interests we 
must be the regulatory force that harmonizes the demands 
of the distinct elements making up our community, in or- 
der that the general interest may"- prevail in every case. 
We must maintain the stability of our institutions and 
safeguard public and private rights. 

The merits of our work will not be measurable by 
the quantity of the laws we pass, but by their quality. 
Nothing breeds more confusion in society than a constant 
change in 1 gislation. To suffer the evils of an existing 
law is in many cases preferable to endeavoring to remedy 
these evils by a law passed in a haphazard way, without 
proper and careful consideration, because laws of this 
nature are productive of greater, and perhaps even of 
irreparable harm. Our work will be to build up and not 
to tear down, and we shall not destroy the old until we 
are sure that the new is better. }Applause). 

The Jones Act confers upon the Senate not only le- 
gislative, but also administrative authority. The Se- 
nate's prerogative to confirm or withhold its confirma- 
tion of the appointments made by the Governor -General 
gives as a share in the powers and, of course the res- 
ponsabilities, or the Executive as regards the execution 
and administration of our laws. It is a prerogative 
that we should esteem and hold in high regard. To ob- 
tain it, great efforts had to be made by the supporters 
of the Jones Act. It has received the special approval 
of our present Governor -General, and we must endeavor 
by our success to dispel the fears of our adversaries and 
to bring about the fruition of the hopes of our sympathi- 
zers. 

The political parties are absolutely necessary orga- 
nizations wherever democratic government is established, 
Vhen a political party obtains the majority of the popu- 
lar vote, it acquires the whole power of the Government, 
and with that power the responsability. it is a fact that 
we do not yet enjoy sovereign powers. Ample as are the 
uowers conferred upon the people by the Jones Act, they 
\vb limited bv the powers reserved by the American Gov- 
ernment, which are powers inherent in sovereignty. We 
Z the right to exercise, and the people naturally de- 
sire £o exercise, all the powers conferred upon us by 
the Jones Act. We are entitled to hope and, I believe, 
mav confidently hope that the representative in these 

of the united States will construe the ^ones Act 
ifriiberaf spiriirand wherever the will of the people 
Li ?n inflict with the powers of the sovereign, the 




ma 

EntlSP ^t'thVvlltorlous^ajority Should occupy the 

irsMv. o f fleas - i\Ti^r s n iv^. 

SSSSSl^oTS; JSCS*"- U to paas £„. *t 
also to secure their proper execution. It is not, how- 
over, sufficient qualification for appointment to an ad- 



- 3 - 



ministrative or Amr 

long to the partv lh*t u posltlon that the dandidate be- 
polls. It is also nl^* 3 ca *T led off the victory at the 
ce, patriotism and Sli?^ 7 that ^tegrlty, intelligen- 
the office which he de;?,f e / ender him rea11 ^ ™ orth V of 
to refuse to inform S 1 .° CCU ^' V/o have no ri S ht 
General for the soIp It olnt wents made by the Governor- 
to our personal livL„ ? n that the P e ^3on appointed is not 

party interests bef or? ^hA*"? ° a3 ! muat we ever P lace 
(Applause.) our dutv %S ? in ^rests of the community. 

not to propose or selec? w^ 1 ^ sive consei ^ a * d 
far removed from J.™?? take a stand ^ ust as 

tion of resnonSn^fJ n ' whlch is a coward renuncia- 
tion °* r ^nsxbility, as from obstinacy and usurpation. 

of the fio eL!? i° tat r the Senate intervenes in the acts 

Tne powe? oT?h? t -^ elated v/ith its international relations, 
ou? homl a?^^! ^f^f Gove rnment being circumscribed to 
oui home affairs, the Pliilippine Senate lacks that autho- 

nations w-m V * ntur l *ome to affir , however, that foreign 

° L r cl °sely watch the conduct of this Senate in 
S »t *5 ??' advance judgment of . what our conduct will 

+ . Sh ? 1:L ,? e ab3 °lut;ely independent. I venture to 
™i u — 11 S reatl y depend upon this Senate whether 

we snail have more sympathisers, not only in America, but 
also in o.ther countries, with our national aspiration. If 
we oake care to respect and enforce respect for the r ights 
of the foreigner, we shall gain the sympathy of the world. 
We mus t aspire to being the custodians of the good faith 
of the Filipino people toward other nations, and it must 
therefore be our endeavor to keep that faith immaculate. 
Our conduct must be inspired by justice, consideration, 
and fraternal affection, not for our own people alone, 
but also for foreigners. 

Gentlemen, ± have taken up too much of your atten- 
tion. I feel upon my shoulders the ful weight of the 
enormous responsibility that you have placed upon me. 
With the aid of God and your assistance I hope to dis9 
charge my mission successfully. V/e need the support of 
the whole people, V/e must remind them that we have en- 
tered upon the most acute period of our hi story; that 
our triumoh, will be their triumph, our defeat their 
defeat, our failure their failure. We must ask them, 
and we can trust that they wi.ll respond to our request, 
to rrive us the inspiration of their patriotism, the ad- 
vicS and direction of their intellect the support and 
co-operation of their powerful are. (Prolonged thundcr- 
our applause . ) 



•Lc/ 



- XIII - 



SPEECH 

D j HON. HANUEL gttwAw 
Resident Commissi ™1 ^20N, 

uniasioner from tho Philippines, 

• ; IN THE HOUSE OP REPRESENTATIVES 

the stat^o^tho^SSS 1 ^ ° f , the whole on 
bill (S. 381) to declare h ?? a undo1, consideration the 
of the United States as to ty^ P °, 36 of the P eo P le 
status of the peo^lo iS «ie future political 
to provide a more" autnL thG rhili PPine Islands, and 
islands. autonomous government for those 

consXoufoT ^k^^tft **l< &11 i 1 ■* 
House is of the utmnti- ?** ^ ^ uest i on before the 
to both the Mer?^L^?S^????% Gf VaSt co »^ence 
action will ? he Plli P :i -no peoples. Your 

Hi Z Z' Andee <** affect not alone you and us of 

the present generation, but those comin- after L - 

£lt"S£entf SraV6 ^Ponsibility that I shall make 

You are writing history to r day, and it lies 
entirely within your power to determine what that 
history shall be - whether it shall be one worthy 
of the past of this great Republic, a realization 
of the noble purpose for which it was founded, or a 
hold and frank departure from what you have asserted 
to be American ideals and American principles. The 
people of the Philippines are in suspense; their 
eyes are now anxiously following the proceedings 
in this chamber, the very life of their country hangs 
in the balance. Shall justice at last be done to 
them? Shall the untold sacrifice in blood and 
treasure made in the past now bear its fruit? 

Shall we, after centuries of subjection, be 
after all permitted to lift up our heads and face 
mankind as an emancipated people, placed upon the 
same footing as those who are already the masters 
of themselves and 'their country; or must we still 
wander, a people without its own country or flag, 
with but feeble hopes in the future? The answer 
is yours. 

To discuss in detail, within the time allotted 
me, the bill now before the House is, of course 
impossible, and perhaps ^oesaary. The chairman 
of the Committee on Insular Affairs (W. Jones) has 
^done this bettor than I could hope to do. It is the 
main issue involved in the bill tt*Uaj f^cul arly 
interested in, and to that Question alone I a£all 
address myself. That issue is conta ^ e ? h i n r ?^ k ^° 

sions of faction 34 ™T h ?i£lTs "rf aef^cSve. 
amendment. The rest of ^he bill is ver £ d in 

ft is not quite as Ij^eral « t^J^ (Mr< Jones) . 

the House by the S entl f^,^Jf ^consistent with 
indeed, some of its privisions are moon 



- 2 - 



the theory underlying the bill; there are too 
H ff ^° nS ^uposed upon the powers granted 

^iipino people; then the prohibition 
clause, known as the G-ronna amendment, reduces 

«r% 2S2 me ° f i he Phi ^iPPine government at a 
tin* when we shall be most in need of revenue,- 

,i\ 8 n raU3t P re P a re for the increased expenses 
™J 1 result from the forthcoming establish- 
es? v.* 11 5- nde P e ndent government. But despite 
these objectionable features of the bill, I am 
willing to have it passed as it is rather than 
to endanger the adoption of the Clarke amendment. 

Mr. Chairman, It would be a lack of candor 
for me to say that the Clarke amendment consti- 
tutes, in my opinion, the best and wisest way 
of disposing of the Philippine question. I think 
1 could propose a better solution, or , at least, 
one that would better safeguard the interests of 
ray people and be more satisfactory to them. But, 
as a practical man, I must deal with conditions, 
and so, there being no other proposal for Philip- 
pine independence which could possible have any 
chance of getting through, I am for the Clarke 
amendment body and soul. (Applause on the Democ- 
ratic side, ) 

The substantial merit of the Clarke amend- 
ment lies in the fact that it provides for the 
establishment, within a short period of time, 
of an independent Philippine government, a 
government that will be of, for, and by the Fi- 
lipino people, absolutely free from any foreign 
control and interference; a government which it 
is our fondest ambition to have, as it is our 
God-given right to establish, the only kind of 
government under which we can live happily and 
content. (Applause.) 

Mr. Chairman, 1 shall not on this occasion 
deal with the question of whether or not the 
Filipino people are capable of governing themselves, 
I have discussed that question time and time 
again, both upon the floor of this House and else 
where, and, X dare say, it is, with most of you, 
no longer a debatable point. Those who, in 
s^ite of the splendid evidence given by tne 
people of the Philippine Islands in their exer- 
cise of tie oower heretofore -ranted them by 
the United States, still insist that we can not 
govern ourselves are either too blind to see 
the lirht or too prejudiced to admit it. It 
is a vm ate of time to. try to convince them. 
The proposition to which I ^l^^nZlll 
is that' on which honest men may di 
whether the Filipino people, left jo thfllr om 
devises, would long remain impendent • j£^e 
are many well-meaning- and sympathetic Americans 



- 3 - 



wh<> would not for one minute withhold from us that 
rignt to govern our own country except for the fear 
that we may fall prey to some other power, and in 
their good will toward my people, in their unselfish 
interest in our well-being they would not tolerate 
for a second a situation under which we might beco- 
me the victim of any unscrupulous nation. All honor 
to ohese good-hearted, generous Americans! They 
are not to be confused with those whose real motive 
in oppising Philippine independence is the promotion 
of their own personal interest. These honest Ameri- 
cans deserve and have the affection of my people, 
But I want to tell them,. Mr. Chairman, that in my 
opinion their fears are unfounded, that the specter 
of a nation awaiting patiently but watching guardedly 
the moment when the United States shall withdraw its 
sovereignty from the Philippine Islands in order to 
step in and get control of the Filippine government 
is the result of fancy. 

Mr. MADDEN, Will the gentleman yield? 
,:r. QUEZON. Yes. 

Mr. MADDEN. Suppose the Filipinos were given 
freedom now, but before they had time to build up 
an army and navy some European or oriental country 
should undertake to take them away. To what civi- 
lized country would they look for protection? 

Mr. QUEZON, Mr. Chairman, I was just saying 
when I was interrupted by the gentleman from 
Illinois (Mr. Madden) that, in my opinion, the 
hypothesis of the gentleman is not likely to be- 
come real; but if it should let me as. sure the 
gentleman that we would look to no country for 
protection; we would fight as best we could with 
whatever means we had we would unhesitatingly 
consecrate once more to your love for freedom the 
best blood there is in our hand (applause); we 
could do no more. 

Mr. 0 ' SIIAUNESSY. Will the gentleman yield 
for just one supplemental questions 

Mr. QUEZON. Yes. 

Mr. O'SHAUNESSY. Has the gentleman got that 
confidence in the nations of the world to believe 
that you will be left alone after you are free 
and independent without a strong army and navy; 

Mr, QUEZON. Mr, Chairman, X have bo more con- 
fidante in the nations of the world now tiian had 
£hose patriotic Americans who in 1776 dared to establish 
a ReSublS in t hia continent with but 5,000,000 peo- 
nlHa^iause) - but rny people are just as willlng- 
in f icl! as desirous of taking their chance - as the 
founders of this Nation were, 



?ui d . x if 1 - ? e as success - 

today had your forefath«^ S fate of your country 
of o ther nations? Is tW * lmid ' aS fearful 

(Mr. O'Shaunnessy) lull S^ 1 ™*? f £ om Rhode l3lands 
of the rrenti^o^ i w ? uld Wlah u s to be? The inquiry 

cLntS-°3Sou?Hi? Pli ! S th9 as3 ^tion that no small 
will be P^lllL l P re ?° be inde P d «nt, for it surely 
be true ^the iL+Z % stron 6 er Power. If this theory 
be forX* c iZh ° f - 6Very iri3i ^ a n patriot should 
simolv mean I 2£« * 31n S e their notle ambition would 
?i3hm ?!- ? 0han S e of master. But. that theory, 
M ISt! y T?S raa 5 kind > i3 ^^ound and not supported 
and other c,™??' lf P lease > at Holland, Switzerland, 

ana other small countries, and tell me how ion* they 

thlv S??f inde ? ende ^- Does anyone question ?hat 7 
5" f e mam so for years to come? Belgium, the 
latest instance of an unprovoked aggression, was not 
attacked because her conquest was sought, but because 
the passage of a belligerent army through her territory 
was deemed vital for the success of that army, and, 
J. dare say, that the attack upon Belgium, more than 
any other cause, will defeat Germany" in this war, 
since she so shocked the moral sense of the world 
that she alienated sympathies which might otherwise 
have been here, it will only be, so we are told - 
and I believe it to be true- after the full inde- 
pendence of Beglium shall have been restored and 
after she has been fully paid for the damages she 
has suffered that the peace of Europe will come. 

Mr. Chairman, it has been very Unfortunate 
for the people of Belgium, it has meant to them 
untold sufferings, and yet, in a way, the v/orld at 
large may be consoled that such a horrible incident 
should have token place, for its consequqnces make 
us feel that it never will be lightly repeated. V/ith 
the lesson in Belgium before it no nation, no matter 
how strong she may be will be anxious to put herself 
in the moral predicament in which the German Govern- 
ment is now placed (Applause). 

Mr. O f SHAUNESSY. Mr. Chairman, just one more 
question. Is it a fact that the politics, so called 
in the Philippic Islands believe that when they 
are /riven their freedom they will be supported in 
it by the Army and Navy of the United States, or 
is there any understanding that they will be suar ant- 
ed in the £? freedom or that something will be done 
for their neutralization? 

iff* QUEZON. Mrf Chairman, there may be Pilipi- 

declared independent ^ h °/lf^ t ae C lzrltlon, either 
States will stand back of ^declar ^ , do 
for a period of years 01 * oher ish such hope, 
not share that ^fj 1 ®* the aid of the United 

Of course, 1 would not ret « ^ if lt was 
States, aAd would accept it graceiuny 



- 5 - 

tendered to us in C a«« ™. 
not ask for 



viy a^xuuae on this ma^I™ \ u " La r; °uld be siver, „ 
That if we want to be inlLeSd ^^nl 3 : 
upon ourselves alone to mSn?*?^' We shou ^ reiy 
government. S G f ar as I Si n and defend our 
titude of the imensS malo??^ ^ U is a ^o She at- 
people. (Applause) ^onty of the Filipino 

It is tpno th t- -hi 
!;r am one of them - whowSu?d C i ?r y , Filiplnos J «nd 
pine Islands neutralized lk \ to see the ^Hip- 

United otates will ta£n tv.;™ 1 We hope that the P 
an agreement with othe? n^t^Tl*™? Steps to securo 
when the islands *h«in k ? ns to ^ he effect that 

pendene by tSs^o^rnmeSt 6 thS gSSV** lnde " 
be recognized and resoee?»A £S o^ n JS pend 2 nce sha11 
the world nnr> vT^i- 1 Z 9 e ° ted D y a11 the nations of 

i,Jr? i ^liPPines as to make the grantin- or 

^io^ Pe ? denC f de P end ^ upon the autoes a of a 
neutralization treaty, 

Ivir. Chairman, I have no fear that when your 
protection is withdrawn from the Philippines, we 
shall at once be invaded by a conquering array; not 
because I have any confidence in the altruism of 

* the other nations, but because I know they are 
selfish. Just let me show you how the self-interest 

• of the great powers will serve to protect the 
islands from foreign aggression. The nations that 
are strong enough to take the Philippines by 
force are England, France, Germans'-, Austria, Italy, 

-and Russia in Europe, and Japan in Asia. England 
is satisfied with the maintenance of the status 
quo in Asia - that is to 3 ay, of retaining what 

■-'she has and in not having others get more than 

' t|iey have now. She does not seem to have any 
special reasons for wishing to possess herself of 
the Philippines. On the contrary, there are two 

istrong reasons why we should have no f?^ a °* . 

'England: First, because after the attitude which 
ahl has taken in this war - holding ° u * ell 
as the friend of weak nations - she ^oula not well 
adopt a policy of conquest toward such a nation se 

■ cond, because" England would ^o more tWnk of «T 

landing the American people than tne ^ 
would think of offending the English people. 

These two English-*., eaking PJ^iSSSt"Sat if the 
friends and will remain so. ^ because, in their 
Philippines are made i^ e P«^ n * Jpl Tfelt it their 
love for justice, the f^ 1 ^ ^fUernment, it 
futy to allow us to owi . 

>.*ould necessarily do offensive ther coU ntry 
the United States to l^arn tha u _ dQQQ not mean 
"^destroyed the government. * entmen t against 
'fat they would have fe^^ o* toward, us. So Sng- 
P.nation which has thus acted to ient hh ilip- 

la ^d will not interfere with an i 
Pine government. 



6 - 



™?™7 ! D ^ t of the question, for she has no 
^ ? • sia and has sh own no desire of late 
2 q . xne them * How about France, Germany, Italy 
and Russia? The interest of Japan, as well as that 
2Lf7 slandj . w111 Protect the Philippines from agr- 
?hf^i°^ °? w i? s from eit ner of these countries/ 3 0 
52 $£l le £? only one nation, and that is Japan, 
miLlt l "5,*?? Which 13 P^ted out ,3 the greatest 
I SSSa ™ ^ hl ii P ? ine independence. Mr, chairman, 
ffi^n ^ t that if the ^nilippine islands were 

TOlSt^f^f 1 ^ the Pill P in ° 3 we to acquiesce 
becoSe^i?-, t ?. tlli T s ^ansfer of sovereign and would 
to Sake P ?£ 1 ?!J C ^Panese, that Japan would be glad 
2?n «v ^ islands. But Japan will make no effort, 
V :- L ^ s ^ e f JfJ a £<* or blood, or spend a cent of 9 
der?" ShJ qUlre the lala nds once they are lndepen- 
whfnh o !® are only thrM objects nowadays for 
natil ^l-f V^talce a the conquest of another 
MnMnn ^S 1 ag-randizement, commercial ex- 

2?' P mi i lta ^y necessity. Japan does not 
Sh* 55 esent fny territory in the Philippines. 

? of J ecent ^ars added to the empire more 

w i« 0r ?'4. She can ea sily manage. Besides, for 
her territorial expansion she is looking toward 
the north instead of toward the south. So, for 
the sake of gaining- more territory alone, Japan 
will not undertake to conquer the islands." As for 

pS^r C o a i !? a ;? 3 ^ n i S he trade of Japan with Europe, 
China, and the United States will not be helped 
by the possession of the Philippines, for the 
islands are out of the way in all these routes. 
As for strategic reasons, the Philippines are no 
more needed by Japan than they are for commercial 
reasons. Wo possible enemy of Japan, after the 
United estates has left the islands, would come by 
way of the Philippines. Therefore 1 can see no 
reason why Japan would have any special desire 
to .seize the islands. Again, England could not 
look -vith favor on the action of Japan in taking 
over the Archipelago, for that would place Australia 
too near Japan to be safe or comfortable. So, M r . 
Chairman, this talk of the Philippines being grabbed 
by Japan the day after you had left us alone is 
-absolutely unfounded, and no one familiar with the 
international situation in the Far East would take 
it seriously. (Applause on the Democratic side.)" 

Sir. MILLER of Minnesota. I understood the 
gentleman to take the position that there is no 
danger of Japan conquering the Philippines in c ase 
the Philippine Islands are independently free? 

Mr. QUEZON. Yes. 

Mr. MIIiLER of Minnesota. But for the purposes 
of this next question, Does the gentleman think 
there is any possibility that Japan would go to 
war with the United States* for the purpose of 
getting the Philippine Islands if our sovereignty 
remaind? 



- 7 - 



for me # tn «f That la a ^evj delicate question 
statesmen 27* That is a for American 

clause? ? £ Ja P anQ ae statesmen to settle. (Ap- 
be the liL? aVe y own opinion as to what would 
if w«Sl fiS nfl Detween the Philippines and Japan 
Placed 1^ ^? d ° Pe ?? ent > 1 shou ^ n ot care to be 

Sncernino- 5S P° a "ion of telling this House things 
SI lapeS? relations between the United States 

thmiSvS 1 ^? ° f Ml nnesota. If the gentleman 
«£w +J^ afe *.* r ff aa would not fi Snt the Filipinos in 
order to get the Philippine Islands, does he think 
that Japan would fight the United States in order 
to get the Philippine Islands? 

... J vIr i QUEZON. Since the gentleman insists, I 
think I can point out to him some difference from 
the standpoint of Japan between the Philippines 
as an independent nation and the Philippines as a 
colony of the United States. The Philippines, 
as an independent nation, would not be a source 
of danger to Japan, but the Philippines under 
American sovereignty might well be a menace to 
Japan.' s interest in. the Par East. (Applause on 
the Democratic side.) 

Mr. Chairman, I feel that I have fully de- 
monstrated that, as conditions in the world stand 
to-day, if you grant the Philippines their inde- 
pendence, that independence will be recognized 
and respected by all the powers. Therefore I see 
no reason why you should withhold from us that 
right which we l^ng to exercise and which by every 
divine and human law is really ours. 

Statements have been made to-day to the ef- 
fect that thi3 is the anniversary of the Battle 
of Manila, and it has been rlleged that because 
of this fact this is an ill-chosen day to bring up 
a bill providing for the independence of the Philip - 
nine Islands. Ah, Mr. Chairman, you could have 
selected no better day than this to decide that 
the Filipinos shall have their independence; you 
could in" no more fitting manner celebrate Dewey's 
victory in the Manila Bay. I remember with what 
unbounded enthusiasm the Filipino people received - 
the news of the declaration of war between the Uni- 
ted States and Spain. It was heralded to them, 
a 3 it was heralded to the rest of the world, as a 
war iiot to be waged for territorial expansion, hot 
made in a spirit of conquest, but undertaken by a 
liberty-loving people in order to free the oppressed 
people of Cuba. 

The Filipinos, of course, understood that this 
meant freedom for them as well, for, to their minds, 
you could not follow one policy in Cuba and another 
in kha Philippines. We in the islands were also 
s^ruSling for our freedom. We fought by your side 
in that war. We hailed the American soldiers as the 



-8b 



liberators of our people; we looked upon your vic- 
tories as our own victories and gave you credit for 
the victories won by our own soldiers. It was a 
common enterprise against a common enemy* You re- 
ceived our aid, knowing the reason why it was given 
you, namely, because we believed in good faith that 
if we took your side, you would set free our country* 
And so, after those long and weary years have gone 
by, it is now well night time for you to celebrate 
Dewey f s victory by granting independence to the Philip- 
pine Islands* Thus you will prove that that victory 
was won not for the purpose of talcing other people's 
land, not for the purpose of opening for your goods 
new markets, not for the purpose of giving your ad- 
ministrators new subjects, but in the true spirit of 
that noble task which you have undertaken from the 
beginning of thi3 Republic - to do your part in the 
emancipation of mankind* 

Mr. Chairman, there is just one more point which 
i wish to make in connection with the statement of 
the gentleman from Tennesses (I Jr. Austin), that all 
the churches in the Philippines, Protestant and Catho- 
lic alike, are against independence* I do not know 
how much truth there is in such a report; but, if it 
be true, I hope it will not be out of place for me 
to remind the representatives of these churches that 
we are the only Christian people in the Par East, and 
it is, therefore, a duty which they owe to themselves • 
to favor Philippine independence. (Applause on the 
Democratic side.) Shall it be said that the Christian 
religion, under whose doctrines we have lived for 
over 300 years, has not made us at least as good ci- 
tizens as other oriental peoples? Why do they want 
American sovereignty of the islands? T)o they, mayhave, 
need American guns to preach us their religion? 
Christianity is founded upon live, and it is only 
through love that Christ wishes kingdom .established. 
Christianity is founded upon live, and it is only 
through love that Christ wishes kingdom established. 
Christianity is the great teacher of freedom, of 
equality among men, and he betrays his faith who would 
use a Christian chursh f s influence to subjugate any 
people. To the Catholic Church, especially, I have 
this message to send: Most of us, if not all of us, 
are Catholics. We have had no other civilization 
except that which was taught us by the Catholic Church. 
To say tht t v/e are no capable of governing ourselves 
is to assert that the Catholic Shurch has been a 
failure in its. civilizing influence in the Philippine 
Islands, (Applause on the Democratic side.) 



CO-HfStESSIONAL RECORD, 
Vol. 53, Part. 15. 
64th Congress, 1st Session, 
pp. 2225-2227. 



Lc/ 



XIV - 



j^THJPARaHSOUS ADDRESS OP HON. MANUEL L. QUEZON 
DELIVERED BEFORE THE LEAGUE OF FREE NATIONS 
ASSOCIATION, HOTEL COMMODORE, NEW YORK 
CITY, APRIL 19, 1919. 



Mr. Toaatmaster, ^adies and Gentlemen: Some 
political opponent* of mine some time ago said,— 
to Belittle wh t I was trying to do— that I had 
more lack than anything else (Laughter) —and I 
1° aS? a Very s ° od ev i^ence of that fact to- 
day. After listening to these two doctors who have 

?r^ e fu ed y° u > and to m y Great satisfaction found 
that_they were able to deliver very eloquent speech 
es, 1 was beginning to think whether if would not 
bo a proper excuse for me to tell the Chairman 
that I am sick again, and that I*had to retire, 
(daughter) But when he said that some one feared 
that the speeches tonight or today would deal on 
generalities, then I changed my mind, and I thought 
I would try to stand on my feet and say a few words 
I am not going to deliver a speech, but I am going 
to state a few facts about the conditions in the 
Philippine Islands, 



Ladies and Gentlemen, this Commission that 
is now visiting your country is composed of men 
representing all walks of life in my country. 
They represent also— i would call three genera- 
tions, constituting now the Filipino people- those 
that are very near the grave (daughter ) --to that 
I do not belong as yet (Harty Laughter) — then the 
generation represented by Professor J^ocoboo and 
Professor Osiaa. 

It h5s been said that one of the objections 
to granting Philippine independence is because 
there are so many different dialects in the Is- 
lands, it Is true. Now, for instance, you notice, 
that even in the English language—in using the 
English language, we have three different dialects 
(Laughter) — the one used by such men as Professor 
Bocobo and Mr., Osiaa, who' have had a thorough 
American education, the English U3ed by those who 
like me have learned English by just picking one 
word here and another word there, and then put- 
tin* them together as best they could, and the 
English apoken by thofce who preceded ua— who were 
thoroughly educated under the Spanish school, 
which is more or less a sort of mysterious lang- 
uage (Laughter) -they don't- they are not always 
sufe whether they are saying exactly what they 
want to say (Laughter — nor whether they are under- 
standing what is being said to them daughter J, 



*> , J you aee > we are here to s ive y° u an idea 

Si-i* J^'erent dialects now being spoken in the 
^niiippine Islands. (daughter). It should, however 
mat inside of a few more years there will be but 
one_ language spoken in the Philippine Islands, and 
11 i may say so myself, as a Filipino, I think it 
x \ ? Shakesperian language that you have just 

heard here today (Hearty Applause). Inside of a few 

l e& l S> 1 ^ di6s ^ gentlemen, all of us will 
T?£! ^one and girls and boys, educated in American 
,chools~when ± say "American 6 , 1 do not. mean to 
say schools paid by American money, or taught by 
American teachers, because today the schools in the 
lu P ? 9 islands are largely taught by Filipinos • 
them selves, but when I say American schools I 
^ an «! C ?° ols fcmnded ^7 American teachers, where 
the English language is the language that is taught. 
ln . a fe ™ years, all these girls and boys will be 
using English. You realize, of course— you under- 
stand what that means. That means that if we 
would be so unfortunate as not to attain our indepen- 
dence today, ten years hence those girls and boys 
will claim in a still louder voice their right to 
be free, because they --every o'ne of them --will have 
been so imbued of American ideals and principles, 
that they cannot live except with an independent 
country. (Hearty Applause). 

ladies and Gentlemen, several million bovs and 
girls today speak English in the Philippine Islands- 
thank God, "better that l do I 

And see what the result or that is — a wonder- 
ful spectacle that you and we are offering to the 
world. Do you realize that if you go through the 
pages of history you will not find a single instance 
where people who have been under a foreign yoke and 
seeking to be free, bring not grievances against 
the mother country, but love? ^o you know of any 
case where people who have been under foreign domina- 
tion seek to be free, not because they have been mis- 
treated, but because they have- been so well treated? 
(Laughter and Applause). 

Your own case --the United States was three cen- 
turies ago inhabited by the sons and the daughters, 
of England, And the United States three centuries 
ago threw off the yoke of England. Why? Because 
you have been mistreated by England. Thsce are no 
countries upon the face of the earth which have secur 
ed their independence except through force of arms. 
And we all hope that the day may come when at last 
we may. see one country free, not throught the force 
of arms, but through good will, love, and coopera- 
tion between the mother country and the colony. 
(Hearty Applause). 



- 5 - 



Gentlemen- ladles and ;-entlemen~I don't want 
to i or get that oecause it is true that X am in favor 
wL^^S^ 1 "* 38 ,He ^ty Laughter and applause)-- 
2J «£?* h;L3 wondorf ul thing been accomplished in 

. laLll PP ln «3? Because the United States can claim 

^L^J^uT 5 -* than that * the wl adorn of having dis- 
covered that colonies are not the properties of the 
colonization powers to be exploited—that people of 

^J 8 are not the slaVQS of the colonizing 
IZtlL S be °nslaved~but that colonies are to be 
r ^^f te 2 lZ T A the sood °? th e colony, for the better- 
ment of their people, and for their freedom and na- 
tional sovereignty. ■ 

This which is now being discussed in Europe, 
ana we all hope is going to be accepted as the princi- 
ple ^ hereafter to be followed in the treatment of co- 

? n iu S %r if ° een £rom tho ver 7 beginning the policy 
oi the United States in the Philippine Islands. And 
because the United States stood by that policy and 
I oil owed it honorably, we have the case, ladies and 
gentlemen, that the people of that country, who, a a 
professor Bocobo said before, in 1898 fought you and 
opposed the extension of your sovereignty over their 
country, now are coming here with a message of live, 
true, sincere, genuine love, affection and i ratitude 
■from the inhabitants of the Philippine Islands to 
the people of the United States (Applause). 

liow this policy has been carried out is what I 
desire to tell you in a few words on this occasion. 
When you came to the Philippine Islands, you first 
established a military government there. The Fili- 
pinos, as you know, opposed the extension of your 
sovereignty. _ They saw very little difference be- 
tween their Spanish masters and their new masters. 
They challenged the right of Spain to cede to you a 
territory, the control of which she had already lost, 
and they fought you. President McKinley sent a com- 
mission to the Philippines to tell the Filipinos — 
what? "I hope," he said, "this commission will be 
looked upon by those people as the bearers, of the 
richest bfcessing of a liberating rafoher than a con- 
quering nation. " And again ' he 3aid, "We shall con- 
tinue as we have begun, to make these, people whom 
Provindence has brought within our jurisdiction, 
fe^l that it is their liberty, not our power, their 
liberty, not our power, their welfare, and not our 
gain, we are seeking to enhance." 

President McKinley instructed this commission 
to establish a civil government in the Philippine 
Islands, and the commission did establish ore there. 
They first started by placing in the hand of the na- 
tives the government of the municipalities, and as 
these municipalities were governed well, they en- 
trusted into the hand of the Filipinos the govern- 



- 4 - 



ment of their province <? 

of these municipalities °S thoae Cities compose 
this civil government of t h Tv>^ n or nine 
the central government t-?!? Ph 3-lippines continued 
of the Americans a^pointS *f ^J 1 *^ in the hands 
United States. A?tlr thol^ the Resident of the 
President McKinley advi^S ° n seven ^ars have gone 
step in popular self -ove™ .^ress that another 
Islands was to be taken 9rn ? ent in *J» Philippine 
ly increasing the measure or fSS'+W are instant- 
islanders, and next sSSS l lbert y accorded the 
we shall take a Seat P s;?VA H COnditlona ^arant, 
their capacity for e \ ! ^ ° *orvmrd in testing 
first Filipino Le^St^T^ 81 ?-, stoning the 
in which thev stand t£ ! Assembly. And the way 

whether the self^ov^nl^ 3 L Wl11 larsel ? detaraina 
increased or ctLKI^'T 11 * thua granted will be 



increased or decreased." 

the fSs? C |w?^? ^V h * 3 declaration in .1907 
for the rilSl 1 i? pin ? A ffembly was inaugurated and 
the Fi\;^« lme in the hi3t °ry of our country 
the Filipinos were permitted to take part in legis- 
lating for their islands. S 

^4 J n 19 ?-?' after seven years of operation of 
this Assembly, President Wilson came to power, fol- 
lowing the same policy marked by his predecessor, 
and said, "Acting under the authority conferred 
upon the President by Congress, I have accorded the 
people of the Islands a majority in both Houses of 
the Legislative body by appointing five instead 
of four native citizens to the membership of the 
Commission." It should be remembered that in the 
beginning the insular government was placed in the 
hands of the so-called Philippine Commission com- 
posed of Americans appointed by the President with 
the consent of the Senate. When the Philippine As- 
sembly was established this Commission constituted 
the upper House of the Legislature, the Assembly 
the lower House, so that while the people were re- 
presented in one branch of their government, still 
the upper branch remained in the hands of Americans 
appointed by the President, and not responsible to 
the people of the Philippine Islands, 

When President Wilson came to power, and after 
a demonstration by the Assembly, that the Filipinos 
could be entrusted with legislative power, he pro- 
ceeded at once to appoint Filipinos in that Commis-. 
aion, living us the majority in the Commission, so 
that £ tow.ll said, from that time on t he control 
of the Legislature was placed, m the hands of the 
Filipino s. 

After two years of operation and when ^t was 
Proven that the Filipinos could be ^fely www 
with all the power of legislating for the country, 



- 5 - 

fiw °wS?^ a3 J* thC Unlted Statea enacted the Jones 
™^'h™~« mad S electlv e both the upper and the lo- 

the l^!l?mv, T P ? aC ^ iCally iavoated th« people of 
the Philippine Islands with such powers that it 
may properly be aald that since that day to this 
present moment the Filipinos themselves have been 
governing the Philippines, 

For three years, ladies and gentlemen, this 
government has been in operation— a government where 
the United States has but one representative — the 
Governor -General — a government where the members 
of the Cabinet of the government — the men in charge 
of the excution and administration of the laws, 
are all Filipinos, have the Vice-Governor — a govern- 
ment where the Legislature is entirely composed of 
Filipinos elected by the people. And I am going 
to proceed to tell you what this government has done. 

This government kept peace and order throughout 
the Archipelago during the war. (Hearty Applause) 
This government, did more than that-thls government 
was the only force back of you in the Orient during 
the war., and every Filipino was ready to fight for 
your flag, not only within the boundaries of the 
Philippine Islands, but in France, in Europe, where 
ever the flag might be assaulted! That is what the 
' =;o v 4r nment ha s do ne . 



That government has increased the opportunities 
for education to girls and boys in the Philippine 
islands. Prior to that time, and in spite of six- 
teen years of a government in the Philippines control- 
ed still mainly by Americans, not all the boys and 
ffirls of the Philippines could be educated, for lack 
of funds— I means attention on the part of the govern- 
ment This new government has found a vay of educa - 
t£Tev«£ child born in the Philippine Islands, and 
tiSf wll? elite educated within the next seven years. 
jHearty Applause). 

-v, -inH-irs and gentleman, under this govern- 
ed again, ladies ano^ improved enormous- 
ment the wealth oi y ln a ape ech before the 
ly, the Secretary of Ooimi f^ce n a i fisure s. This 
Chimber of Coifflnepco a fewday^ago ^ave ^ ^ 
government organized a banK v/nao hundred 
but five million pilars, " £ t bank W est of 
and fifty million tollBra-~tee ±*r& done-not 
Chicago-that le wtot thl| .ovornm ^ ^ ^ 
excepting San rrancisco ox 
government has been doing. 

^ if you want to^M^a^W" " 
ficial representatives in "u have to do is to 

working of this goverMjnu all y ^ _ - 
hear what Governor -General liarr ernjnen t» he 



sure this government la 



- 6 - 

said— speaking or thai- 

maintained under as w"* OVori ^«nt--and 

-dependent Phl^Sp^^ 

Now, that i a th* 

■that country or ™? to ahow whether ?he4 i^?? 183 
a stable go?wS.^'- ^"i^S e^™ 
the American p eop £e W i b !„ 8afcabll <"»<l ther^S! Will 

to cne extent that where t-v,«« Ken ■ it in good faith 
there is now faith, wSere £w WaS ^ us P^ion before 
la now love, and to t£ L^T^ Va L* isl f ke there" 




a thing as that I eriCan P e °Pl« could do such 

th* Ph-rn™- -tirst, that Japan desires to take 
^n^t^ PP J neS - (LaU ^ hter); s «cond, that it will toe 
tot'phlELf-^r 0 * advan *^ous for her to take ' 
« t e s • ifo sane rea son desires to take 
something that will do him harm (Laughter), and no 
sane nation would, Jauan has given evidence of 
being rather too sane (Hearty Laughter ). Of course, 
it is hard for any one of us to say and to be sure 
■ that he knows #hat he is talking about— that Japan 
does not want to take the Philippines. We can only 
.judge men as well as people from what they say, 
(Laughter) And we are bound to take at face value 
their words until they prove to be liars. Japan 
time and again has been saying that she cares not 
for the Philippine s, L5ut lot us see her actions, 
her deeds, as far as the Philippines are concerned 
whether they would seem to justify her words. There 
is no law in the Philippines that precludes Japanese- 
immigration. We have been the neighbors of Japan 
ffor more than three hundred years, 'ihey and we have 
"fflwayarbeen in the Far East— at least i do not know 
that there has been any change in the geographical 
position of the two countries (daughter ). And do 
you realize that there are not many more than seven 
thousand Japanese in the Philippine £?^ d ^-;£" 
pito of that 1 m continued Soographical neigh|oi 
hood. There are- more Chinese in Phxlippi-nes 

Jtroanesa. Would not that ^°£*^w1ms. 
*■ not so very anxious to colonize the f hilippmes. 

pnuntries either be- 
Nations grab other people's oouhwa 



- 7 - 



cause they need their territ-™, 4. 

tion, or they need their wealth nr. S ?2 d thelr P°P«la- 
territory for strategical rea l or ^ * eed the 
seem to fee very badly i n neerl Z Japan does not 
present, and if she £ he? n 0 ? r L- territor y J*at at 
toward a different geopr^hio^ i < ? ua f /es are looking 
HP Philippines are located ?*v d i re .9tton than where 
has Formosa, Korea, Kancnurii ^S^?^ 9 !^ Japan 
more than ample for all tiS S~ ^VS* 1 "" 0 ^ is 
and live there. 4t Lv l?f? le ° f apan to S° to 
they are now livinn L ^Jt**™ the ^land° W here 
She is not badly In n^eVof^^-^ ° th *? ^ritories. 
that one reaso/is^be g.^' 

o.ssf^as^^£ a ^ be 

do not know that thev cowl 5 X *1 ?? unt ^«s, and we 

Philippines if ^hefwen?^ tVs t^£%? £J£ot 

• of ^ne^pl'ntatloS, ?* ^ Ja P™ ^° Tto some* 0 *' 
01 tneir plantations in Java are readily welcomed hv 
some grave somewhere (Laughter). They Lnno? a?and 
our climate. u 

Here is the last and most important reason. The 
taking over of the Philippines by Japan will be the 
most difficult enterprise she ever had. It would not 
j'be like the taking over of Korea or of Formosa. Do 

• you realize that there is but one thing in which Ja- 
panese and Filipinos are alike, and that is that 
-their countries are both located in the Far East 

(Laughter). The Japanese — the Filipino is not ra- 
cially like the Japanese. Our religious is absolute- 
ly different. We have been Christians for the last 
three hundred years, and they are not. Our people 
have been for the last twenty years living under 
democratic institutions, auch more democratic than 
those existing in Japan. The Filipinos never could 
•be taupht or compelled for that matter, a government 
such as now prevails in autocratic countries. 

Now, ladies and gentlemen, this is a fact, and 
J»very Japanese statemen knows it. ^11 now wnat^ 
g. tLre?ore the problem for 

"-to the Philippines and trxe *™ c °r^ illinr r every 
-pines?.. It is simply the prool om ^ ki llin 
Filipino (Laughter)--raale and female, ^ y ^ 
:ter and Applause) because the 1 which is 

%rdly willing to *%™f*** <£ meD are strongly 
non-Christian, q»ie * xl ^t?° ^avc unreasonable 
Christian. If anything, they ^ r u relig ions- 
Prejudices (Laughter) «S*^ S * ^^--the oppoel- 
^ean this. And it means the Philippines 

^on of Filipino women us iax u because in 
1« concerned, ladies and ^ 1 ^ n &3 rret vote, 
*7 country, although women do no ■ wW j 
« it la due to a law ^ iaC "ffted by us (Hearty 
|f the United 3tatos--not enactad^J althoUg h 
L aughter)— in my country where 



- a - 



they do not vote, and hope they will -women 
exercise a very strong and decisive opinion 
over our afiaxrs. They are the masters in 
their homes. It i s a fact (daughter)-, and it 
is the only country in the Par iSaat too where 
women are ao respected by men. Their voice 
goes a long way. That is a fact. Now, that is 
the only country in the Par East where women " 
have something to say, not only in home affairs, 
hut in public affairs as well-and they don't 
vote either. The first time I elected, thanks 
to the influence of women. You understand now 
why I am for women (Tremendous Laughter and App- 
laus.e). You have discovered my secret. .That 
is the reason 1 am for women suff^a-e (Hearty 
Laughter). So you see the Japanese people know 
that. 

Now, what advantages will there be for 
Japan to control a country under such conditions'^ 
Japan knows that we have ;rown during the last 
twenty years in every way. All that Japan wants 
from t he Philippines, ladies and gentlemen, X 
think, is our friendliness, and since we are 
not troublesome — we are ready to be friends with 
anybody — and against Japan would naturally want 
a share in our "trade. Why, she is entitled to 
everything 3he can ^et. That is all, in my opi- 
nion, that Japan wants from the Philippine s , 

This war has also proven another thin — that 
countries, geographically situated as the Jrhillp- 
oines are, can be easily defended from invasion. 
All we have to have are our mines, submarines and 
leroolanes, and while we are not a very large 
coSStrJ? w4 can provide ourselves with mines sub- 
marine? 'and aeroplane* , I assure you of that- 
so that it will be a difficult, expensive pro- 
position to come and conquer the Philippines. 

J ^«fst» 'And whelher^e^hi-SSines 

tectorate or absolutely ^^J^ l3 lands 
that if you had granted the ^xliH ^ ^ 

their independence a nd apa tried without 

reason-and ther V«nd coSo^eV the Philippines, 
any reason to comeanaco nquer f a little 

that at least Ja P an ^^g^ is today in the 

bit more ^ P ° P ^a^htS 2d applause). 
United States (daughter a 

teVia United States, ladies 
When I camejo, W not come with 

and gentlemen, cQ ^ Q thrC ugh Japan 

the rest of the Mi«S£»* more pe0 ple 

alone. * made " \£ ore . A few things 

in Japan than X ever cu-u. 



- 9 - 

I have noticed, 
being wise pe 
from this war 



eo Ple" n have Ja P a neae people 

ia ^."" r * ^e'. hav« i ed ' aoBl<5 lessons 

o«- from t& eo^f, '^V^^ 



And now, I W»«+ 
ference between the ™* Say thia "there is no d4 - 
those masses come from* jlL? t he pe <W -JSfcStf 
States, from England i-vS^' fr ° m the u n"«d 
use). The masses of the ^o,? r Ge ? llian ^' (Appla- 
and justice ins tine tiveVe?^ b ? lieV ? ln ^ 
lause). ii nd wherever you ZZJ^?™ < H ««-ty Ap- 
at large to ■ control th??^ 2 f mt the Government 
a country that will nnt I fiovern * en t, you find 
That is what JaSn i? J ^ C&Use for double, 
beginning to bo % io-day-at least, it i 3 

Japan arS begfnW to^lT^ th ° P<3 ° ple in 
they hate war a£ mfcl as anv ^f r government, and 
gepn f ■? Mov^r. ttB jt mu ° n as any people do. I have 
seen iinancisra in Japan— some of them don't 1^ 
prove of certain policies of their soverment P " 

SSL l! i n n Sf hands toda ^ ^thout going into 
foreign troubles. So you see we really have no 
reason to be affraid of Japan. 

But suppose Japan had some designs in the 
Philippines. How about the League? Hbw about 
the League 1 say again? How about those won- 
derfully eloquent declarations made by this 
country when she entered the war, that you went 
into that war ready to 3pend everything you had, 
. and you were, in order to guarantee the right of 
every people, great or small, to live their own 
independent existence. How about those declara- 
tions? They sounded fco wonderful, that they ware 
greeted with joy when they wore heard in the 
Philippine Islands. They sounded so wonderful, 
tba t every Filipino offered his service to United 
States government so as to help this government 
to make good those declarations. 

And you are making good those declarations. 
You have already recognised the independence of 
Czecho-Llavia — Jugo-Slavia and Poland, even be- 
fore the armistice was signed, and you are ready 
to helo them stand on their feet, have you pro- 
mised anything in particular to those £untrie£ 

pie whom you promised to help to 



- XV - 



In addressing the i flri >, 

■*^SS:f M the °S eni ^ ^^ n onSs n c? jS 10 * gathered 
M^osifcion, Gomlssioner c^ezon'said- anana ?aci " 

"Allow rne to Wolonno 
K* Philippine Islands to\h? behald of the People 

of the Philippine to th3 s ? \ ^ of tlle People 

of the greatest event in ^ Juration of one 
are gathered here to day S / ^ or f °£ Mankind. We 
nation of the two rreat oc , «1 ° the 9tor ^ con- 
the ability and capacity n? 1 ' • accomplished through 
shall not indulge in the SL^ ler ?- Can citi ^nshi p . f 
to&, nor shall I tllct L % 0 Tl]?* ? f v ' hat ^mortal 
befits that the peolle 1 of The p5? 8tatln G the 
ifirive from the oponin" of p Uppinea ex P ect to 
Confine myself chiefS'tn J^L ? anama I shall 

% the Phili^ines i? ^ ? ointln S out the reasons 

-iJ.ippa.nea is taking part in this exposition. 



^ArB^ ^^^^ s 

T&^T,^ tot W^i«6 and progressive neopL: 

lan y oeeun^ Si thC 0nl ^ b ^ v/hichthev 

|an occupy a place in international affairs such as" 
^f e entitled to is that of mingling with othSr 
•ople and of showing them what they themselves are. 

11 The Filipinos are more interested in doing this 
facause they are among the least known people in the 
Kid. Strange as it may seem, after fifteen years 
of American occupation in the islands they are' hardly 
itnown even to the American people at large. There 
atill prevails in many minds the idea that the majori- 
ty of them are practically uncivilized. 

"When you make the circuit of this pavilion and 
Bfe exhibits, the Educational and Agricultural pala- 
°<s and examine our displays in art and in science, 
to agriculture, in forestry, in industry, in commerce 
Bp. in.education, you must come to the conclusion 
'^t a people capable of accomplishing such results 
k aot altogether foreign to civilization. Here you 
P-l see the products of Filipino minds, and Pilipi- 
^ hands, and unless I am very much mistaken whon 
Cleave this place you wkll carry with you the con- 
#°tion that the Filipinos are far from boing uncl- 
#U 2 ed. 



r Jilt is. unnecessary for me to say that there is 
? Paramount question in the mind of these P e °Ple. 
Wwant to be free and independent from any xoreign 
Nation. 



- XV - 



FILIPINOS WANT INDEPENDENCE 



QUEZON HOPEFUL 

to gathered 
fic Exposition, SorJIsStel^a^/^ ?aCi " 

of the^WliSni^ ri C ? Z OU on behGld of the People 
of the Philippine islands to this grounds. We invite 

r/the SS^n^Sf?* co ^ibution of the peopic 

J ™ t PP i nS tc \ this celebration of one 

of the greatest event in the history of mankind. We 
are gathered nere to day to celebrate the eternal con- 
nection of the two great oceans, accomplished through 
the ability and capacity of American citizenship. I 
shall not indulge in the discussion of what immortal 
deed, nor shall I take up your time in stating the 
benefits that the .people of the Philippines expect to 
derive from the opening of the Panama canal. I shall 
iSonfine myself chiefly to pointing out the reasons 
why the Philippines is taking part in this exposition. 

"For a small country like the Philippines in the 
present circumstances of a world-wide commercial de- 
pression it implies a great effort for us to come 
here and participate in this exposition. But the Fi- 
lipinos are an interprising and progressive people. 
They are fully aware that the only way by which they 
can occupy a place in international affairs such as 
they are entitled to is that of mingling with other 
people and of showing them what they themselves are. 

"The Filipinos are more Interested in doing this 
because they are among the least known people in the 
world. Strange as It may seem, after fifteen years 
of American occupation in the islands they are hardly 
known even to the American people at large. There 
still prevails in many minds the idea that the majori- 
ty of them are practically uncivilized. 

"When you make the circuit of this pavilion and 
the exhibits, the Educational and Agricultural pala- 
ces Sd examine our displays in art and in science, 
in apiculture, in forestry, in industry, in commerce 
in agricux^ ^ come tQ , ch& conc i U sion 

and in education, you a liahlng such results 

that a P°^ t ^ a fo?eign to civilization. Here you 
is not al 5?S e *^ u ^; e Jf Filipino minds, and Filipi- 
will see the P^*£*? ^ ver £ rnuch mistaken when 
no hands, ^^J* ^ ou wk ll carry with you the con- 
^ctioS ?haT?hf mipmos are far from being unci- 
vilized. 

*>ir ■pr.-P me to say that there is 
"It unnecessary for^e to^ J f ^ 

one paramount queo^oi independent from any foreign 

They want to be ireo 

domination. 



- 2 - 

There are those in thin „~ j 
that the Philippines asTl ^ r who Relieve 
States is a commercial aa<iS? 5° a «? n of the ^ted 
time that this illusion bo Si^i ^! c «^try. It is 
of the Philippines by the Uni?^ "StH Th ° P°"«*on 
enormous responsibilitv J i . !)tat93 ent&ils both 

"There is no r^s^n +.u s 
commercial relation tet mflf f d Why J he 3aiae 

tained between the pS^^StW be main " 
af w„ puj , 7 * ^J-PPme and the U n ited States 
if. f J'ha.lAppines have become independent. It 
vail then he true that since Americans wil? not be 
drawn upon for money to be used in the r.aintenance 
of American sovereignty in the Island the *ai5Tof 
2??^ C&n » eo P le fro ^ trade with the Philippines 
vail be .correspondingly Increased. The r^antin" of 
independence would in itself create so strong a sen- 
timent of gratitude on the part of the Filipino people 
toward the United States that you would have created 
in the heart of the Pacific a nation reuw in its alle- 
giance and friendship to you both in peace and in war. 

tyAs to the prestige :-of the American flag, what 
better prestige can you have than that which will 
come to you as the result of an Act of international 
justice and generosity?" 

At San Francisco, u r. Quezon also 3aid to the 
press }+ : - 

"President Wilson is earnestly and seriously in 
favor of this measure." he said, "and has formally 
assured us that it will be one of the first subjects 
considered when Congress convenes next December. Af- 
ter the ship purchase bill had been disposed of an^ 
effort was made to call the Jones bill out -of commi- 
ttee in the last days of ingress but the opposition 
refused to agree tot to try to talk the bill to death 
unless we would eliminate from the preamble the pos,- 
tive promise of independence. 



Lc/ 



- XVI - 

SPE3CH OF HON. MANUEL L. OTTWrm r«r.>r,«~~ 
THK PHILIPPINE SENATE AND oka A- PR T ESiDEi ^ OF 

pSJlippihe mission rawK 

2HE PHILIPPINES UNITED STATF^ 4? Ki TT 3£ 0N 
S «ATIVES HELD JOINTL^^^^^-^ 

Mr. QUEZON, Mr. Chairman 
coatee, we have listened \??h a rtlTVJ . 
lege to be received and heard bv bnth ™Jj tl ° f 1 5" 

cause at this time there are many problems of domes- 
tic nature and of international character pre ssS 
for your consideration. pi easing 

The Philippine Legislature, in accordance with 
the wishes of the Filipino people, sent a special 
mission to tnis country bearing the message* of pood 
will, respect, and gratitude from the people of "the 
Philippine Islands to the Government and people of 
the United States. This mission is truly and tho- 
roahgly represnetative. It is composed of men re- 
presenting all walks of life in the Philippines. 
It is presided over by the president of the senate 
and counts in its membership secretaries of depart- 
ments, senators, representatives, the attorney ge- 
neral, deans and professors of the University of the 
Philippines, the assistant director of the bureau 
of education, and men representing the commercial, 
industrial, and agricultural interests of the country 
as well as the labor element. 

The following represent the Philippine Legisla- 
ture: Maiiuel L. Quezon, President Philippine Senate, 
chairman of the mission; Rafael Palma, senator, fourth 
district (Manila), vice chairman of the mission; V. 
Sin-son Sncarnacion, senator, first district (Ilocos ; 

&Tso 6 onh a Pe3ro AunarLfrepr^entaSive (Mountain 
Province ) . 

BMt the cabinet are Rafael Palma, 
Those whc > h f^^^fLd Sonisio Jakosalem, 
secretary of and' coromuni cations, 

secretary of coraraei 

. qqinnera from the Philippines 
The resident coroinissioners ^ de ^ 

in the United e l ^&, a ex officio, -r. Pablo 

Teodoro R. Yabgco, &e commissioner *^° m J h * he 

Ocampo «as formerly £gf at es and a member of the 
Philippines to tne 
lialolos Congress. 



- 2 - 



Those representing a™^,,^ 
Pilemon Perez f omer^eSeseS^f 1 ^ tereat are 
Rey es, former S overnor of ^ ! L[fTr & V- 5 J ° 36 
former representative (Occident i'wl \ kahina ^ 
r ino de Leon, former ripSeaeSSSv^fSli^ ^ 

Ol^a^SS^^e^^S^^^-tol^ interests : 
Slipways Co., and ^^^^^^^ 

u ,„ T p°?!^ epr,e3enti1 ^ co ™rcial interests are ' . 
l ' im llZ * Z> General manager Germinal Cigar and Ci- 
garette Factory: Juan B. Alegre, hemp merchant; Carlos 
Cuyugan, vxce president Compania Merchantll de Flli- 
pinaa; and iaarcoa Rooes, general merchant. 

Drs. Gregorlo Singian and Perpetuo Guiterrez re- 
present the medical profession. The lawyers are re- 
presented by Gabriel La 0, member of the Philippine 
and United States Supreme Court bars. 

The labor elements have sent Crisanto Evangelista 
as their representative. The University of the Philip- 
pines is represented by Prof. Jorge Bocobo, dean, col- 
lege of Law; Prof. Gonrado Benitez, dean, college of 
liberal arts; and Assist. Prof, iuaximo M. Kalaw, sec- 
retary of the mission. 

The department of justice is represented by 
Quintin Paredes, attorney general for the Philippine 
Islands, and Jose A. Santos, assistant attorney ge- 
ner al • 

Education is represented by Camilo Osias, assis- 
tant director of education. 

The Philippine National Guard is represented by 
it • I varraa, aid-de-camp to the chairman of 

tSe'mfssfonr'and Capt. Bernabe Bustamante, disbursing 
officer of the mission. 

El Debate. 

t n«« La C and Guillermo Cabrera came 
^ S3r3 nf the^lericarstaff of the mission, 
as members ox tne oj.oj.j- 

fflHvP a body, Mr. Chairman, 
So large arKi representative a y,^ ^ 

has come to you charge °- ^ °^ ? or the national mde- 
and sacred mission of pleading ^ Filipino 

pendence of the PW1IPP*» has come when steps should 
people feel that the ?* m ? ^vernment of the United 
be taken immediately %^ e o fthe sovereignty of the 
States for the recognition o try . it is, £ 

Filipino people over ° u £ lstor y of the its 

a country under the aovoj. 



separation from +h* 

grievances or ab^ 1 ***** *>* on th* 
rather on the Pro ,,JJ i^at call ?L he ground 0 f 
66untry has be£°^ *ftt th 5 '?^-8 but* 
i* is no longer nf° wel l and. no £it the ru ling 
direct the deaii£?° esaa *y thatch? P ? rfo **«a thft 
colony, with lo^ !5 d of he* c£i£l 8 L»*W still 
country, seeks Sr^gr^itude^ s ° 

r separation. he governing 

We have nori^v, , 
elation for t-S2 lng bu ^ words rt f 

States, and 1*1 Wox * so ^ LrL^ ae and ^Pwe- 
nothing Sorfor y i^ Wi11 ZToL^ V* ***** 

our people. mSf xncie Pendence would l*f ta ? d wh ^ 
this time i 3 in a S rantin S of ownafe^ satis f 

Philippine co^fslion to Sf£\ he . 8ent th ° »St 
expressed the hope theFVS* Ph J ll PPme Islands be 
would be received by %L Fil?°S! r ° of * he commission 
resentatives "of a liberaUi P ^ peo 2 le as the *ep- 
quering Nations. - Lxberatl n rather than of a con- 
Again President IIcKinley said: 

i-h* «!£ S ? a11 ° 0ntinue * as we have benm. to onen 
the schools and the churches to «t 5£1 « 2 P ? 
or>ar*n . unoa, tjo set the courts in 

S£nTvS?%^ r industry and trade and agricul- 

ture a nd in every way in our power, to make the™ 
people whom Providence has brought ^ithiS our toL- 

£f£ 0n *.£°f 1 " 13 tholr l^erty, and not ^ 

power, their welfare, and not our gain, we are seekinr 
to enhance. * 

President Roosevelt, following the sane policy 
as President McKinley, time ahd time again enunciated 
that the purpose of the United States in the Philip- 
pine Islands v/as to help the Filipinos to establish 
their own government. I shall, with the permission 
of the committee and in order not to ■ 'take up its time 
now, insert as a part of my remarks declarations made 
by President Roosevelt and President Taft, and those 
made by President Wilson. 



(The matter referred to follows; ) 
In 1906 President Roosevelt said: 



"We are constantly increasing the measure of 
liberty'accorded the islands and next spring if 
conditions warrant, _ we shall take a great ^rxdejor 

ward in testing their cap £^ f ^£ftive assembly; 
by siwaoning the ilrst iiJ-ipP u wlll largely 

and the way In which thej ^ stand ^ ^ *m 

determine whether the seix ^ 
be increased #or decreased. 



- 4 - 

And in refers to tl 

■ '■ "Hitherto this P hlll " he 
with moderation and tSi^ine leai o ^ 
in practical f as^ 36 ^ 65 Wlf haa acted 
that there must ali^ i real ize tho ^ aa see ^ed, 
only way in which an^ ,^ Government ^uth 
the necessity G f ho<i ^ of Individ ? nci that the 

show that they are -5? ^ outSS Q3C ^ 

keep down wroLoSL le te restrain ° rs 13 to 
people, tlorouph ?S 811(1 ^order^ Th?^^ 3 * to 

And ho also said: 

will arV^when^hf pu^? generation the time 
solves whether it i 3 well S° %f an deaS -^ for them- 
pendent or to continue inder ^L 161 " *2 beoome 
lo 1 *?^ ?"? di3l ntereaL^ower abS*?^' 0 " ° f a 
^SSntt^ St ^ P-teotfr?^ 6 

1912 f^^Kfl^ °» "h of Decker, 

F „I " We sh °nld x x x endeavor to secure for the 

conole?e S s^ C ? n0miC inde P endenc « *nd to lit °5hS for 
complete self -government, with the power to decide 
eventually, according to' their own lariat 
whether such self-government shall be accompanied 
by independence." 

On the 1st of March, 1913, President Taft ad- 
verted to the Democratic platform with reference 
to the Philippines and quated that portion of it 
which referred to the purpose of the United States 
to "recognize the independence of the Philippine 
Islands as soon as a stable government can be es- 
tablished, " and said that this was "an affirmation 
of policy only slightly diffring from that repeatedly 
announced by this and preceding Sepublican adminis- 
trations . " 

President Wilson in a message to the Filipino 
people delivered by Gov. Harrison in Manila, Octo- 
ber 6, 1913, said: 

"We regard ourselves as trustees acting not 
for thfaSILtage of the ^^^^JS^ 
benefit of the people of the fmni^j- 

"Every step we take will be^en ^ith aview 
to the ultimate independence of the is^ to 
a .preparation for that ^dependence. ^ ^ 
move toward that end as ra *i?y,*? anda will permit." 
the permanent interests of the isj.* 



- 5 • 



After these 
Chief Executives of l^^ons 
United States in ^tr^t^ ^ 

to declare thp Paased «, i 116 G °ni- re -~ „ * 

States as to h H P ? 36 <* Ss* i?» titled? th f 
of the PhllipJiSa^e PolittSS 1 *; °J <*• United 806 
no^ous S ove r SS e t «£S £Xx e 

™ . nose Elands." Qe a lllo ^e auto- 

inis act in u 

ln ^ S preamble 



Whereas it Says: 

^in^a^ or the people 

aggranai^ntf andT °" °°^°?^S^ h 
Whereas it ha« o1 

e es tabli3hed; and, stable government 

Whereas for 1- )-><•> 
purpose it is desirabl? 6 ?^ f 000 "^* Orient of such 
people of the PhlllSSjLj 0 in the hands ^f the 

domestic affairs P ?« b,^ 1 " 8 !, a contro1 o? their 
maintime imperil!^ SS eSefcIS ^J***"* in 
sovereignty by the people of the TT^ h f V ights of 
order that by the use and exercLe ^ St ? tes > in 
cho.se and governmental 2?w«5! Zt ° r P°P ula r fran- 

en.oy all the privileges o^e^^SS^SS. 
Purpose^VpT^ 

and giving the Piliginos Sf^^tSlt^to 1 !^ 1 ? 6 ' 

iL^ 6y dld <J?°* 1:now > a ™- to demonstrate if ?he? did - 
-their capacity to govern themselves. This act has been 
in operation for three years. It was passed at a 
time when the whole world was in one of the most 
critical periods in its history. It required ability, 
patriotism, and intelligence of the highest order on 
the part of the people of the Philippine Islands to 
create the new government as provided by this act, 
and to assume the new responsibilities in the f ace i 
of the perplexing problems brought about by the war. 

How my people have succeeded, , I shall refer the 
'"-committee to the official reports of the Governor Ge- 
neral of the Philippine Islands, as well as the Acting 
Governor General, Vice Governor Yeater, regarding the 
doings of' the present Philippine government. 

All I want to say is, that this Government has 
practically assumed the responsibilities of the United 
States in the Philippine Isl M ™\ £g £t£na£onal 

aestic affairs, but also m so fa f ye ft ha^kept order 
responsibilities are oonoerned. .1 ej ^ P ^ 
and peace during these ^f^rsf * and order 
not only done that, we have not kept p_ anxi0U3 - 

within our borders, but we were ready n y, 



- 6 - 



onee you had entered 

outside of the Philip*?® Ourselves * n 

for you in the battle J? * and fight wi ^ s ° 
the Government of th! f T lel ds of PranoI lth *> u and 
send our men. ?ne Sta tes^4ldV hereve r 
ticalL time their lo^Ti Pino s ^ve 8 wi • c ? re 10 
appreciation of whaf y** ^ the Un&state^\^ 
shown it not i n worrt/S ,. have d °ne for ?J ates > their 
ganized their National S* in deed 3- The^S have 
they have In eJ^St^ for "rv^bTV*- 
allotment of LioertX\^ ? } ~ 3C1 ^ tne£ 
United States a submarine and ?^ ha ! e °«ered Se 
have contributed to th£ «J^« a des troy Q r; thev 
ficant than all tlVe^e^tt^l "fr 
Elands was ready to fight" for^ou? SaJ hilipp * ne 

What we have done in the PhiH™* 
of the committee, to help vou Jft 1 i pplnea ^ gentlemen 
little I know bUt ^ P yo V Tin the war, i s verv 
terms of cSS's £l!£ 8 TFiS?? 8ldep ^ 
meant, how the FiliSnof fell ^f, T of what they 
this, we have ^an^*S^^^~ S ™»* 

made progress in education, in commerce L Sustry 
in agriculture. In other words, it has made propyls 
in every way. So we feel that the conditions laiS 

^SJ??", * t Act aa Prerequisite for the granting 

01 inilippme independence have been performed: that 
we have shown not only that a stable government can 
be established in the islands but th* there is now 
one there. 

There is still another reason why we think that 
the independence of the Philippines should be granted 
at this time and that is because of the attitude taken 
by this Government in the recent xvar. You said you 
have gone to war for the liberation of mankind for 
the right of every people to govern themselves. Indeed, 
you have made good those declarations in thus for 
recognizing the independent existence of several 
countryes of Europe;"" certainly it would be nothing 
but natural that the .Filipinos should feel that you 
™ make those declarations good with regard to the 
people of the Philippines. Yon ^J 0 Ff^ni,ed the 
independence of countries of Europe mca have een 
under thf> control of autocratic powers, vlio nave 
umer tne co " b *"; " pxe rcising the powers of self- 
had. no opportunity ?f Jf^^es you were not pledged 
government, and to these cowrie j related, 
to give independence, you weie nor; J tion and 

jou were not tied by bonds of » ^ 3 r ° ecognize the 
affection. How can you fj.°* a 1 le v/hom you have 
independence, of the Fxlxpxno peopi ^ helped 

solemnly promised independence, who; y self _ gover nment 
to acquire the science ^/^^ affection, friend- 
todatibo are bound to you ^ ^ ting of our na- 

ahip, and eternal gratitude b object lesson 

tional freedom will be ^ld that this country . 
that you could give to the vorl^ , h s 

can give of her Deli el in ^ f , overn tnemseiv«» 

of every people to oe ir&« 



- 7 - 



The CHAIRMAN. Mr n 
to interrupt you - aa*T f on ' if You win 
lature adopted, a m^Jj^ evat ^ it allow »» 

aesired to present ^S^S.S? tlt ^'E2 ^ 

Mr. Quezon, Yea 

* acs j sir. 

The CHAIRMAN, tym 
permission to let ^ you ae sir e to 
of my remarks. The i PP ? Sent ^ose documonT* that f011 
resolution legislature has W?2f &S part 

commission !s to\hf Wtiona ^ ^fJSS«SJ 0int 
and the indenenS* Ptoses of the Pn ? ? endence 

«u«m — Pi ne mission S t - >J - ven instructions 

shall presently 5 u Wt f th f ^[t*- d^entlT 

The CHAIRMAN t-p , 
would be proner £? U de3ire - and I think it 

of the prooeedirJs ^ the 6 ? 8h ?ft d be Panted as part 
Let me suggest Tyol a?so ?hat ^ that be 
commissioners in ie fl f Jf* 11 y ? u 30 de3ire your 
to Congress.' Your ctwalL^J?* 3 ^ them as a Petition 
tfcey be printed £ ?he I e LS^ * Sk p ^ mlasio » **** 
they may become off iciall^a vlrt S 1^°^ S ° J hat 
of Congress. A11 Qf ^^P-t ^ ne the if P--desg| it 

have one, but I am simply making that suggestion. 

Mp. QUEZON, That Is what* we shall do, Jud -e. I 
thank you. 

Senator HARDING. I would like to ask Senator 
Quezon just a question. Do you want the committee 
to construe the purport of your appeal to be a com- 
plete severance of relations without any protectorate 
or anything of that sort? 

Mr. QUEZON. Senator, we are not now making a 
concerete proposition as to. that, because the Philip- 
pine Legislature has not given us concerete instruc- 
tions on this matter, since we think that the future 
relations between the United .States and the Philippine 
Islands should be discussed between representatives 
of the Government of the United States and represen- 
tatives of the Philippine Islands commissioned tothia 
effect after congressional ^^j^J^TLT^ 
whereby independence of *J® ^g^S e the assertion 
recognized. however, A »Jf f* a?S prepared to have 

that the people of the PM1 ^P^ n ^ c ^ized by the United 
the independence of the country reco gg zeo. ^y^ ^ 
States without any pro tec to ate, that aome kind 

deemed peref erable by the United States z ^ 
of political relationship should ^ ghaix , ake 
willing to accept that. In °™ er ne3 vdth or without any 
the independence of the rniJ.**! 
protection. 



- 8 - 
Senator IARDIHG. 



get at is, you are v6i G *„i i, he P°int 1^4.,. 
United State, inVr^- ^-o-SSm.?^ the 



Mr. QUEZON. Are v 
my judgment, Senator? as ^ing me my preferenc 

Senator HARDING r ~ 
or your judgment. * x m ask *ns for y Cur expression 

Mr. QUEZON. Well ™t 
terest of both the" United s£?! a it mi ^ ht to the in 
that some kind of uMe^^l"" 63 and the PMlipnlnes 
after the independence o^ ?he n f.-? h °5 ld Q ^ "ne^oy 
nized that there stil? he VnL \ s ± a 5 ds h *s been recoL 
ween the two countries Bu ? tiit n ? of potion SSt- 
consideration, I think! Thl is me ? el y a secondary 

that the independence of the Phr i™?^* 1 th ' 1 ^ is 
either absolute j ndeoendeno a • 1 ? pine J be recognized- 
protectorate of thfSSte^ltates? ep6nd0nCe Under the ■ 

SENATOR HARDING. Which would your commission prefer? 

Phlli™^^^ * th n ink that the independence of the ' 
Philippines under the league is what at the present 
time appeals to everybody in the Philippines*. But if 
there be no league the Filipinos would like to see 
the independence of the Philippine recognized and guaran- 
teed by international agreement between the great powers j 
but if that should not be possible, they want indepen- 
dence, anyway. 

The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Quezon, the Philippines have 
been making - especially during the last few years - 
very remarkable progress, have they not? 

Mr. QUEZON. Yes, sir. 

The CHAIRMAN. And some of your cordis sioners will 
make a statement of that, as to the facts and figures 
in regard to it, in the hearing, I Relieve. Nov; ha 
being true and present conditions in the islands being 
k ^satisfactory? * suppose that it Is -f.^f Im- 
perative that immediate consider atio no ^ 
should be given, is it; that is, as 
of independence? 

Hr QUEZON. Does the jud C e wish me to answer how 
. the mipto P-Ple -uld feel about 1«T 

The Chairman, Yes. 

the people of the ^H^f £g£ la taken, 
disappointed if no £° the near future is eon- 

they understand that ac tion in matt ^ that the 

plated, beeauso the truth e& t s „ as .h 
Filipinos ^ v L 00 ?£denendence of the islands woii 
war was over the inaepen 
granted. 



that 



- 9 - 



The CHAIRMAN. q ni 
mission should 3av ^ >a ^°sing the* ^ ^ 
truthfully say !li h ^our £ 0 ™ e e members of the com- 
engrossed, overwhelmed L*!? st ates J" the * could very 
tion and rehabilj It Wlth the nw! simply y 
can't get enough S ^ 5 a^S^! f 

of these preseins matt *° ru * the S?** ba ^upt; they 
press this questioS ^^ S , are before ^2 nent t and all 7 
not a question tw °? ln dependenn~ , th P*t lt v/e 
deration at thlt tiJ iXX r ^eive ?S e ?S° G tho ^ " i« 

| -t. have som/eK u^-ge^^X & ? «~ 
can, because we cant? 0 ?' 36 we will "have to do * 

The cb . 70U to SAMr* we 

khow°?h^° n ln ** »l£'l?thti' la iV ? r °P°«"ion. The 
taSt 2vo oond «i°ns that exiata in LS 3e f ° r 7011 " *>» 
juat aak oon S reaa for something «»Jt v, "G? 9 38 '* 7°" °«n't 
You know theae conditions th«? S «t? a .. h ? ve " Canted, 
beat now, even from you? staSd™?^* J" Coi Wess S la it 
immediate consideration h^ ^5S int ? t° r V° u to ask 
. when the probabil^Sa arl f"^ "tlon 

would not consider it now- and if *£t f^, St pl ? oe the y 

tnoL^r^ - S -^-re^ g *° 

mi - ao /' Ir V QI,E ? L Wo. think so, and that is why this 

mission has been sent here; but if we can no't get action 

anyway, the question does not seen to be whether it 
is the best thing to do or not. 

The CHAIRMAN. It is not a question of whether 
it is best or not; the difficulty really is that I 
don't believe v/e can get action at this time. That 
is the truth about it. 

iu r* QUEZON. We really think it would be better if 
we could get this Congress to act. That is the reason 
why this commission has been sent by the Philippine 
legislature, because the people of the Philippine 
Islands thought that this was the best time, since you 
are just now engaged in the work of defining the geo- 
graphical airl ethnical demarcations of the ™rld. 
4it I can see, with my experience in ■ ^gjj?* that ' 
,vdth the situation here in the bnited otates 

m , /-i tt a ~ttj t t a i\T This is not so much a question of 
The CHAIRMAN- This is no ^ggAsttng to 

principle as it is a p IWJ ™ ljefore Congress 

you now. Brery proposition t hat <»™g» Pirat 

for consideration st™rA is it possible 

is it desirable l^i a J^°?' c ^SSSstaiices? I am 
to secure it under exis tx **^~i tion 0 r the second 
Suggesting to you the consideration 

question. 



- 10 - 



Mr. QUEZON. That i « . 
that better than X do ? 13 3ust it. j ^ ^ 

Senator HARDING, t 
auestion: Based nrU« wa nt to ask 
Congress, v^ould yoTl y ° Ur e *P^ience as Q a ° n ? 

^«Aimtely disposed of? 
Mr. QUEZON. Wen f 
lipino, Senator, this is »°?J he ^andpoint of the Pi- 
this is the way the FilLirJ! ? ^^late time. Now, 
with my experience in Co " r e'ss ? k n at the matter > *u* 
view it. I realize She SSS^!? 1 See , iaow ^ ou 
way; but if vou a-pa -of . ailllcul ties you have in your 

diate actionTanswer tT^klL? ^ of 
be cause X do not belie ve%w *S ' ln . the aff Amative, 
fair<? lr> h\™ oeiieve that the present state of af- 
ttii 4-t jilur °P e °r in this country should interfere 

tJme th 5bS a S25 n iS 1 ?? ° f independence^rthis 
time. You can easily grant the Pilininos their indenend^ 
ence because that is a matter to be decided sL P ly anS 
solely ^ by the United States Government. Now supposed 
there is no league of nations then the process of recog- 
nizing Philippine independence will be like the process 
of the Recognition of all other countries that have been 
independent heretofore. The United Statew will simply 
recognize it and I take it the other nations will follow 
suit. And if there is a league of nations, of course, we 
want the Philippines to become a member of the league, 
and since you are our sponsors, I suppose we would 
easily be admitted • So 1 don't really see any reason 
for waiting. I think that one joint resolution of 
Congress could grant Philippine independence and <fio it 
in 24 hours, if Congress felt like doing it. 

Senator CHAMBERLAIN. What would then happen to 
the Philippines if within the next 60 days we absolutely 
severed relations with the Philippine Islands and recog- 
nized their independence? What would happen then.' 

Mr. QUEZON. We would proceed to £ one thing only. 
Senator, and that is to el ee> tgwcc essor to 
nor General whom you have sent there £o i 
sident of the Philippine reputtio. ^^hecl and 
the governmental machinery properly eata. 

consituted. 

~v, to t attj Vou have the machinery in 
Senator CHAMBERLAIN. You ftave language or 

all the Province, no ^tter^t ^ ^ machinev7 
racial condition is? xo 
ready to set in motion. 

Mr. :,UEZ0N. Yes sir; absolutely. ident of the 
and wfcan easily, do i^^^d do within those 60 
Philippine republic, 
days. 



<D 

03 « -P 1 <D 
• >i GJ cd 1 c > I -P 

02 I t>> 0) -P O <D -H -P CO Ctf Gj <tf ft 2 0 . 

'd^iH ~* xl i-p-po si ^ go ps\ ' 

-P O I W 3d (tf O H «H -H bC-P drl ? M OK g 

cd -p to pf (DH-PP -p^cqx! cd o d) o ^ ->H Q> 'd ps jr 

-P-PC303O eJ o Sh-ph o ^ iroo Ch ? 

3H3C-P-P O ft 0) > ^ C e £3 C ^H-P > ^ti -p ft - 

O C e w cO <d O cO-P OH OP aJctfaj »h £ n a5 

^ © £ ajoo ?h 0)P (i) d *h d 

rH <u a> a <p ft£J as ^ & £ >>.h ;=> ctf .ti aj g -P -p ^ ^ ^ 

g ^Hflft Xi^ft-PH? ££(D£,£G H^f 

fi cS^ ©ft a) ^ co o^PrS ho vo^C-P *h -p . 

5ftd * Stf'd o © © d *h . : _ n 

Koo oo« ajp4^*oaJ o o © © a © d a 



o 3 ■ S M Rj in aj aJ xj 2 (5 m © w j-h *q 

_, ° n n ffl 3 3 O O d-. ©OS H©^0«Hd OJ « -P 

H £J? §8m S SbS^ as g <tf & « ^ 

o 2 h «i o , , « o . E - s w h * d § 



•H -P g O -P +3© XJgOOO'HOfiO© 0 

g 5 ^ O -P O CUP,® -P <M ?h P-c-rj ? j. 



o 



o 



o 

o 
ft 

<D 

I 

H 

-p 

<D 
Fh 
•H 



0^* 
01 

© 

ft 
ft 

p -H 

H H 



a. 
© 

•H 




- 12 - 

Senator CIIAHBERLain. m» ^ 

sfss-^M: v ^iirP* ^sas-it" 

Mr. QUEZON. Yes, sir# 

Senator CHAMBERLAIN. You wiVl 
countny in 1783, after wp Member that in this 

took till 1789 'to set tit Const?? IT ^^P^ndence, it 
was a condition which e-Lt«S S £" ution ratified, and here 
tically all spoke the sate ?«™ tWeen people wh ° prac- 
ficulties that confrorled e U s an S;- X \l lQ% " of 
have serious difficulti^ ^t' you think y° u will 

in adopting a constitution af?eT^ IrSS™^** 1 * 011 ° r 
been recognized? in ntii«v, Z ? ->our independence has 
be safer for the l?n^L W °* ds ' 1*°? "* thinl < it would 
tilAtion and submit ^it^t?* 3 t0 &d ° pt 3 ? me form of ^na- 
tion of yoSr Sdependencer ^ P6qu68t *° r the reco ^ ni ' 

. Mr* Q^SZON. Undoubtedly, Senator. I did not mean, 
in my answer to your question before, to say that that 
was the thing that we had in mind. My own personal plan 
would oe tnis: The government of the United States should 
authorized the people of the Philippine islands to hold 
a constitutional convention; to adopt their constitution 
to submit it for the approval of the Congress of the 
United States, and, once approved, let them elect the 
officers as provided in that constitution, and, when 
those officers have been elected, to recognize Philippine 
independence. That has been your policy in Cuba. Those 
have been the practical steps taken in Cuba, and that 
is all that is necessary to be done in the Philippines. 

SBnator CHAMBERLAIN. In other words, you think 
it would be well to provide for the formulation of a 
constitution over there by some convention and have it 
submitted to the people for their ratification? 

Me. QUEZON. Yes, sir. 

Senator CHAMBERLAIN. And ^^f^J^^t^J 0 
the United States with your request ^^gf^^^t 
it seems to me that would be the P-ctical thing.^ ; h 
can't be done in six months, noi can w 
year. 

Mr. QUEZON. It certainly ^^p^^ies'wm^e^ 
very happy and the • people of tne i * tlma . 
very happy if we ^^ses^f^ongress authorizing 
solution through both ;^ses ds to ado pt a c 2"f 1 

the people of the ^ilxppine^^^ of tne Uniue d 
tution and submit it ^° 

^States for approval. adopted 
i Senator CBAMBBHLAIN. Woul d Jgt ffilgol.^ 

by Congress, be aeoessar/ decide upon to 

•upon some such */ 3t ™t it to the P? 0 Pj* states would 

constitution and i^-ess of the Unitea 

tificationV Then the Cong* do< 

know exactly what yoa van 



- 13 - 



Mr. QUEZON T r? 
to have authority from th^ £ elieve th ^ it is necessary 
States. I think we IV al thz? f %nt°i th ° 

has already adopted a reaAi,,i? "J™ 8 to me that Congress 
tuto recognising the rian? n the forra of a s * a - 

upon the- deterraination Snon hlll 2 pine independence, 
eventually to grant it 6 P&rt of the tf nit ^ States 

of ^&of^^ e ^* that savor a little 
adopt a eonstitut^^ 

Senator GHAI.1B.-JILAIN. m adV ance of our authority. 
Senator HARDING. Yes. 

din.; ^TnwSf^ N ' 1 th±nk ** not be bin- 

of the Pm V, § 1V< ? an fl ^ M "ion of the opinion 

oi zne Filipino as to just what he wants. 

, n Se natop PIELAN. Mr. Chairman, there is a precedent 

cotton 0 th H St S te ° f 2 alif ornia, which ad?p?ed 
?n ?S - ^ an 5 £ UD3e qnently applied for admission 

to the Jmon - and Texas as well. 

I would like to ask Mr. Quezon if, after he was 
assured of independence, would it be the intention of 
his Government to apply to the league of nations, if 
it existed at that time, for membership, and would he 
regard t hat as sufficient protection against outside 
aggression? 

Mr. QUEZON. Yes, sir; I think so. 

Senator PHELAN. And your desire is to have your 
independence within a reasonable time now, in order 
that you might make that application for membership 
in the league of nations? 

Mr. QUEZON. Ye 3, sir. But of course v/e don't want 
it to be under stood that our petition for independence 
is to be made dependent upon the existence of the league 
of nations. Of course, if there is to be a league of 
nations, we should like to become members of tne league. 

Senator PHELAN. Well, you are more familiar than we 

•Z .n^iHnns in Asia. Uo you mean to say that you 
are with conditions xn Asx J are 

have no fear of °* fc ** d ? h a6 g£ ted "States or the league 
without protection ol tne unxuo 

of nations? 

Mr. QUEZON. That is exactly what I mean. 

Senator PHELAN. You have no feor of outage 
aggression? 



are 



- 14 - 

to. QUEZON. Yes, ^ 

Senator PH3iL^ m, 
? 8 P ° Sitl0n *> reSlS'^f Session occurs you 




Senator PHHLAW vr n 
maimers to attack people ^f 1 ^* 8 ? ot ^ood international 
by zones of influence? You see lLi nainuate ^sefves^ 

U 866 that ev »y day in Asia no*. 

Mr. QUS20N. Yes « 4. - 

power of- a nation to r^ist'the^i 6 ^? 0 ^ if the P^ical 
is essential for the recognition S ^ S J° n °J ^ otI »r 
pendence, there are malv nati^? ? ^ at natioi * *nde- 
not be independent? Frlnct , n?, in ?^ ope that sh ould 
the attack of Geminv SI? could not have resisted alone 
France should, not w« a ? c ° rdin C to that theory 
gium and many ^Lr^IouSrLs^- n * ent > nor -tumii ^el- 
has risen up in iuat 1 ,t independent, She world 
from thejLp kaSs a o r w S?d ^^r^^n^Snk 

pendent! P °?Se feS^T ° nly ^-fere^lVouA^ 

?£f *w r?f ? 1 P\ at raany P e °Ple have that Japan would 
grab the Philippine Islands is baseless. We don't think 
that Japan would do that. In the first place, if you 
grantee the Philippines their independence now, for 
Japan to go and attack the Philippine Islands would be 
a challenge to the United States itself. You don't 
have to assune the protection of the Philippine Islands; 
you do not have to stand sponsor for Philippine inde- 
pendence, the world would know and the Japanese people 
would know that you would resent their attacking the 
Philippines after their independence has been granted 
by the United States. 

You would be proud of your deed. You would call 
the attnntion of mankind that you have generously and de- 
liberately granted .a weak nation its independence; 
and no nation will interfere with so magnanimous and 
glorious an act. In the second place, no nation attack 
another except with the expectation of gaining more 
than it loses in the attack. And Japan or any other 
nation will not profit as much as it would ^| e u ^eSaken 
auft-PlMD- tha Philippine Islands. Conquests are undertaken 
quermg tne mi-Lippx" territory or for strategical 

new either because of need of *fg*>J t now very amd . ous 
reasons. Japan does not seem . w » J Ianchur1o> Korea, and 
to get more land; she has pi en t y in £ nohuri* ^ 
Pormosa, and certainly sne has not snown 
a good colonizer of tropical lands. 



- 15 - 

As far aa stratepical 
pan does not need the Phni J? sons are concerned, Ja- 
Philipplnes out of the hanS n- eS J! Xcept *° S et the 
, think that Japan might care to ^ P™ers. I should 

the Philippines were indenL^ the p ^lippines if 

in her career of conquest S? J and Ge rmany were still 
come and conquer the rhiin- *? r lear that Germany might 
for an attack on Japan* tw V Use them as a' basis 
Japan for her coiinuerirm- vZZl if* 5 rea3on given by 
Korea. But there^Ls ^ w £ r0a " that Russia \vanted 
would like to take the FMi? Pe f country that we think 
have their independence- tneSSf^ 3 Y thS 

nosaibi???v°of P S;« W - tow S, what do ^ ou thi **> a *°ut the 
possibility of capan peacefully colonizing the Phili- 
ppines as she is doing eallfornia? 

Mr. QUEZON. Why, Senator, we cannot prevent that, 
Japan desires to do it. ' 

Senator PHELAN. You cannot prevent that? 
Mr. QUEZON. No. 

Senator PHELAN. That would be the easiest way of 
conquest, would not it? 

Mr. QUEZON. But, Senator, you are not giving us 
protection to-day against that system of conquest. The 
Japanese are going to the Philippine Islands to-day 
and taking land there. 

Senator PHELAN. The Japanese are? 

Mr. QUEZON. Yes, sir. And the Philippine Legisla 
ture enacted a law limiting the ownership of land to 
Africans and Filipinos', but that law required approval 
£f tto President and the State Department was about to 

if fh7veto of the President so we had to withdra 
T°™%£ef^e we are not getting any protection on 
lilt sooJf ??om the United States to-day. 

Senior PHELAN. How long has it been since that 
law was passed? 

Mr. QUEZON. Nearly two years. 

ptiTtt AN And our State Department has re- 
Senator PHELAN. u 
fused its approval? ... n1ne Le _ 

, OTTEZ0N It has indicated to the Philippine 
2? f it iouldnot approve it. 
gislature that it coul Callfo rnia 

Senate* O^^P^ jBS£W 
SvenrSrCal^nia Legislature from 

such a law. 



- 16 - 

Hr. QUEZON But ... ' 
matters, and we o Q >-> , ai:Lr ornia can i 
. Presided 5 ft^T* ^"p^SS'S tL^" 

r«^g Sis r» L 

Senator PHELAN p , , 
way to the European" comnifiS? * % Waa due > ln a diplomatic 
partment withheld i?s S ion ^ that the State D ^ omatlc 
not ripe. 3 a PProval. Probably the time is 

Mr. QUEZON. Tr» 
lands. In the meantime, they are acquiring 

areas, S ?& a le%5^|i ea f 6 the * acquiring i ands ln large 
MR. QUEZON. Not in any unusual way. 

pie to ward* tha tf ELAlN ' * 13 the peo- 

wnat n is P ?he e ft?-3: a H hj ~ 7 ° Ur ° V ' n con ^ess or legislature 
ITctJ* \ attitude of your people? Have they pro- 
tlr^t d rt ^.* h %S°yernment? Have there been several ses- 
sions of the legislature since then. 

^ A . Kr * ^P^N. Yes, sir; and the legislature passed 
that law again. The legislature tried to meet the ob- 
jections of the State Department, and they amended the 
law and passed it again. 

Senator PHELAN. The Filipino people can't acquire 
lands in Japan, can they? 

Mr. QUEZON. No, sir. 

Senator PHELAN. And your laborers, are they free 
to go to Japan and take employment? 

Mr. QUEZON. Yes, sir; I think they are. But we are 
not sending them. They donot need to go there. 

Mr. NOLAN. Afoout how many Japanese are there in the 
Philippine Islands? 

Mr. QUEZON. Very few; about 10,000 - a little over 
10,000. 

Mr, NOLAN. What peroentage of them are native born, 
born in the Philippines? 

Mr. QUEZON. Of the Japanese? 

Mr. N&LAN. Yes. 

^ * fhink there are any. 

fer. QUEZON. I do not thin* 

4- hove any "picture bride 
-vtau They do not have any y 
Mr. NCI* AW* xAxwj j-H^n 9 
come to the Philippines, then- 



1st 



- 17 - 
Mr. .QUEZON. X don , t 

Mr. NOLAN. You under3tana what • iipiotoe ^ 

Mr. QUEZON, oh. t 

Wi > yea, 1 understand. 



Mr. NOLAN, in othc 
so great on the Japanae oL7™ ?* 4- th L re at*iotion are not 
as they are coning into fcS?V^ ln J° the Phi liPPinee 
tlemen's agreement?" country under the "gen- 

Mr. QUEZON, i aoat t think ao< 

deception? 3 ° th ° y don,t have to Practice the sane 
Mr. QUEZON. No. 

' Mt%rmt 5^1 FAIRFIELD. I would like to inquire what func- 
tions i;he Government of the United States is now exer- 
cising m the Philippine Islands? 

Mr. QUEZON. What functions? 

Mr. FAIRFIELD. Yes/ what function do we now exer- 
cise in the Philippine Islands? In other words, as I 
understood from your statement, you are practically 
controlling the islands now. 

Mr. QUEZON. The Congress of the United States has 
the right to annul any lav/ passed by the Philippine 
Legislature. The President of the Uniteds has the 
right to exercise an absolute veto power over all our 
legislation that has been vetoed by the governor- gene- 
ral and the governors veto overriden by a two -thirds 
vote of our legislature, The President of the United 
States has the power to disapproved any legislation 
enacted by the Philippine Legislature concerning land, 
mining naturalisation, immigration, currency, arid 
tarrif • and the governor -general, who is an appointed 
of the Presidented, has the right of appointing all 
of n ^J. +h% PhUinnine Government provided by 

the officers of *^ '^^o every act enacted by the 
law; he has_ the right veto every 1 

£SSS*SSd L SSS!Ki oftne government of the Philip- 

pine s t 

MP. F AIRFIELD* Well, 
have already had from three 
in self ©government.' 

Mr. QUEZON. Yes, sir. 

„ , he Government through its re- 
paIRFIISLD' Has th ViJ;^ lY in such a way 

that you would not freeiy 
ability; 



as 
to 



X understand you, you 
five years experience 



- 18 - 



Mr. QUEZON. fl 0 ai 

neral Harrison has been policy of Governor -Oe- 

lefeter but the spirit 0 f f u Car T ry out not onl y the 

nor General Harrison has «?? °? e L Act » 831(1 30 Gover- 

Philippine Islands to manSe tS * he E° 0p3 ; e of the 
three years. ldna S e the country during these 

Ilr, FAIRFIELD. So th B t 4-- *, 

responsibilitv ; hfl that Practically we have the 

tout tt* FiliSno? +w® government of the Philippines, 
W that k"ra?r^Ltemen8 VeS ^ ove « themselves. 

life. QUEZON. That has been done during these 



three years. 



m'J^I KWtTTSOil. Mr. Quezon, how many vetoes have 
Presidents of the United States made? 

Mr* QUEZON. Not one. 

Mr. KNUTSON. Are you absolutely sure in your own 
mind that you could establish a stable form of govern- 
ment if you were given complete independence? 

Mr'. QUEZON. Absolutely. 

Mr. KNUTSON, You have two political parties in 
the Philippines? 

Mr . QUEZO N . Yes, " sir'. 

Mr. KNUTSON. What is their relative strength? 

lip. QUEZON. Their relative strength as shown in 
the laXe?Sn waa J^ron^d^ In the senate 
they had no representative and m the nousc * 
about 15 out of 92. 

Mr. KNUTSON. What do the two partle 3 stand for? 

-» . Quezon. 1 ^IX^At SEupJES 8 

4. «f the American sovereignty 
Upon the establishment ot the ^ tg &t orga - 
in the Philippine Islands there were H £ oiona i ia ta 
nLation of ?£e ^cionalxst aP^^^e of the F & i- 

Party it *» ^ 

lippxnes, -r. xa organize this part y^ fQr ^en 

to have the ^iiiP and the people nize d 

war was aosolutexy lista Party was noj <■> instead, 
it, and so the f ^xonal * ican occupation. J- 
to SL^f^Sls^rsani^ed, we ma^say,^ ^ ^ 



it; and so the f q c "g^rican occ ^ under the 
in ^er'pSr-^orsanized, -fLf^ the Fader, 
rsp?ces P of?he Government. 

Party. ^ vjill yo u allow m ° to 

..Aicr M*. Quezon, J^ih/wj necessary, 
The CIIAIHUAN. Mjj ^ , Xt .^Senators and 
interrupt you at this ^ the W ^ „ t ^t 

according to the prom we adjourn at ^hx Houseg upon 
Representatives, their r esp 

the Members may ge* 



- 19 - 



re- 



the opening of the sessw -ri. 

journed until 2 o'clock this hearln S will be ad- 
have as large an attendance 0 ? S rn :° n ' 1 ho P e we will 
of the House aa Possible? Senators and Members 

Mr. KNUTSON. f dnntf a 
ternoon, Mr. Chairman ^ri t Xpe ^ ?° be here thl a af- 
one nation; he caTln^ AHn^worV ^ *»* 

Are both doII-M ooi * * 
this request for independeSce? SS in Complete accord in 

presented. "!%rS o a ' Si ^ ? he Party is here _ 

and its leader In the P re3ident ° f ^» P*rty 

1 iri Ta © house ox representatives, 

cessed^t^TS,^ X l ° ,c l°^ noon, the committee re- 
cessed. until 2 o'clock p. m. this day). 

MOM) AY, AFTER RECESS. 

« m The 9 ornrnltteo met at 2 o'clock p.m., Hon. Horace 
M. Towner (chairman presiding. 

The following members of the Senate Committee on 
the Philippines were also present j Senators Warren G. 
■Warding (chairman), Fletcher, Phelan, and Beckham. 

Mr. TOWNER. The sittings of the jo^nt committee 
will be resumed. The reporter will note that this is 
a continuation of hearing already held. 

Mr. QUE20N. Mr. Chairman, unless the committee 
desires to ask other questions of me, I shall at this 
time reauest that I may be allowed to present the me- 
morial which I have referred to, the joint resolution 
of the legislature, and the instructions of the in- 
dependence commission. 

Mr. TOWNER. Do you ask that the memorial should 
be read, and also the resolutions, at this time, be- 
fore the committee? 

Kr. QUEZON. It is too long, Mr. Chairman. It would 
take too much time. 

i#. TOWNKR. I was thinking that it would t«k. up • 
too much time, brohably. 

QUEZON. I Just M a*e it a part or ^ ^ 

Ad., TOWNER' Will you hand a cop, of it to the re- 
porter? 

ottpvoN. I will do that. 
1 a to are inserted as Appendixes 

(Documents referred to are 

A, B, and C . ) 



7% 



- so - 



Mr. TOWinat. The ^ 
Sr. Reporter, thai- -h-,* cor(i heretofore hoc- «u 
gislature of' t^lh^^ig^ptS 6 ^^ 
Sr. Quezon and was ordered %i was offered by 

The record also shows that the L P ^" n J ed in the record, 
tion passed by the Ph±lipp^ e L ^f°^ond of instruc- 
mission were ordered to l ^ 3lature to the com- 

and printed. De made a Part of the record 

Mr. QUEZON. if fv, p 
I should like to present th^J °S I s through with me 
secretary of the inteS r 0 t^\^ e \ Palma ' He is the 
As secretary of the int^™ u ^^PPine Government. 
Archipelago He is also i£ ^ ° ±S J^S^Se of the 
uncivilized tribes of~?he Phil ?^Lfs th ^ ao ^ 11 ^ 
Palma has been a member of the Swi?™i«! e p retar ^ 
from 19nP> -nnf-n iqik 'u 7, * "iiippine Commission 
irom ±yob until 1915, when the Philippine Commission 
was abolished. After that time, when the SenTt was 
inaugurated, Mr. Palma was elected senator. He is 
also secretary of the interior. He can p-ive the com- 
mittee all the information re^ardinr; the government 
of the Philippines. 



Lc/ 



