The 



Aq uino 

MANAGEMENT 



Of The 



PRESIDENCY 




One With Her People 



The 

UINO 

MANAGEMENT 

Of The 



. The 

Aq 



PRESIDENCY 




One With Her People 



Published by the 
Presidential Management Staff 
Office of the President 
Manila, Philippines 
June 1992 



Project Director 

Executive Secretary Franklin Drilon 



EDITORIAL ADVISORY BOARD 
Chairman 

Secretary Aniceto Sobrepena 
Members 

Asst. Secretary Mary Ann Fernandez 
Asst. Secretary Demetrio Ignacio 
Asst. Secretary Narciso Inlong 

Production Manager 

Director Nicanor Torres 

Production Support 

Felicitas Estrella 

Office of Special Concerns - PMS 

Writers/Researchers 

Ann Lopez 

Gloria Georgina Jota 

Minerva Generalao 

Merci-Biluan-Tabafunda 

Ronnie Gosiengfiao 

Editorial Consultants 

Hugo YonzonUI 
Guia Tecson Prado 
Minerva Quemuel 

Book Design 

Fusion Media 

Special Thanks 

Resource Persons/Institutions 

Executive Director Maria Montclibano - RTVM 

Col. Voltaire Gazmin - PSG 

Major Joselito Angel Honrado - PSG 

Amor Castillo -RTVM 

Photos 

Photo Lab - Office of the Press Secretary 
Undersecretary Lourdes Siytangco 

Logo 

Philippine Information Agency 
Editorial and Visual Office - PMS 

Printing 

NEDA Secretariat - APO 



Foreword 



"OURS IS A government that came to power borne on the shoulders of our 
people; we must, therefore, govern on the basis of that same people power". 

These were the very words of President Corazon C. Aquino - words that laid 
the foundation of the highest office of the land. For six years and four months, her 
people-powered presidency reflected itself in the very nature of the executive branch 
and on the implementation of several projects closest to the President's heart; clos- 
est, because they touched the warp and woof of our people's aspirations. 

To document in part her people-powered presidency, we have compiled this 
series of volumes titled Tlie Aquino Management of the Presidency. The first part 
of the series attempts to outline the evolution of the support offices and the various 
management tools and technology employed in the decision-making and decision 
dissemination processes in the Office of the President. The second part of the series, 
to which this volume belongs, provides a chronicle of some specific undertakings 
initiated by the Office of the President which, now, constitute part of the legacies of 
the Aquino government. The third part of the series is a summation of the Aquino 
government's performance during its six years in office. 

This volume, "One With Her People", details the ways by which President Aquino 
made real and easy to reach her people-powered presidency such that she became 
truly one with all Filipinos. 



This series of volumes, The Aquino Management of the Presidency , is by no 
means a complete coverage of the legacies of the Aquino presidency. Some of those 
not documented here are contained in materials better covered by other line agen- 
cies or academic groups. 

Some of President Aquino's legacies, however, will find no archive to preserve 
them for posterity. One would have to look at the faces and listen to the hearts of the 
people she touched in order to find them. 



Aniceto M. Sobrepena 

Cabinet Secretan/ 
and 

Head, Presidential Management Staff 



"The politics of the present and the future is a 
people politics, just like the character of the 
revolution that brought us all here was people- 
powered. In the same manner, the full recovery of 
this country and the fulfillment of its potential 
must be an affair of the people, and for the 
people. There is no other way". 

President Corazon C. Aquino 

Magtanong Sa Pangulo 
September 16, 1988 



Introduction 



KEEPING IN TOUCH with her people was an activity that President Aquino 
relentlessly pursued. To her, it was not a job; it was a source of joy, inspiration, and 
wisdom. 

One of the activities which kept President Aquino in constant touch with the 
people was her trips to the barrios. To those who had been used to the grandiose 
schemes of the past regime, President Aquino's trips were non-events. But these 
regular visits assumed an informal and festive air as she talked with the rural folk. 
Here, without the trappings of protocol and critical eyes, President Aquino became 
animated and relaxed. She literally sat down with the common tao and with the 
local leaders - from the lowliest kagaivad to the most charismatic provincial gover- 
nor. To the President, this open link energized her government. Where others relied 
and flaunted surveys, President Aquino's most accurate and most dependable gauge 
on the public pulse were her frequent one-on-one with the people from the country- 
side. 

An anecdote went around Malacanang which indicates how much President 
Aquino valued her dialogue with the small folk. One day, it is said, a group of 
barangay councilmen went to Malacanang to seek audience with the President. 
When asked who the visitors were, an office secretary said half in jest: "Mga taga- 
silbi ng kape". The President overheard this condescending remark and with 



4 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



wisdom in her eyes, gently reprimanded the girl: "Huwag ninyong mamatahin yan, 
tandaan ninyo na dati, akorin taga-silbi ng kape". A lesson in humility and truth in 
that one remark. 



Her weekly radio program/'Magtanong Sa Pangulo", was another venue which 
kept the President in constant touch with the people. In Magtanong, the President 
encouraged the people to bring their problems, issues, and queries to her. To Ma- 
nila-based media and urban sophisticates, her Magtanong was a bore. But folks in 
the countryside found the Magtanong otherwise. To them, it meant a channel through 
which they could reach the Pangulo. Thousands sought presidential hope, assur- 
ance, and solution to their plight. 

Another system which the President used was the Presidential Action Line Sys- 
tem or PALS. Through PALS, she encouraged people particularly local officials to 
directly communicate with her. Just like their constituents, local officials had com- 
plaints and problems which often got buried in the bureaucratic maze. The PALS 
offered them a way. 

These major activities were the President's forward and feedback mechanisms 
that drew a precise picture of the public need. Her running dialogue with the people 
enabled her administration to prioritize projects, e.g., for which areas and on what 
schedule, given government's limited resources. Being one with her people pro- 
vided President Aquino the strength and the direction that helped sustain her espe- 
cially during the tumultous passage from dictatorship to democracy. 

The dictatorship had built moats and walls around the seat of power and 
isolated itself from the people. President Aquino saw the chasm and built bridges. 
Beyond EDSA, she had to revive the Filipino's faith not only in the presidency, but in 
the government and in the whole democratic process as well. 

During the Aquino administration, Malacanang was opened to the public. The 
centuries-old palace happily groaned under the weight of over a million pairs of 
feet who could not let this chance pass by. Far from being merely symbolic, the 
palace had been brought back to the people. And it took one person who had faith in 
them to see this through. 



Presidential 
Provincial 
Visits 



FOR THE PRESIDENT, there was only one way to establish direct linkage 
between the people and the government: be with them. She often said: "Ako ay 
Pangulo ng lahat ng Pilipino. Kailangan dalawin ko ang lahat ng ating mga 
kababayan". 

Corazon Aquino was probably the most travelled President of the Philippines. 
Where some of her predecessors travelled only to the most populous and, therefore, 
most vote-rich provinces, President Aquino frequented the most neglected and 
sparsely populated areas of the country. 

From March 1986 to May 1992, the President logged a total of 248 visits to 54 
provinces. It is said that she extended the traditional Philippine north-south geo- 
graphic reference of "Aparri to Jolo" to "Batanes to Tawi Tawi", as it really should 
be. To punctuate that reality, she visited these two forsaken provinces. 

Going North 

Batanes is a group of small islands at the northernmost part of the archipelago. 
Totalling only 209.3 square kilometers, it is actually nearer to Taiwan than to the 
main island of Luzon. Batanes is a favorite stomping ground of strong tropical 
typhoons. The Batanes folk, called Ivatans, had adjusted their lives to these vagar- 



6 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



ies of nature - building thick-walled stone houses, planting mostly rootcrops, farm- 
ing by day, and fishing at night by the giant waves of the Pacific Ocean and China 
Sea in order to supplement their meager crops from the land. 

From November to February, chilly Siberian winds envelop Batanes. Thus, the 
Ivatans call this time "winter" not really a misnomer, since but for the absence of 
snow, life at this time is as harsh. The only livestock that survive are cattle and goats. 
Eggs have to be "imported" from the mainland. 

Perhaps because of their land, the Ivatans are a hardy, industrious, frugal, and 
patient people. They have learned to live with the yearly havoc wrought by the 
seasons and the seemingly lifelong neglect of the government. But the Ivatans are far 
from being meek and submissive. 

Batanes has a history of fighting tyrants. During the 1960s, its teachers stood 
up to the notorious Suzuki boys who sowed terror by roaring through the peaceful 
province in their motorcycles, trying to snatch ballot boxes from what they thought 
were timid Ivatans. They failed. 

During the snap elections of 1986, Batanes was the only province in Regions I 
and II which defied the dictator by giving Cory Aquino almost all of its 7,000 votes. 

On April 24, 1989, the Ivatans were therefore overjoyed to see in person the 
resident that they elected. The last time the province was visited by the country's 
I resident was in 1964, when Diosdado Macapagal held the position. 

For Batanes, the President directed the Department of Agriculture to release 
P.779 million for various livelihood projects which included salt production, ube 
planting, vinegar production, and cattle breeding. 

Another P.5 million was allocated to improve the local cattle industry. Funds 
were also g.ven for the garlic industry and other development projects. The pier 
that was destroyed during two super typhoons in 1 987 was ordered repaired. Eleven 
million pesos was appropriated for the building of a boat that would serve as a link 
across the seas between Batanes and Luzon. Pending that, the Philippine Navy was 



One With Her People 



7 



ordered to make five to six trips a year to Basco, the capital, to transport goods and 
other needs. 

Batanes was also given two ambulances, a radio station, and a telephone link 
through the municipal phone system. But most significant of all these was the gov- 
ernment's action to give Batanes electricity. 

Today, there is a remarkable change in the lives of the Ivatans. Birthday cel- 
ebrants are greeted on the radio. They get the latest news and entertainment on 
cable television while enjoying their halo-halo. 

On the pipeline is a study for the construction of an ice plant that would up- 
grade the Ivatan's subsistence fishing to commercial fishing. 

Going South 

The President also ignored strong security advice not to visit provinces with 
doubtful peace and order conditions. Thus, her visit to Tawi Tawi gave the Presi- 
dential Security Group (PSG) nightmares. Yet she went to Tawi Tawi twice. The 
first time, to know firsthand about the people's problems; the second time, on May 
15, 1989, to see for herself if what she had promised was delivered. 

For Tawi Tawi, President Aquino ordered the completion of the Sanga-Sanga 
airport. Like Batanes, Tawi Tawi received a powerful electric generator that sup- 
plied power for up to 24 hours daily. The ports of Sitangkai and Bongao were also 
completed. Rehabilitation of the area's potable water system was also ordered, 
thereby supplying an additional 1,000 households with potable water and hope- 
fully helping alleviate the island's malaria problem. Artesian wells were installed in 
areas outside of the main system. 

The President's display of personal touch was a clear signal to other govern- 
ment agencies to reach out further and farther to their fellow Filipinos. Tabawan 
Island, a speck of an islet some seven hours by boat from the capital, Bongao, is a 
fine example. The place is not wanting when it comes to produce from the seas. The 



8 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



men fish the abundant waters of the Celebes and Sulu Seas which bound their islet. 
Small-scale farming is likewise engaged in, enough to meet the islanders' needs. But 
a group of Samal housewives felt they could still improve their lot and contribute 
more to the household income. 

With the help and encouragement of the Land Bank, the women formed a 
cooperative and applied for government assistance in their project - mat-weaving 
using pandan leaves showing colorful traditional patterns. With the loan from Land 
Bank and some technical and marketing assistance from the Department of Trade 
and Industry (DTI) through the intercession of Land Bank, their products had found 
their way to markets as far as Cebu. 

In November 1991, President Aquino cited theTabawan Island mothers's co- 
operative as one of the 12 model cooperatives of the year. A beautifully woven mat 
was presented to the President by the Samal women as their gesture of thanks and 
appreciation for all that her government had done for them. 



Into Rebel Country 

Time and again, the President emphasized that her provincial visits were not 
to be limited only to places where she won during the snap election. She went to 
Leyte and Cagayan where she extended the same generous assistance she had ex- 
tended to others. Her primary concern was to make the people as one with her and 
the government. 

For insurgency-infested Samar, she had a special package of assistance. In 
Catbalogan on July 8, 1 988, several initiatives were ordered to tap the potentials of 
the province. In the energy sector, 81 kilometers of new power lines were installed to 
service remote communities and power rates were reduced from P4.30 to P2.50 per 
kilowatt hour. The power lines extended from Catarman and Calbayog to reach 
Catbalogan, Wright, and Catubig towns. 



One With Her People 



9 



Infrastructure facilities were also ordered built with the release of P589 million 
for roads and bridges in Region VIII and P46 million for rural water supply sys- 
tems. Completed were the widened Catarman airport, the Wright-Taft Road which 
cuts across the mountain, and the Amanjuray Mini-Hydro plants. The inroads that 
the government gained because of these projects had dissipated the Samarenos 
despair and bitterness at the past years' neglect. 

President Aquino said: 'The quality of life in (Samar) shall be the benchmark of 
the performance of all government agencies involved in the poverty eradication 
effort". 

Helping Rural Entrepreneurs 

President Aquino knew no holiday for her provincial visits. On her 56th birth- 
day, President Aquino visited Bulacan, the first province to be covered under the 
program called Presidential Visits on Rural Employment and Livelihood. The pro- 
gram intended to spur growth in the provinces by supporting local businessmen 
initially through investment forum. Through this forum, the President expanded her 
reach from small farmers and fishermen to provincial entrepreneurs. 

In the investment forum that was conducted in Bulacan, the President re- 
sponded to the problems presented by the province's four major industries: gar- 
ments, jewelry-making, marble production, and livestock and prawn raising. 

The garment producers relayed their need for a common-bonded trading ware- 
house in the province and requested the DTI to help their export marketing efforts 
by expanding the participation of garments and other textile-related manufacturers 
in trade fairs and selling missions abroad. These concerns were immediately an- 
swered with the operationalization of the warehouse in August 1989 and the devel- 
opment of the Bulacan Galeria into an exhibition center. 

The marble producers, on the other hand, requested the banning of the expor- 
tation of marble blocks to protect the local marble processors. Moreover, they raised 
the need to improve the road network leading to marble quarry sites. The road was 



10 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



constructed at once, while the export ban of marble blocks was studied and en- 
dorsed to Congress. 

Thereafter, the President visited two growing enterprises in Hagonoy, Bulacan: 
Cel's Garments and the Marina International Marketing which processed prawns 
for export. The President also later made a stop at Bulacan Gardens Corporation. 

Similar consultations were undertaken in Pangasinan, Batanes, Bataan, Nueva 
Ecija, Tarlac, Camarines Sur, Romblon, Iloilo, Cebu, Bohol, Negros Oriental, North- 
ern/Western/Eastern Samar, Tawi Tawi, and Cotabato City. 

President Aquino's itinerary always included a visit to selected enterprises with 
potential for growth and employment generation or those displaying extraordinary 
growth or those pioneering in new fields. 1 

The President's visits produced a bounty for the places visited. Under the pro- 
gram for rural employment, community-based brick factories in three Samar towns 
were constructed and about P7.2 million livelihood assistance was extended to farm- 
ers and fishermen. In Bulacan, the President ordered the extension of mutual pro- 
tection to both garments contractors and subcontractors. A prawn factory was also 
established in the province. Additional telephones were installed and a water dis- 
trict in one locality was rehabilitated. 

In her visits, the President always sought the participation of the private sector. 
She was emphatic on the attainment of growth through genuine partnership with 
NGOs and people's organizations. Because of this, a lot of the projects that she 
directed to be funded by the government were implemented through NGOs. 



Touching Base With NGOs 

In the last two years of her term, the President adopted new approaches to 
further strengthen the linkage between the government and the NGOs. On March 
1991, President Aquino directed Cabinet Secretary Aniceto "Chito" Sobrepena to 
coordinate with Norberto "Bert" Gonzales for the conduct of nationwide consulta- 
tions with various sectors in the provinces. 



One With Her People 



11 



The President had chosen Chito since he had been entrusted with the responsi- 
bility of coordinating the preparations for Presidential visits. In addition, Chito was 
often entrusted with special assignments by the President as he was one of the few 
people the President relied on to accomplish her directives and instructions. Bert, on 
the other hand, was the Chairman of the PDSP (Partido Demokratiko Sosyalista ng 
Pilipinas), one of seven registered political parties which boasted partnerships with 
NGOs, POs, and cooperatives. The President first had a chance to work with Bert on 
September 1986 during the meeting of the government panel with the MNLF to 
discuss the ceasefire agreement. Bert had been instrumental in getting the President 
and Nur Misuari together. Through the years, the President had also observed the 
growth of the organization and recognized that Bert as Chairman of the PDSP could 
again assist in bringing the Presidency closer to the people through the establish- 
ment of a mechanism for consultation and dialogue between the President and the 
marginalized sectors. 

The result of the teamwork between Chito and Bert were the "Pulong 
Pangkabuhayan" visits. The Pulong Pangkabuhayan consisted of a formal program 
where the President would address the members of the various multisectoral alli- 
ances in the region and afterwards would have an informal huddle right on stage 
with the leaders of the organizations. This unusual setup was done so as to allow the 
crowd to see their leaders in actual dialogue with the President. More than the 
formal program, it was the informal huddle that provided great impact to these 
occasions. The leaders were given the opportunity to personally present their issues 
and concerns to the President and the latter would, right then and there, address 
them or direct the members of her Cabinet who were with her to take measures to 
address these problems. 

These provincial visits were unlike the previous provincial visits of the Presi- 
dent where the host was the local government unit. Here, the hosts were the 
multisectoral alliances and coordination was done directly with the leaders of these 
alliances. The local government executives were invited as a matter of courtesy to 
observe the activities but their roles were limited to no more than giving a brief 
message. 



12 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Because of the different nature of the Pulong Pangkabuhayan visits, the pre- 
visit preparations resulted more often than not, in friction between the local chief 
executives and the leaders of the alliances. During the Pulong Pangkabuhayan in 
Malalag, Davao del Sur, on February 20, 1992, the Governor of the province was 
insistent on holding the occasion at the provincial capital but the alliance was insist- 
ent on holding it in Malalag to allow more of their members to attend. In retaliation, 
the Governor became instrumental in withholding the provision of vital equipment 
such as generators, public address systems, and vehicles needed for the visit. Feel- 
ing slighted as he was not given the opportunity to dictate the venue for the activity, 
he also demanded that he be included in the presidential party which would take 
the helicopter from Davao City to Malalag. A few minutes before the arrival of the 
President, his wife who had proceeded directly to the landing site, also made her 
own demands. She insisted that all the provincial board members be included in the 
reception party for the President. When it was firmly insisted that this could not be 
done, the Governor's wife left in a huff and brought with her a vehicle which had 
been intended to form part of the presidential convoy. The members of the alliance 
did not forget the obstacles created by their provincial Governor to derail their 
Pulong Pangkabuhayan with President Aquino, and it is worth noting that the Gov- 
ernor who had been a formidable political figure, lost in the 1992 elections. This was 
the response of the 20,000 members of the multisectoral alliance to the provincial 
head who had become their enemy instead of an ally. 

The President conducted six of these Pulong Pangkabuhayan series in San Pablo 
City, Iloilo City, Bacolod City, Davao del Sur, Naga City, and Bataan. From these 
visits, it is noteworthy that P4 million was released to a cooperative in San Pablo 
and more than a hundred waterwells were constructed in Laguna and the Bondoc 
Peninsula. While in Bacolod, the labor alliance received PI million in livelihood as- 
sistance from the Kapisanan ng Manggagawa ng Pilipinas, Inc. through the Presi- 
dent's mediation. In Malalag, Davao del Sur, a total of P6.057 million in financial 
assistance to various cooperatives was provided. 

But more than the financial assistance extended to the members of the various 
multisectoral alliances, the Pulong Pangkabuhayan series of visits provided these 
alliances a chance to personally bring to the President's attention, not only their 
issues and concerns but also the success that they had already achieved with the 



One With Her People 



13 



assistance provided them by the government The President recognized the alli- 
ances' success and praised them for it: "Inaasahan kong ituturing ninyo ang aking 
pakikinig sa inyo ngayong umaga bilang tanda ng aking pagpapahalaga sa inyong 
sektor. Subalit hindi ako nagtungo rito upang makinig lamang sa inyo. Nagtungo 
ako rito upang masaksihan ng sarili kong mga mata ang tagumpay na nagagawa 
ng pagkakaisa ng mga Pilipino. Habang pinakikinggan ko ang mga ulat ng inyong 
mga kinatawan, lalo pang lumakas ang aking paninindigan na tanging sa 
pagkakaisa matatamo ng ating bansa ang minimithing pag-unlad. Nagkaisa 
kayo...nakamit ninyo ang panimulang tagumpay, at dahil dito, binabati ko kayo at 
ang inyong pamunuan". The importance the President gave to the Pulong 
Pangkabuhayan is summed up in her statement in Malalag, Davao del Sur: "Lubos 
pong mahalaga sa akin itong pagtitipong ito. Dito ko po nalalaman na ganap ang 
inyong mga damdamin sa mga nangyayari at nagagawa natin para sa ating mga 
kababayan. Sa pagtitipong ganito, nailalabas ninyo ang nasa puso ninyo at iyan ay 
mahalaga sa lalong ikatatatag ng ating pagsasama-sama". 



Preparations 

The President's provincial visits - whether 35 minutes or two hours - required 
a lot of preparations. With the President's insistence that she be able to visit as many 
corners of the country as possible, the responsibility of laying the groundworks was 
heavy. Thus, the Presidential Visit Team was formed. It was composed of the repre- 
sentatives of the Presidential Management Staff-Office of Special Concerns (PMS), 
Radio-TV Malacanang (RTVM), the Protocol Office, and the Office of the Press 
Secretary-Media Accreditation and Relations Office (OPS-MA RO). 

At the local level, visit preparations were spearheaded both by the local chief 
executives - governors, mayors, congressmen - and the NGOs. There were many 
instances, however, when rivalries between governors and congressmen made agen- 
das difficult to pin down. 

According to Rogelio L. Singson, former coordinator of presidential visits: "Peo- 
ple in the provinces consider the visit of the President to their place as an honor. 
Therefore, the local leaders of the place and the people expect to be part of the 



14 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



preparations. Whoever was in charge of preparing presidential visits had to know 
how to listen, at the same time be firm, when necessary". 

Oftentimes, the Team was caught in the crossfire between political groups. But 
this did not distract them from carrying on with the identified theme and focus of 
the scheduled visit. Nothing, not even pressure from politicians, could make them 
deviate from communicating the priority programs of the government. That way, 
the Team was able to maintain control of the activities during a visit, thereby pre- 
venting it from going off target. 

The President was allergic to politicking and grandstanding, and the Team 
was quite aware of this. Priority, therefore, was always given to the demands of the 
people who were then given prominent slots in the open forum and discussions. 



The Frontl iners 

The burden of preparing for all Presidential visits fell on the Office of Special 
Concerns or OSC. Even each time before the Team was convened for a coordination 
meeting, the OSC had to make initial contact with local organizers to thresh out the 
proposed program of activities. The initial set of issues were identified through the 
pre-visit dialogues/meeting with local organizers and other parties involved. Based 
on these, a draft scenario was arrived at. They conducted their first ocular inspec- 
tion. 

The OSC was also responsible for making sure that local organizers were pre- 
pared with all the initial requirements (maps; layout of venues, identification of 
sites, list of issues, proposed highlights of the visit, and others) when the Team ar- 
rives for inspection. 

Only when OSC had done the spade work did the Team move in. The OSC, 
therefore, served as the frontliner for the Office of the President in the preparation 
for Presidential visits. The OSC also assisted all the members of the Team in ensur- 
ing that their requirements were met by the organizers. 



One With Her People 



15 



More importantly, the OSC gathered all the comments and recommendations 
of the Team and moved them into a clearer scenario for the President's visit which 
was submitted to the President for approval and, later, disseminated to all the mem- 
bers of the Team to serve as their main guide. 

The OSC also saw to it that the scenario agreed upon was strictly followed. It, 
therefore, had to look into all the aspects of preparation like briefing kits, outline for 
the President's speech or statement, and the discussion flow. It had to make sure 
that checks, certificates, the stage, gifts, transportation, sound system, commemo- 
rative markers, and one thousand and one details were ticked off. 

Initially, then Cabinet Secretary Jose P. de Jesus attended to all the arrange- 
ments himself with Rogelio Singson and a lean technical staff. When de Jesus be- 
came the Presidential Executive Coordinating Secretary, the task was assigned to 
Aniceto 'Chito' Sobrepena. Chito was assisted by Director Nicanor 'Nick' Torres. 

The OSC was created in 1988 primarily to handle the numerous special assign- 
ments of the Cabinet Secretary from the President. Special concerns later 
became a unit of PMS. 



The Protectors 

"We always wondered how the President could cope with the physical de- 
mands of the visits. It's not very enjoyable to ride helicopters left and right' , says 
Major Jose Angel Honrado or Bodette, the Commanding Officer of the PSG Presi- 
dential Escorts. He continues: "Kahit maganda ang eroplano mo, nakakapagod 
talaga. Kung kami nga napapagod, siya pa kaya. 

No President has ever done this before, visiting the provinces as frequent as she 
did. She has really taken the pain, courage, and strength to go down to the people. 
While she could just stay in the office and given directives to the governors and 
mayors, she really made it a point to go out and visit the countryside". 



16 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The PSG is considered one of the "twin shadows of the President", the other 
being the RTVM close-in crew. It was headed by Colonel Voltaire Gazmin, a godson 
of Sen. Benigno 'Ninoy' Aquino who, sadly because of his profession, later became 
his jailor in Fort Magsaysay. 

Down to 1,000 men from 15,000 during the Marcos administration, the PSG 
drew recruits from the Army, Navy, Air Force, and the Philippine National Police 
(PNP). It had three batallions: the Service Batallion, the Presidential Guards, and 
the Presidential Escort which was the smallest battalion. 

It was PSG which insisted that the President limit her provincial visits to only 
one at a time. Gazmin says: "We adopted this after the August 27 coup attempt to 
ensure that PSG troops were not deployed too thinly. Preferably, she flew out of 
Manila and was back on the same day". 

Given the treachery of the attacks on Malacanang during the December 1 989 
putsch, the PSG succeeded very well in defending the seat of the head of state. 
Because of this, the PSG was able to gain a stature of respect. 

Major 'Bodette' recalls: "In 1986, everybody wanted to come in. They were 

thinking of money, power, and everything. May precedent kasi. The former PSG 

was involved in dollar-salting, smuggling, etc. Pero ngayon v walang pera. Wala 
taiaga. 

But we felt more than just soldiers. We were treated as humans. Eto 'yung 
hindi mo maalis sa sundalo, 'yung maging loyal sila sa taong tini-treat sila with 
dignity. 

Kapag may affair ang Pangulo sa labas at gagabihin, tinatanong pa niya kami 

Th "^Z Pagkain na - Kun S ano an § ulam - Sasabihin ko, 'Ma'am meron pong 
adobo Siya , she would say, 'padagdagan mo ng pansit'. She goes to that extent 
and other details. We were not pampered with material things but we were treated 
well. Parang mother-son relationship. Pati nga anak niya nalalapitan ng mga 
close-in. 

I feel that after all these things, after the six years, everything has just been a 
nice, good dream". 



THE DICTATORSHIP, IN its waning years, may have lost its grip on realities 
but its iron hold on the media, particularly broadcast, was very tight. During the 
snap elections, the only way that Corazon Aquino got air time was when the elector- 
ate passed around bootleg copies of cassette tapes containing her voice and played 
them in their recorders. This "program" was "Magtanong Kay Cory". 

When President Aquino assumed power, she was resolved to dismantle the 
propagand a machine of the old government. She slashed the budget for the govern- 
ment television station and the government media production office, and down- 
graded other units which formed a phalanx of so-called information groups for the 
former dictator. Although the Aquino administration sequestered broadcast sta- 
tions once owned by a Marcos crony, it was very explicit in the manner by which it 
managed the enterprise: hands off in the programming. 

Meanwhile, letters from the citizens, averaging 10,000 a month, were pouring 
in for the President. The concerns raised in the letters covered a wide spectrum: 
from communal to personal, from serious to ludicrous. Some raised problems on 
water supply, poor state of infrastructure, and lack of schoolbuildings. Others told 
about the rigors of job hunting and asked the President's help in finding 
employment. 



18 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Medium Of The Masses 



To be able to respond quickly to the hundreds of letters, the Office of the Presi- 
dent fell back on a communications medium which had the widest base of users: 
radio. Thus, "Magtanong Sa Pangulo" was born in September 1987. Since its start, 
Magtanong was aired weekly over six Metro Manila and 26 provincial stations. In 
addition, the provincial stations of RMN, NBC, and ABS-CBN would often hook-up 
for a Sunday evening broadcast or early morning replay. Without gloss and glitz, 
Magtanong provided an effective avenue of communication for the President and 
the taong bayan. 

Magtanong featured President Aquino herself addressing the people's con- 
cerns and issues of national interest. The program was guided by a three- fold objec- 
tive: one, to provide the Filipinos a direct communication line to the President and 
vice-versa; two, to inform the people of the government's policies, programs, projects, 
decisions, and actions; and three, to serve as feedback mechanism for the President. 

Since its initial broadcast until the end of the term of President Aquino in June 
1992, Magtanong did not miss a single weekly one-hour broadcast. It went on air 
regularly, no matter how heavy the burden of the Presidency was at times. 

The people which Magtanong aimed to reach were those in the countrysides, 
especially those in remote areas beyond the reach of television and national dailies. 
Hence, Magtanong was aired over radio on Sunday evenings when most of them 
were in their homes. 

So avid were the people for the President's attention that even domestic squab- 
bles reached her ear. And as is the wont of Filipinos, some wanted the President to 
stand as sponsor in baptisms and weddings. 

A wife even braved to let the President know that for four years since her 
soldier-husband had been assigned in PC-RECOM 3, she had not received any fi- 
nancial support from him. Then there was a mother who, before the EDS A Revolu- 
tion, decided to name her unborn baby Cory Victory. After the baby was born, she 



One With Her People 



19 



wrote to ask the President to be the godmother of her child. The President accepted 
and since then has been sending her godchild presents on Christmas. 

Across the seas, a German was so smitten by her that he proposed to marry 
her. He even sent her a gold wedding band, which she ordered to be returned. There 
was another foreigner who regularly sent $20 as assistance to the needy. The Presi- 
dent had his donation put in the PNB to be included in the government funds. 



Radio For Action 

By and large, Magtanong became the regular meeting ground of the people 
and their President. To the common folk, the leader of the land became madaling 
lapitan. No problem was too big nor too small. For sure, not all appeals for help 
were answered. No miracles were promised. What mattered was that here was a 
President who was not afraid to come closer to her people, talk to them and listen to 
them. 

Many issues and projects were facilitated through the Magtanong Sa Pangulo. 
In 1987 for instance, the President, acting on a request, directed the implementation 
of the constitutional provision on free education. She asked Congress to enact neces- 
sary measures as soon as possible. Thus, House Bill No. 2528 - "An Act Establishing 
and Providing for a Free Public Secondary Education and for other Purposes' was 
passed by the House of Representatives and transmitted to the Senate in October 
1987. The President approved the release of P785 million high school program. 
Beginning schoolyear 1988-1989, the Free Secondary Education Program was im- 
plemented in all public high schools. 

The construction and rehabilitation of provincial and barangay roads were 
also facilitated through the President's direct intervention via Magtanong. These 
included, among many others, the provincial road connecting barangay Tuba in 
Jaro, Leyte to the national highway; a barangay road in Baras and the San Isidro- 
Banaba-Kaysipot Road in Rizal; and the Tagaytay-Alfonso provincial road, the 
Balubad, and Matagbak barangay roads in Cavite. 



20 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Many irrigation systems were also built because requests came in through the 
radio program. In May 1988, the President directed the National Irrigation Admin- 
istration to finish the Kamuayan Communal Irrigation System Project in Misamis 
Oriental at the soonest possible time. By August of that year, NIA completed and 
turned over the project to the irrigators' association. The project covered 292 hec- 
tares and benefited some 150 farmers. 

In August 1990, the GSIS, following instructions from the President aired on 
the program, raised the monthly pension of GSIS pensioners by 1 0 percent and the 
bereavement aid for its members from PI ,000 to P3,000. 



Requests Big And Small 



Random samples of those who wrote to Pangulong Cory included two broth- 
ers from Las Pinas, Metro Manila who asked for her help in their bid for job rein- 
statement with the Philippine Navy. A young worker from Negros Occidental, on 
the other hand, asked how she and other casual employees can be made permanent. 

In her response to the brothers from Las Pinas seeking reinstatement, President 
Aquino told them to write or go to Captain Guerrero Guzman at the personnel 
, headquarters of the Philippine Navy on Roxas Boulevard, Manila. At the same time, 
she directed Captain Guzman to attend to their problem. 

From Palawan came a letter asking help for speedy resolution of a pending 
case with the National Labor Relations Council (NLRC). From Maitum, South 
Cotabato came a complaint about the refusal of a pharmacy to sell medicine with- 
out prescription. And from Camarines Sur came a landowner's lament on the snail- 
paced processing of his voluntary offer to sell. 

A leader of a cooperative federation in Catarman, Samar raised a number of 
concerns: implementation of CARP, ejection of farmers, need for carabao and irri- 
gation, the havoc wrought by Golden Kuhol, high prices, and delivery of services 
direct to the people. 



LIGHT MOMENT. The President dons a vakul, a 
native hat used by Ivatan farmwomen. She braved 
the foul weather to visit the isolated province of 
Batanes on April 24, 1989. 




President Aquino greets Pangasinenses 
who braved the rains to welcome her 
during the inauguration of the P209 
million Don Teofilo Sison bridge in 
Carmen, Rosales in Pangasinan on Aug. 

14, 1991. Jhe President in Bulacan. 




EE 

vl 0) 






01 sz 








Si 








</> C/) 




I.E 


un 




O) 


0) (0 


03 


— c 


. — 1 


Q) O 


c 






|1 


o 








5 5 


05 


a. 








c 




03 




CO 






o 




CD 


si 


T3 




Ij 


0) 




c -c 




o> </> 








2? 


03 

o> 




o 


CL as 




05 




O) 




03 


h (Dh 






President Aquino waves to the throng during the 
National Day of Prayer and Renewal on December 
14, 1991. Both admirers and detractors concede 
that the President seem to have an Upper Advan- 
tage." 



NO MINORITIES. Upper photo. 
The Mangyans from 
Occidental Mindoro trooped 
to their provincial capitol 
when they heard that Presi- 
dent Aquino was in town. 
The President visited 
Mambajao on April 16, 1991. 



Left. The President tries rice 
wine during the International 
Festival and Conference on 
Indigenous and Traditional 
Culture on Nov. 23, 1988. 




President Aquino comforts Pfc. Jimmy President Aquino exchanges pleasant- 
Biligulo, one of the soliders who sur- ries with a schoolboy while he awaits 
vived an NPA ambush in Surigao del his class' turn to enter the Malacafiang 





Is 



mm 




Preceeding page; 

President Aquino explains to 
the nation the IMF Memoran- 
dum of Economic Policy or 
Letter of Intent during her 
weekly radio program 
"Magtanong sa Pangulo" on 
March 19, 1989. 



The President discusses long term reconstruction 
and rehabilitation programs on affected families 
and areas of Mt. Pinatubo with (counter clockwise) 
Pampanga Governor Bren Guiao; Public Works 
and Highways Secretary Jose de Jesus; Bureau of 
Broadcast director Frankie Batacan; and Radyo ng 
Bayan station manager Roger Lagasca in 
"Magtanong sa Pangulo" on June 30, 1991. 




President Aquino congratulates Narcisa Lanorio 
as the 100,000th caller to the Middle East during a 
visit at the PresidentiaJ Action Center (PAC) in 
Kalayaan Hall, Malacanang. The President also 
extended medical and financial assitance to 
Narcisa whose child is half-paralyzed due to 
meningitis and needs brain surgery. Looking on is 
Executive Secretary Oscar Orbos. 




The President heads for the helicopter while son Noynoy escorts her. Tagaytay, 
June 9, 1988. 

Leaders of 13 organizations under the Tunay na Alyansa ng mga Samahan sa 
Kabikulan (TASK) headed by Flaviano Encenares (right of the President) sit down 
with their President during her visit to Naga City on January 21, 1992. 





President Aquino twists her ankle upon 
alighting from the Presidential helicopter, 
Jiggy, in Munoz, Nueva Ecija on May 23, 
1991. She was there to attend the ground- 
breaking ceremonies for the post-harvest 
facilities of the Alay-TangkiHk Foundation. 



With ankle swollen, the President still 
decides to proceed to Cabiao from Munoz 
Nueva Ecija to inaugurate the Philrice 
complex. 




Pupils of the P. Guevarra Elementary 
School greet the President. 




ALL EARS. The President listens to Antonio Binoya, barangay captain of 
Sitio Abad, San Marcelino, Zambales during her visit to Barangay Poon 
Bato in Botolan, Zambales on November 7, 1987. 

On the same ocassion, Aetas entertain the President with a war dance. 





LIGHTER MOMENTS. 
Upper photo. The President 
poses with the officers 
and members of the 
Samahang Kartunista ng 
Pilipinas after gamely 
sitting for a sketching 
session with them at the 
Guest House. 



Left. President Aquino 
greets her faithful 
"penpal", Mrs. Alfonso 
Radislao of the Aklan 
Agricultural College on 
December 20, 1991. Mrs. 
Radislao fulfilled her 
dream of meeting the 
President in person after 
having corresponded 
with her since 1986. 





President Aquino stressed that no 
barriers, religious or whatever, should 
prevent the country from coming to- 
gether in praying for peace in the land. 
Above, the President is assisted by 
Obispo Maximo Tito Pasco of the Iglesia 
Filipinia Independiente and the National 
Council of Churches in the Philippines 
while she reads the Community Prayer 
during the Ecumenical Day of Prayer at 
Malacanang's Heroes Hall on July 22, 
1991. Also in photo are (from left) Abdu 
Sammy Baunta, representing the Muslim 
Community; Bishop Deogracias Iniguez 
of the Diocese of Iba, Zambales; and 
Rev. Rey Desenganio of the Cosmopoli- 
tan Church representing the United 
Church of Christ in the Philippines. 



Next page. Upper photo. The President briefs 
guests on thrust and topic of 
'Magtanong sa Pangulo'. 

Lower photo. Prawn exporters of Bulacan 
show their produce to a curious 
visitor. 



The President shares Christmas joy by 
distributing toys from Bigay-Puso and 
Australia's Donate-A-Doll project. 





BIRTHDAY CELEBRATION. President Aquino shares birthday cake with 
students of the Tejeros Elementary School on January 25, 1991. While 
below, same day, she addresses residents of Makati who had gathered in 
the compound. She appealed to big businessmen to share blessings. 





The President visits survivors of the massacre victims in Lupao, Nueva 

Ecija on February 21, 1987. 

President Aquino looks into the housing unit awarded to the Cabalic family 
by the National Housing Authority (NHA) at the Baguilan Ressetlement Site 
in Botolan, Zambales on October 29, 1991. Government has completed 757 
housing units for the relocatees by then. 





Preceeding pnge: 

The President is mobbed by a crowd 
who had come to attend the Pulong 
Pangkabuhayan with the farmers and 
fisherfolk from Regions 9 and 11 at the 
Malalag Gymnasium in Davao del Sur on 
February 20, 1992. 



NUMERO UNO. President Aquino is an 
indefatigable campaigner. She went to 
her people to get their support and they 
have responded well to her appeals. As 
in the ratification of the Constitution, the 
election of senators, and later still, the 
election of her successor. Photo shows 
the President in Bacolod City on April 
29, 1987 plugging for her 
candidates. 



One With Her People 



21 



The mayor of a town in Bukidnon also wrote to follow up on the implementa- 
tion of his proposed priority projects for his town. In her reply to Mayor Mequiabas 
of Maramag, Bukidnon, aired on Magtanong on November 6, 1988, the President 
suggested that the Mayor get in touch with the Regional Development Council of his 
area. She said: "A key feature in this process is the establishment of local develop- 
ment councils at the municipal, provincial, and regional levels. Those councils are 
mandated to appraise and prioritize the needs of their respective areas. So, all pro- 
posed programs and projects to be funded by the government have to be endorsed 
by the Regional Development Councils". The advice to the people to participate in 
local planning was a signal precursor to decentralization. Hence, while she wanted 
to help, she had to put across the idea that decision making could be done at the 
local level. She always avoided the hand panning of favors. 

Most of the time, President Aquino's immediate response was a combination 
of action/directive and information on relevant government offices, officials, poli- 
cies and programs that led people to officials and institutions as well as to 
processes. 

The people's voiced needs and concerns became useful inputs to policy plan- 
ning and program formulation. At the very least, they lent a sense of urgency as a 
number of government programs became marked "top priority". 



A Public Pact 

Magtanong Sa Pangulo was both a forum and a public pact. A government 
agency which promised to act on a request from the people virtually made these 
commitments public. Pronouncements made in the radio program were, after all, 
also picked up by the major newspapers. It usually made headlines and frontpage 
news of national dailies on Monday. This was a happy by-product brought on by 
the choice of Sunday as airing date - Sundays are considered "dead days" for news 
by reporters. 

But apart from the public and media scrutiny, the Office of the President had a 
system to follow pledges through. After the airing of each program, the PMS re- 



22 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



viewed the transcriptions and identified the directives given by the President to 
different agencies and officials. These directives were then sent by PMS to the con- 
cerned agencies and/or officials for appropriate action. The PMS also monitored 
the implementation of the President's directives. Monthly status reports were pre- 
pared by the PMS and submitted to the Office of the Executive Secretary and the 
Cabinet Assistance Secretariat. 

The airing of commitments emboldened the people to follow up their officials 
on actions taken. In a manner of speaking, Magtanong Sa Pangulo became their ally 
in measuring the government's words. 

The original program format of Magtanong hewed closely to its title - queries 
addressed to the President were answered and acted upon by the President. Under 
this format, queries sent to Malacanang by mail were discussed by the President on 
the air. 

The sources of queries were not limited to mailed-in letters to Malacanang. 
Listeners of PBS stations, popularly known as Radyo Ng Bayan and Magtanong's 
carrying stations, would send letters to the stations and to the Philippine Informa- 
tion Agency provincial offices. Oftentimes, the stations would ask people to voice 
tape their query or request. Later, RTVM teams would also video tape queries and 
requests of people they would meet during remote coverages. Thus, sources of que- 
ries included mailed-in letters and audio tapes to Malacanang, Radyo Ng Bayan, 
and PIA as well as video taken by RTVM in the field. 

Television Version 

Two years after its initial broadcast, Magtanong started a television version. 
This development was an outcome of RTVM's video documentation work in the 
field. The RTVM, now it can be told, did video documentation of various reported 
projects all over the country only ostensibly so that the President can see the project 
for herself without actually going to the site. What the President actually wanted 
was to hear, firsthand, what the people were really saying and to countercheck 
status reports on paper with actual footages. Thus, the cameramen and production 



One With Her People 



23 



crew of RTVVI became one of the President's reliable "eyes and ears" in the country- 
side. 

Magtanong, however, was just the tip of the communication structure. 

On field, RTVM usually operated in small groups of three or four and blended 
with the surroundings. They usually did not identify themselves as coming from 
Malacanang. Oftentimes, they were mistaken to be from PIA, PTV 4, or Channel 2. 

But not being recognized did not bother the RTVVI staff. They knew from 
experience that when people were aware that they came from Malacanang, the 
picture, more often than not, got distorted. Either problems were exaggerated or 
accomplishments were bloated to get more of everything - be it assistance or pats 
on the back. As a rule, RTVM crews, when not covering the President, preferred to 
remain unlabeled and anonymous. This was not always successful. 

During a remote coverage to document the effects of Red Tide in Bataan on 
September 22, 1988, a barangay captain being interviewed on camera somehow 
learned that the crew was from Malacanang. 

Faces Of Appeal 

Barangay Captain Ireneo Villegas of Barangay Lusungan, Orion, Bataan was 
asked to give a brief situationer on the effects of the Red Tide menace on their 
barrio. After dramatically relating how difficult life had been since the onslaught of 
the Red Tide, Villegas suddenly called on the President for help. The RTVM crew 
looked at each other and the cameraman shouted "Cut!" - they had a Magtanong 
query. Thus, a "change tape" was necessary. It was standard operating procedure 
that all Magtanong queries were in separate tapes, separate from interviews and 
other documentary footages. This way, filing, retrieval, processing, and response to 
Magtanong queries were facilitated efficiently. 

During the second take of Villegas, however, the cameraman again cut short 
the take. Other team members wondered what the problem was this time; it looked 



24 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



like a good take. The problem, it turned out, was that the alert cameraman noticed 
that the barangay captain - a government official - had addressed the President as 
simply "Cory". 

As a rule, RTVM crews did not coach interviewees, but the barangay captain 
just had to be told to address the President properly. 

During the third take, he called the President "Kagalang-galang na Pangulong 
Cory" and then, to the astonishment of the RTVM crew, knelt down and cried: "Sana 
unawain at dinggin ang karaingan ng aking barrio. Kaya tiklop-tuhod po kaming 
nakikiusap, sana kung ano po ang paparatingin dito ay siya po naming 
pasasalamatan". 

The RTVM people were trained to get both the voice of local officials and the 
citizenry in order to get the people's real pulse. Hence, aside from getting Barangay 
Captain Villegas' view, the crew also went around to get footages of a fisherman, a 
fish vendor, a fisherman's wife, and other barangay officials in nearby Barangay 
Bago. Man-on-the-street (MOS) interviews were also conducted among fish ven- 
dors in the public market of Orion, Bataan. 

In the course of these interviews, it was found out that the public had the 
mistaken notion that the Red Tide also contaminated fish. As a consequence, the 
fishermen and vendors suffered because of this. 

The findings, as voiced by the people of Bataan, confirmed that the Red Tide 
inflicted untold suffering on them as earlier reported to Malacanang by the provin- 
cial government. 

In the special edition of Magtanong Sa Pangulo on October 22, 1988, the ap- 
peal of Barangay Captain Villegas became the springboard for discussion by Presi- 
dent Aquino, Agriculture Secretary Carlos Dominguez, Agricultural Credit Policy 
Council Deputy Executive Director Orlando Abelgas, BFAR Resarch Division Chief 
Jose Ordonez, and BFAR Director Juanito Malig. 



One With Her People 



25 



The discussion consolidated ideas and suggestions for a successful massive 
information drive regarding the Red Tide menace. 

In early 1988, RTVM started producing the weekly tv docu-magazine pro- 
gram "Sagot Ng Pangulo" It served as the Aquino government's action line and 
featured not only the people's needs and concerns, but more on the action done on 
these by the concerned government agencies. Most of the early episodes of Sagot 
were follow- through reports of Magtanong. 

During remote coverages of Sagot - most of which took the crew to far-flung 
corners of the country - the RTVM team sought Magtanong letter senders and asked 
for feedback. 



Uncovering Facts 

The Sagot format and style of production became an effective monitoring tool 
for the President. It provided a true picture of the status of response projects di- 
rected for implementation by the President. What Sagot showed were both hearten- 
ing, in the case of projects completed and making a difference in people's lives, and 
disappointing, in the case of projects erroneously reported as completed. 

Stella Formoso, an Associate Producer for Sagot, recalls an instance that made 
her and her team seethe with anger. They were on a trip to Region IX where one of 
the projects they were to cover was a bridge reported to be already completed. The 
team's vehicle broke down on the way to the site, so the RTVM team had to walk the 
remaining 10 kilometers; all the while, carrying the camera, tripod, supplies, and 
other equipment. There was no complaint from any of the crew. They were commit- 
ted to completing their mission - that of taking footages of the finished bridge. But 
to their horror and anger, they did not find a bridge at the site. There were just piles 
of stones, and rocks, and a river which merrily tumbled over the piles. No bridge. 

The RTVM crew brought back full shots, medium shots, and establishing shots 
of stones, rocks, and running water - mute testimonies to dishonesty, inefficiency, 
and corruption. 



26 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Stella remembers that nobody was laughing when the team leader, Lito Nadal, 
directed the shots to be taken. It was, after all, their duty to show things as they 
really were, for all its worth. 

While the RTVM crew stuck to a cardinal rule of documenting the truth, it also 
as strongly avoided recording contrived situations. 

On October 5, 1 988, while documenting the government's efforts at easing the 
effects of the Red Tide menace, a barangay captain expressed a lot of dissatisfaction 
with the distribution of relief goods. He complained that a congressman had inter- 
fered in the distribution such that the relief goods were given only to barangay 
captains friendly to the congressman, but who were not necessarily Red Tide 
victims. 



But before the RTVM crew could put on tape the barangay captain's lament, a 
provincial official intervened and dictated to the poor barangay captain what he 
should say. The RTVM team made it clear to both the provincial official and barangay 
captain that they will not tape scripted statements. 

The team leader then called for a break in the shooting and invited the official 
"in the shade" for an off-camera interview. The crew already knew what to do. 
While the official was being interviewed "in the shade" far enough from them, they 
were able to tape the barangay captain's statements straight from the heart. 

As a result of this particular report from the field, the policy of having relief 
goods distribution done mainly by the DSWD and the NGOs was reinforced. 



Evolution Of Format 



Over the years, Magtanong had several changes in its format to reflect changes 
in the information needs rather than trends in production. From its initial broadcast 
m September 1987, the question-and-answer format continued until early 1989. 
Later that year, the format gave more space to invited guests. A prelude to this 
topical discussion format was aired on March 19, 1989, where four invited guests 



One With Her People 



27 



from the financial and economic sectors discussed with the President the IMF pro- 
gram and its implications on the lives of the Filipinos. 

In 1990, the topical discussion format evolved further to include an introduc- 
tory statement by the President on the topic for discussion. Another significant change 
that year was the cessation of the airing of mailed-in or taped queries. This, how- 
ever, did not mean that they were not attended to anymore. The function of collat- 
ing, answering, and referring for action of the queries was assigned to the OPS 7 
Bureau of Communication Services. Efforts were also made to monitor the status of 
the queries as when they were being aired, with some significant ones even featured 
in Sagot. 

Aside from the President and the Press Secretary, the other officials involved in 
directing the thrusts of Magtanong were the Executive Secretary, the Presidential 
Counsel, and Director Maria V. Montelibano of RTVM. 



The Producers 

Through the years, the faces and names of the RTVM staff and crew changed. 
But every man and woman were the same in the sense that they all took pride in 
their commitment to the service of the Aquino administration. The entire RTVM 
family were contractual employees and co-terminus with the President. Visitors to 
the RTVM doubtless saw on the front bulletin board of the office's reception area a 
sign ticking off the number of remaining days of the Aquino administration. This 
countdown to the end of the President's term was a very graphic demonstration of 
RTVM's absolute loyalty and commitment to her and her alone. 

The RTVM's main task was to document, produce relevant radio-tv programs/ 
shows, and to preserve the moments of the presidency. All presidential activities 
and pronouncements were documented on video. Using these materials and other 
relevant footages, the RTVM produced radio, television, and video shows on the 
Aquino presidency. Finally, all these materials were preserved in a professionally 
managed video and audio library that maintained a hard copy file of audio tran- 
scripts as well. Selected materials were also transferred to laser disc, a first not only 
in the country but also in the ASEAN region. 



28 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The primary tasks of the RTVM men and women involved their being on call to 
the President at all times - in Cabinet meetings, while receiving foreign visitors and 
dignitaries, and on provincial and overseas trips. Private television crews and re- 
porters, who had access to the President mostly only during press conferences, re- 
ferred to the RTVM crew as "one of the twin shadows of the Presidents"; the other 
being the PSG. 

The work done by RTVM for Magtanong was just part of a workday averag- 
ing 13.6 hours. The only difference was that work on Magtanong demanded more 
flexibility. Flexibility in the technical aspects like taping facilities, equipment, per- 
sonnel, etc. was a given. But more demanding of flexibility were the myriad produc- 
tion details that came with a show such as Magtanong - program content and in- 
vited guests could change at a moment's notice due to snags in presidential sched- 
ules or nonconvergence of guests 7 appointments. 

Work was demanding and hard at the RTVM. Burn-out was common, though 
one would surprisingly see a familiar face all gung-ho on the job again after a brief 
absence. Perhaps it was the exciting nature of the job - meeting all kinds of people 
seeing many places, watching history being made. Perhaps it was also because of 
the psychic reward on being part of a presidency that cared to be one with the 
people. 



The Constant Figure 

Over the years, the Magtanong Sa Pangulo mirrored not only the key national 
issues that confronted the nation and the presidency, but also reflected the evolution 
of the various offices within the Palace and the comings and goings of key officials. 
It was not unlike a tv drama series where the cast of characters changed every now 
and then. Only, one figure remained constant and consistent: Corazon Aquino. 

The President was a fast study. In the initial taping days, she marveled at the 
way the medium could enhance image, like how studio lighting could eliminate 
eyebags or how editing could make speeches crisp and faultless. But despite being 



One With Her People 



29 



just in front of the camera most of the time, she was soon speaking in the crew's 
technical language and even directing herself during tapings. 

The President graduated from using "sound" to "audio". She would pause, 
before going on the presidential dais, to evaluate the lighting scheme on the set and 
at times was able to spot shadows where they were not supposed to be. When she 
was not happy with her delivery, she herself would say: "Cut!" and"Let's take it from 
the top". Spoken like a trouper. 

Still later, in the absence of Director Montelibano, the President herself would 
organize the program - telling the editors and the assistant directors what particu- 
lar event to show on what specific time frame and what part she was to discuss with 
guests. She did it so completely and efficiently that the RTVM people would joke 
that Maria Montelibano had a new tv director in her stable: President Corazon C. 
Aquino. 



Presidential 
Action Line 
System 



ALL THE PRESIDENT'S efforts at "touching base" with the people - from the 
radio/tv programs to the presidential visits - were complemented by the Presiden- 
tial Action Line System. The President knew that the spirit of cooperation should not 
only exist between the government and the private sector, it should also hold true 
between the presidency and the local government units (LGUs). 

The PALS was set up in the Office of the President in April 1989 to attend 
immediately to the requests and concerns of LGUs as well as to identify critical 
issues requiring presidential intervention. The establishment of PALS also became 
necessary because the Local Government Code, which would give local govern- 
ments room to directly manage and undertake their own development programs, 
was gathering cobwebs in the halls of Congress. The people in the countrysides 
needed to have their problems addressed. They could not afford to just wait. The 
resident felt they should not wait. And she certainly would not. Through PALS, 
t erefore, she was able to give attention to specific local concerns and to directly 
provide local government units with needed assistance. 

The PALS was managed by the PMS. In order to facilitate the processing of 
requests coming from different areas of the country, certain mechanisms were put 
in place by the PMS. First, PALS was computerized thereby easing the classifica- 
tion, retrieval, tracking down, and follow up of requests referred to line depart- 



One With Her People 



31 



merits/ agencies. An action officer was also designated for each of these depart- 
ments/ agencies. Acting as pointmen for all requests, they helped greatly in the short- 
ening of action and reaction time in the departments/agencies. 

In the course of its operations, the people of PALS were able to gather a verita- 
ble treasure trove of amusing anecdotes. Sometime in May 1991, a certain Mrs. 
Miranda arrived at the PMS doorstep all the way from Mindanao. She had an en- 
dorsement letter from a local official of the town she came from, as well as several 
other documents. Mrs. Miranda was seeking the intervention of President Aquino to 
reclaim a piece of land somewhere in Manila which she insisted she inherited from 
her family. Sensing nothing unusual about the request, the PMS immediately at- 
tended to Mrs. Miranda's request. Following SOP, they first examined her docu- 
ments in order to determine the merits of the case. Unfortunately, the PMS had to 
politely decline Mrs. Miranda's request despite her urgent importuning - it turned 
out that the land she was claiming was none other than historic, and doubtless, 
public land, Plaza Miranda. 

For the PMS staff assigned to PALS, there never was a dull moment. Aside 
from encounters with people like Mrs. Miranda, the letters that they received were 
rich sources of knowledge - of the Filipino character, of the countrysides, of human 
nature, of life in general. Some of the letters told tragic stories and some told dra- 
matic ones. Others were very informative and still others were plain curious. As in 
the case of one barangay captain who wrote to ask about Kris Aquino's movie 
career and personal plans, probably forgetting that he was writing to the President 
and not Inday Badiday. 

But no matter what kind of stories they told or for what purpose they came, 
the people who approached the President through PALS were sending a common 
message: trust. The PALS reinforced their vision of the presidency as a symbol of 
hope. The PMS could do no less than to honor this trust, and the President's, too, by 
speedily attending to the appeals. 

As of October 31, 1991, the PMS had processed a total of 8,487 LGU requests/ 
concerns. Of this number, 6,447 were referred to concerned agencies for appropri- 
ate action. 



32 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The PALS as well as the provincial visits of the President were in reality, dry 
runs for her aim to eventually devolve more power to the people. On January 25, 
1989, during a visit to Bulacan, she summarized: "I am visiting the provinces to 
realize the government's goal of helping the rural areas become more prosperous 
and independent. Likewise, my provincial visits intend to transfer enough power 
and wealth to local government units". 

The people's response to President Aquino's efforts at bringing the presidency 
and government to them was very encouraging. Rolando Tabun, a farmer from 
Pilar, Bataan perhaps says it best: "Ako ay para sa Pangulo. Sapagka't ngayon ko 
lang nalasap, ngayon lang nalasap ng mga maliliit, na sa kanyang panunungkulan 
ay mayroon kaming halaga. Hindi ko maiintindihan kung ano ang Kabisig, kung 
ano ang LDP, at ano man. Ang naiintindihan ko lang sa kanya, ang gusto niyang 
mangyari, kaming maliliit ay mapaganda ang kalagayan. Hindi katulad noong 
huling rehimen na wala kaming karapatan". 



