Commonweal th of the Pnili opines 



Dept. of Inforaiat^^and Public Relations 



'vJisoc" laneous t* ,r "^^^itionB 



CONTENTS - 



1 Office of Special Service, Commonwealth of the Philippines - 
July 12, 1943 

2. Department of Information and Public Relations, comnonwealth 

of the Philippines - 1943 - Oct. 15; Nov, 11, 12, 15, 17, 
19, 27; Dec. 4, 6, 7. 

1944 - Jan. 1, 26, 29, 31; Feb. 4, 7, 25; March 13, 18, 
20 , 29; April 1, 3, 6; May 17, 19, 26, 27, 29; June 6, 
7, 14, 15; July 5, 21; Aug. 7, 10, 11, 24, 26, 29; Sept. 
7; Oct. 20, 21, 25, 26, 27, 31; Nov. 8, 14, 15, 16, 17, 
29, 30; Dec. 14. 

1945 - Jan. 10; Feb. 1, 5, 15, 19, 20, 27. 

3. Department of Information and Public Relations, Commonwealth 

of the Philippines (Delivery of Pres. Quezon's Address) - 
Oct. 15, 1943 

4. Department of Information and Public Relations, Commonwealth 

of the Philippines - (Voice of Freedom) - 1944 - Nov. 8, 
9, 13, 14, 15, 27, 29. 
( Mi scellaneous ) 

5. Office of Special Service (Enemy Radio Digest) 1943 - July 12; 

Aug. 25. 

6. Office of War Information (Manila Broadcast), 1943 - July 9, 23. 

7. U. S. office of War Info ramt ion (The Philippine Hour) Aug. 2, 1944 

8. The 4th War Loan News Desk - Feb. 2, 1944 

9. Address of Mrs. Franklin Roosevelt delivered Dec. 4, 1943 

10. Philippine War Relief - Aug. 29, 1942 

11. Congressional Record (The Jones Act) Sept. 1, 1942 

12. N. C. W. C. News Service - Aug. 29, 1942; Sept. 1, 1942 

13. Office of Resident Commissioner of the Philippines to the United 

States. )- Oct. 6, 1945 

14. Department of Information and Public Relations (Pedro Napalan) 

15. Office of Philippine Resident Commissioner (Phil. Nevra Digest) 

Sept. 24, 1945 

16. Presenting of the Medal for Valor to Fleet Admiral Chester Nimitz 

by the President of the Philippines 

17. Extract from Letter describing Miraculous cure at Canton, 1939. 



1617 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 
HObart 1400 

Office of Special Services 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE July 12, 1943 

Pleas and threats broadcast by Tokyo for over a year have 
unwittingly told the world a story of unending resistance by un 
conqiered Filipino and American soldiers against the Japanese 
invs lers of the Philippines, according to the Philippine 
Off: ie of Special Services in Washington. 

On July 2, 1943, in what amounted virtually to a battle 
commmique, the Japanese reported on the operations against 
Filipino partisans on the island of Cebu. This statement de- 
clare! that the Japanese forces, "since the start of opera- 
tions in Northern Cebu March 10, have been defying every 
hardship in the achievement of the pacification campaign and 
on th night of June 13, the unit commander, accompanied by 
' member of his unit, launched a surprise thrust on the bandit 
headqurters and freed three native prisoners and captured 
four c the enemy, as well as a quantity of munitions." 

0 many occasions since the fall of Corregidor, the 
Japanee have announced the "complete pacification" of the 
Philiptnes. But they continue to report the surronder of 
groups ,f "guerrillas" and "bandits," as the enemy calls the 
Americas' and Filipinos v*ho refuse to submit to Nippon's new 

order. The Japanese propaganda machine plays up to the limit 

i * # 

stories'of the "surrenders^" giving names and ranks of cap- 
tured 1-oders and quoting Statements purportedly made by them 
about 4 kindness and courtesy extended to thorn by Japanese 
author: ties. 

Japanese admission,; Wpino "guerrillas" and "bandits' 
I destroying comfit ion lines and storehouses and 
,i ng an ti-Ja;fencso Jindbills. Oftentimes they engage 



\ 



- 2 - 

the Japanese in bloody skirmishes. 

Hero are some of the contradicting items spewed by the 
enemy radio; 

On April 2, 1942, a week before the fall of Botaan, 

p. 

Tokyo confidently announced "complete restore tion of peace and 
order on Luzon." On Muy 4, 1942, shortly before Corrcgidor's 
capitulation, Tokyo admitted that "the cleaning-up campaign 
is continuing on Luzon" and accused Filipino-American forces 

\ 

of "socking, raping, setting buildings on fire nnd fleeing 
into the hills." 

On June 28, 1942, Tokyo stated that Filipinos could be 
made men of good character if they cooperated with the 
Japanese. Only four days before, the Japanese hod announced 
the execution of eight Filipinos for distributing anti- Japanese 
pamphlets on — day of all days'. -- the Emperor's birthday. 

On November 3, 1942, Tokyo again admitted that Japan 
had been forced to send on expedition "to clean out the lost 
strongholds of resistance" in tho Cuyo Iwlr.-nls. On March 19, 
1943, the Japanese- controlled Manila radio called for the ' 
"pacification of Mindanao." 

The Japanese have promised "independence" for the 
Philippines this year — but only on condition that "peace and 
order" reign throughout the country. 



> 




OSS-PR- 3 2 



1617 Massachusetts' Ave. , N.W. 
Washington 6, D,C. 
I-IObart 1/+00 

DEPARTl'lENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 M M 0 N V/ EALTH OF THE P H I L I P P I N E S 

October 15, 1943 



fQR' MEDIATE RELEASE: 

President Manuel L. Quezon of the Philippines, commenting on 
the establishment of a so-called Philippine Republic by the 
Japanese, today stated that "the terns of the alliance as announced 
by Tokyo clearly show the real purpose behind the granting by Japan 
of a so-called Philippine independence, namely, to use the Phil- 
ippines 'politically, economically and militarily for the success- 
ful prosecution of the War of Greater ^.ast Asia.' 1 ' 

He reminded his people that "we are bound to America by the 
ties of loyalty and gratitude," and promised them "I v/ill return 
with General HacArthur." 

i? I hope and expect that the Filipino people . . . will fight 
on the side of the liberating forces," President Quezon added. 

President Quezon's message broadcast to the Philippines, in 
full, follows: 

"We are informed thatVhe so-called Philippine Republic 
sponsored by Japan was inaugurated on October 14, and on the same 
day a- Tokyo broadcast says^-^y Tokyo Board of Information 
announced Thursday the sighing of a pact of alliance between Japan 
and the Republic of the -hilippinos. t <phu terms of the alliance 
as announced by Tokyo clearly show the real purpose behind the 
granting by Japan of a so-called Philippine independence, namely, 
to use the Philippines 'politically, economically and militarily 

* 1 ' • . ' •/ . 

for the successful prosecution of the war of Greater East Asia. 1 

"I want to remind my people who for so many years have 

honored me with their trust and confidence ,. of the' f olloy/ing 

important facts: First, that we are bound to America by ties of 

. » v 

loyalty and gratitude; second, that America has pledged all her . 
resources in men and material to redeem. the Philippines-, to expel 



the Japanese invaders from our land and establish and protect the 
Philippine Republic; third, that the Congress of the United States, 
upon the recommendation of President Roosevelt, is now considering 
the enactment of legislation that will not only recognize the in- 
dependence of the Philippines even before July 4, 1946, but will 
provide for the future economic security of our people, and for the 
defense of the territorial integrity of the Philippines; fourth] 
this legislation will also provide for the financial and economic 
rehabilitation of the Philippines and the repair of all the damages 
caused by the war to the Philippine Government, to public and pri- 
vate corporations and to individuals, including the poor people 
who might have lost their small houses, their carabaos, hogs, etc.; 
fifth and last, the strength of America is now being gathered in 
the Pacific for the final blow at Japan. Already very significant 
victories have been achieved by General MacArthur in the Southwest 
Pacific, where he has decisively defeated the Japanese and driven 
them out of Gona, iiuna, Ilunda, Lae , Salamaua, Finschafen, in New 
Guinea, and Kolombangara in the central Solomons, and only three 
days ago his air force scored a decisive victory in Rabaul where 
177 Japanese planes were destroyed and 119 Japanese ships sunk, all 
in preparation for the reoccupation of the Philippines. 

"I will return with General Hae^rthur . And I hope and expect 
that the Filipino people, when that day comes, will fight on the 
si.de* of the liberating forces and not allow theaselvos to be used 
by Japan who is responsible for the thousands of lives lost, the 
hardships and sufferings or our people and the devastation or our 
c ountry 

"Filipinos, ray belovc^^ountrymen, ;:ecp your fai'th in America. 
Let us be with her irl victory as we have been with her in defeat ♦ •'• 



PR- 3 



1617 Massachusetts Ave,, N,W» 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1400 



BSPAREMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 M SI 0 N ¥/ E A L T H OF THE P H I L I ? P I N E S 

October 15, 1943 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE : 

President Manuel L. Quezon of the Philippines, commenting on 
the establishment of a so-called Philippine Republic by the 
Japanese, today stated that "the terns of the alliance as announced 
by Tokyo clearly show the real purpose behind the granting by Japan 
of a so-called Philippine independence, namely, to use the Phil- 
ippines 'politically, economically and militarily for the success- 
ful prosecution of the ".Jar of Greater 3ast Asia, 1 " 

He reminded his people that "we are bound to America by the 
ties of loyalty and gratitude," and promised them "I will return 
with General Ilac Arthur . " 

"I hope and expect that the Filipino people . . . will fight 
on the side of the liberating forces," President Quezon added. 

President Quezon's message broadcast to the Philippines, in 
full, follows: 

.-•"We are informed that the , so-called Philippine Republic 
sponsored by Japan was inaugurated on October 14, and on the same 
day a Tokyo broadcast says:^^^e Tokyo Board of Information 
announced Thursday the si^KKf a pact of alliance between Japan 
and the Republic .of the IjMBppines. » The terms of the alliance 
as announced by' Tokyo clearly show the real purpose behind the 
granting by Japan of a s'o-called Philippine independence, namely, 
to use the Philippines . 'politically , .economically and militarily 
for the successful prosecution of the war of Greater East Asia.' 

"I want to remind my people who for so many year have 
honored me with their trust and confidence, of the following 
important facts: First, that we are bound to America by ties of 
loyalty and gratitude; second, that America has pledged all her 
resources in men and material to redeem the Philippines, to" expel 



- 2 ~ 

the Japanese invaders from our land and establish and protect the 
Philippine Republic; third, that the Congress of the United States, 
upon the recommendation of President Roosevelt, is now considering 
the enactment of legislation that will not only recognize the in- 
dependence of the Philippines even before July 4, 1946, but will 
provide for the future economic soourity of our people, and for the 
defense of the territorial integrity of the Philippines; fourth, 
this legislation will also provide for the financial and economic 
rehabilitation of the Philippines and the repair of all the damages 
caused by the war to the Philippine Government, to public and pri- 
vate corporations and to individuals, including the poor people 
who might have lost their small houses, their carabaos, hogs, etc.; 
fifth and last, the strength of Amerioa is now being gathered in 
the Pacific for the final blow at Japan. Already very significant 
victories have been achieved by General Plac^rthur in the Southwest 
Pacific, where he has decisively defeated the Japanese and driven 
them out of Gone, 3una, Hunda, Lae , Salamaua, Finschafen, in New 
Guinea, and Kolombangara in the central Solomons, and only three 
days ago his air force scored a decisive victory in Rabaul where 
177 Japanese planes were destroyed and 119 Japanese ships sunk, all 
in preparation for the reoccupation of the Philippines, 

"I will return with General Kacarthur. And I hope and expect 
that the Filipino people, when that day comes, will fight on the 
side of the liberating forces and not allow themselves to be used 
by Japan who is responsible for the thousands of lives lost, the 
hardships and sufferings ojjJUf people and the devastation of our 
c ountry ., 1 

"Filipinos, my beloved countrymen, keep your faith in America, 

t t r ' 

Let us be witlvher in victory as we have boen with her in defeat. 1 '' 



PR- 3 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.W, 
Washington 6, D.C* 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

November 11, 1943 



FOR RELEASE ONLY AFTER TEE PRESIDENT OF T HE UNITED STATES HAS 
APPROVED THE JOINT RESOLUTION OF CONGRESS CONTINUING PRESIDENT 
QUEZON IN OFFICE FOR THE DURATION OF THE WAR: 



Vice President Sergio Osmena of the Philippines, in a 
message to all Filipinos in the Philippines ana abroad, today 
gave his reasons for initiating the tame that led to the enact- 
ment of a Congressional resolution to keep President Manuel L. 
Quezon in office for the duration of the war. 

Mr. Osmena, who would have succeeded President Quezon on 
November 1$, said that he relinquished his right because the 
interests of the United States and the Philippines in the war 
could be best served by keeping President Quezon in offico. 

Full text of Mr. Osmena' s message follows: 

"My Countrymen: 

"A joint resolution was passed by Congress continuing Pres- 
ident Quezon in office for the duration of the war. Under this 
resolution which has beenjjupproved ky the Fresident of the 
United States, my rightpfcT succeed to the presidency on 
November 15, 1943, has been postponed until constitutional 
processes shall have been restored in the Philippines, 

"Congress acted on this matter upon the request of the 
Philippine Government in exile and this action of the Philippine 
Government was taken on my own initiative. I owe it to my people 
who gave me their confidence in the last elections to state the 
reasons for my action. 

"If we were in normal times, my duty would be clear and 
simple: 1 would have to assume the presidency on. the 15th of 
th].s month as a matter of right. Put these are not normal 



- 2 - 



tlilfenemyT ° 0UntTy n0t ° nly is at war > but also is occupied by 




t hp ?mm A^r u r«^ "t"? i?." 00 win the war > liberate our people from 

u a fl fl ,ir nv eSt ? bllSh the ^^Penaence of our country. The 

t ! «?S h a H 1SeS: . What is the b est thing to do in order 
vO nelp accomplish these aims? 

"It is unnecessary for me to lemind vou that Present 

^M*?™™^?,^**™^" Ume It theTut- 
creak 01 tno war and that it w«a h-t « i «+ + t j •» i 

4-u tt . i ^ Iiau * " was ms lot to lead our people bv 
the side ol the United Statpq w„*+v-.-p,,n * ^ 
haq «nm^Hpfl wi + h V, faithfully and courageously, he 

His Soice 1? i \ 7 6Ven With his health neatly impaired, 
and lo itel ?aith wl££ tn °ur People to resist the enemy 
for us thP P Jpt«l?^ the United States, it was he who signed 
the Philinn?n^ lit 1 ?S ° f Jnited Nations. Due to his efforts 
the Philippines has been given a seat in the Tacific War Council. 

on the^TS't hoT- r! P 2? Slble for the Prosecution of the war 
cern ?hP nnl -?? lte L State3 have ^pressed to me their con- 

this k 1 e + ff e0t 0f the chan « e of leadership at 

Sesidint V„^ ey , SaiQ + that the ene *y would take advantage of 
the F ?nl f ?h ? £ etl ff ment f ™ e^tive leadership by\elling 
and fSii P ip hat r eSldent ::Uezon had withdrawn f rom the fight 
that ?hP L ? n S J?* 6 ?? inte rested in this war. They added 
J t ? I" fx 16 ° f ^ Fili P inos s tiH fighting the enemy in the 
? ?i^ S u f LU ? 0 !?: Vlsa y as ^d Mindanao and receiving inspira- 
«nSS' ??* ^ might weaken if Fresident Quezon retired. Further- 
atfon ^2 ^ / 6 J ha ?u in their °P in lon, based on recent inform- 

hPttL 52? f J° nt i the Unity " f our P eo Pl e in general would be 

better maintained and secured with the retention of President 

Quezon in office since that would mean that both of us would 
continue working together. 

"The presidential succession therefore ceased to be a 
domestic matter involving only our own interests and desires. 
Kelated, as it was, to the war, it became a matter that concerned 
not ourselves alone but also the United States. 

"With the redemption of our country uppermost in ny mind 
and with the conviction that this objective cannot be achieved 
without the full support, much less without the leadership, of 
the United States, I prepared the letter which the Philippine 
Government approved and sent to Congress. In that letter, the 
matter of the presidential succession was placed before Congress 
with the request that they review the whole situation and take 
such action as in their wisdom will best serve the interest of 
the Filipino people, their constitutional government and the 
government of the United States during this emergency. 

"Congress, after thorough consideration, passed the joint 
resolution providing for the continuance in office, of President 
Quezon for the duration of the war. This resolution expresses 
the considered judgment of^the American people. I accept it 
without reserve and I urg^Pbvery Filipino, whether in the home- 
land, in continental 'United States, in Hawaii or anywhere else, 
to accept this congressional action which is intended to safe- 
guard the best interests of the two peoples. 



As for me, I consider it my inescapable duty to continue 
giving to President Quezon's leadership my utmost support and 
cooperation so that the Commonwealth Government now in Washington 
may render the greatest service to the Philippines and the 
Filipinos, It is my. desire to assist the Commonwealth Government 
in its endeavor to make every Filipino, wherever he may be, feel 
that he is close to his government which is always solicitous of 
his interest and welfare. 

"Fellow Countrymen: These are critical days for individuals 
as well as nations. Our sense of responsibility as a people and 
the strength of our national solidarity have once more been 
tested. We have again proved our unity. . With this action, we 
have shown the world that when the freedom of our country and the 
validity of our commitments are at stake, there are no differ- 
ences among us and selfish considerations carry no weight in our 
decisions." ■ PR_1 9 



1617 Massachusetts Ave, , N.W 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION 2ND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 II M 0 N W E A L T H OF THE PHILI? V I N E S 

Novenber 12, 1943 



FOR RELEASE IIONDAY I IQR T J W3tj NO] !Z1J2ZILJL2. i 

» 

Jaime Hernandez, Auditor General of the Philippines, in 
a Philippine Commonwealth Day address in New -ork, last night 
declared that the destiny of the Filipino people -as the spear- 
head of democracy and freedom among the Oriental peoples shall 
reappear more resplendent after the most trying and dreadful 
ordeal in their history, » 

.The Philippine official said that "all the misleading- 
propaganda used by the Japanese to cajole the Filipinos into 
abandoning their way of life and adopting that of Japan will not 
influence us in the least." The Filipinos who are free, he added 
;? can see distinctly the evil and far-reacning consequences that 
will result from abdication of our culture and democratic 
principles. " 

Mr. Hernandez was the main speaker at the banquet given by 
the Filipino community. of New York under the auspices of the 
Filipino National Council and the ' Philippine Center at the 

McAlpin Hotel. 

-■■■''.'■■3k . *■ ' y 

Special Philippine Commonwealth Day messages from 

President ilanuel.L. Quezon, Vice President Sergio Osmena, 
Gov. Thomas E. Dewey and Mayor Fiorello LaGuardia were read 
during the program. 

Full text of llr. Hernandez' address, outlining the frame- 
work of the Philippine Commonwealth and comparing it with the 
Japanese administration in the Philippines, follows: • 

"We are gathered here tonight in order to celebrate the 
eighth anniversary of the establishment of the Commonwealth of ■ 
the Philippines. It is indeed most fitting that we should 'do 
so, for on that historic day the sovereign government of the 
United States placed in the hands of the Filipino people. the 



-2- 



Go^onwP«i?h the course -of their national destiny. The 

a^ o^; • °l ti10 Phil iPPi*es, established in pursuance of such 
l*lc£ll S 16 groundwork on which we shall erect the inde- 
ori ^reign Philippine Republic. This event was 

ev^ ?™ 3 sche ^ le<3 for 4, 1946, but it nay take place 

even sooner as the result of a pending resolution in Congress. 

work ofth^pn^r 1 '' Ht US review in broad outlines the frane- 
a consLn?-in ow "° n m ^ 1 l h ' The foundation of this government is 
to^S^St&55S5i?S e 5 b7 . tlle flole Sates of the Filipino people 
ment o? thi TTr,f?f^ oi 6 ? for tliat P ur P°se, approved by the Govern- 
ment oi the United states, and ratified by the rill A 10 neonle 

^^stltutTo^ 

;?+h constitution lor tno Filipinos, by the Filipinos 

: ^SJ???!" °? 4^ty-l°vi4 peoples ?»ou* 
de uoSatic nract^S 111 t ? 01r P oliti «al institution! and 

o? oS eonstf^ion?' al8 ° lnfluenoed neatly in tho arafting 

derivo??tf° establish^ under this fundamental law 
exercise' tfS froa .*? e ,u0 P l0 of «"> Philippines and 

ks T I' w a0li a 5 tl6S ln aeoorflanoe with democratic 

g'aHe^rtments of co^nnent^If rlKTlf W*"! threo , 
to insure to tho r^™n ~ +w ' faithfully iiaintamed m order 

Phili-ouines %M$l ?&! th ° ^servation of democracy in tho 

elections and t n*J- ft- ° h °f Qn in frae and untrakieled popular 
basio S5 J f °°nftltutional processes Guaranteed by the * 

of tie toverlil fwf Vt^f 6 4^ d con f rolli ^ ^rcos in the exercise 

the by th f i 000 ? 16 - The Phrase "government of 
yne people" is not a mere rhet.nvinai o-b-tv^oo -s «*, u,,* . 



iiviS°?ealitv ?nV aer ° rhetorical session but ^ 6 a„ d 
PhIl5L?nfi lty rH?^ Government of the Commonwealth of the 
a mosf SL; 25 establishment of this government, through 
a' r S a un i' reo ?aented act of the United States of 



own destiny. 



the p£t^?™^™ V hG , ?? d of the Commonwealth period, but before 

created ast Sndfnf 0l1 ? °^ Uld b * COr,lc a *>ality, a global conflict 
S£?X? a astounding confusion and grave disorder in the normal 

was ab?^t^°?ft? ati °? S / nd ?°° pleG - 0ur ~ Cam££S£h 
was abruptly interrupted m its peaceful task of buildine a 

?Ho°^ a - 1C , nati ? n and was unavoidably and f orciblv enguK ed in 
inl UtiT* catastrophe. In the midst of this oVerwhelm- 

wavoiT fr 1Utl ° n > tlie Fili ?^o people cannot stop by the 
t?ucMon of S?S a Saf " Vanta&G ^ound watch passively the des- 
a? f f S ?h natl ?ns.and political and social institutions, m 
lMtoutiS**^ 10 int ? rnational upheaval, and our nation and 
tS cone i??h t^V^ V1 *!/° r ' periSh a ^ 0 ^ding to our own ability 
hol^aust! aestructive forces let loose by this global 

under"!! Iio^i tU * 0S ° f war have temporarily placed our country 
HiitdJ!? ao^olute domination of imperialistic Japan. Japanese 
th- ? a !, and practices are completely at variance from 

r 0al ^ n ? u & ht and way of national life of the Filipino 
div?™\ Imperialism and the belief in an absolute and su^osedly 
mTrh?S hea J. of ; bh0 state are entirely antagonistic to, and incom- 
nSoT Wl 3 ' democratic governments and the idea of the sov- 
llt 6 y °L* h ? P°°P le ' Centuries of imperial rule by the mikado 
nave made the Japanese people stern, absolute and arbitrary 
rulers but also submissive and servile subjects. On tho other 
nana, four centuries of constant rebellion against despotism 
and autocratic rulers have made the Filipinos appreciate and em- 
brace more dearly the blessings of democracy and popul'ar gov- 
ernment. The two peoples having different and antagonistic 
political ideologies and experiences have come in abrupt and 
forcible contact with each other, —the Japanese as 'the so Iff 
imposed rulers and the Filipinos, unfortunately, as the helpless 
subjects. 



-3- 



turall? and In f?^?? ^P^es the two people cul- 

MSlSSoS iSdS?S» h ° Japanes ^ lia ™ apparently allowed 
of Japanese miin^ .Jf C ? Urso tho autocratic and iron dictation 

on condition Wiat S n,h ^ t0 SCt Up a government in the Philippines 
on condition that such government shall fullv cooneratP with 

& M Inaopa^onoe^S* °f a - Great ^ S't" J^o!prosp rity 

f our'centS ' Zf cle^orlf usof a" ^ T^ 1 Wf"? - f0? 
the npnnln n-p th-> PhiiV^- ? Ga as the b ait, dandled before 

tarists still trir^l ?JIZ QS iT0U tne b ayonots of Japanese mili- 

The macic 'ord ind .LT^ procious ^lood of Filipino heroes, 
1110 magic wora, lnaopondenco . was vpn- dwn*..ii, f * ^ in . 9 n 

used to sugar-coat the most vile a IsfL^ t 3 an< ? allur "el3' 
For tliu vaunted nnnn. . , : "-si^n 01 Japanese imperialism. 

o? ^^StuS^oMSStCTn'SS °S*f!«M»« all traces 

making the Filipinos reve"rt to Orxentol 1 ^ Upplnc ? and of 
wav n-p "H-pn -hiA T B ^ n iein;ai — wnich Means Japanese — 

hando * 1 ^ solfan^d ?SSS S **™> haTe 

DlBtt -■■n with q t™ so-called 'independence' on a silver 

Sf^^ and a Japan*. 

pendert Government 10 £w« ly i '^de. in- Japan « Philippine incte- 
by ^r ffl ^t 2nL fl Hf all i that e° ve rnmont was established 
Lap Td no Procedure. Its constitution was made 

tL d a |fSere°d SL^.^^^SJ 11 ; ^^PP-os, but by 

S 1° C °^V a despotism and born of war and cannot, 

substan?^and a J I° n -i 1C outl; - ard aPPoaranco, and muoh less the 
substance and the spirit, of a mandate from the people of the 
Philippmes a constitution that is imposed upon ?he people bv 
Sade th ni basif of a f d °? ana despoticVwor cannot be' 

sored Filinfnn ^dependent government. The JapaneSe-s ? on- 

r d *J liPiao independence is, therefor., independence in name 

thi ^Iff* !' S e°^°rniaont is a government maintained solely by 
tne military power of Japan. J y 

nend >nr 0S i?^ S n^ iS T SPUri0US and C0unt ^feit constitution, the inde- 
fe^el thMr ?JL apan r ^ uircs ^ Filipinos to discard and to 
afffi 5a »o J trai 5 in 6.m democracy and self-expression in Public 
affairs as being foreign to the 'Oriental' ideas of government 
L^ i^f ?°' th ° '°*l«*tal* Political life and Ins™' 
d ^ h! n ^ r:iean uttor submission of the masses to the 
remind Jw ? f % s ^ OSQ ^y divine ruler. Japan should bo 
rounded that one Filipinos, although an Oriental race, have 
Pies Western civilization and in democratic princi- 

;ir?'^' Malayan customs and traditions have not been uo- 

?° r ™ P i aeea b ^ Occidental nodes of life, but have been 
5 If strengthened by the infusion of Western democratic 
S? P ih a S? doctrine of popular sovereignty in govern- 
22,1 bluna - Ln fe of Malayan customs and traditions "with 

S2f ™? democracy and popular sovereignty has made the Filipinos 
are mnlL^^l P iS Pl ° Wh0SG cultur - and political ideologies 
bv tl i a ° d by tne absolute will of an autocratic ruler but 
oy tne free and supreme will of the masses. 

th ' J T his Westernized condition of Filipino national life is 
Z^£ r i nC1 ? al stui ibling block of Japanese' inordinate ambition to 
nominate # all the .Oriental peoples.- Japan fears that unless those 
western ideas are forever eradicated from the Philippines, thoy 
win m time shed the light and extend the hope of democracy to 
zriv less fortunate peoples of the Orient who are now struggling 
in one clutches of imperialistic Japan. The blessings of 
Christian culture and of democratic institutions which shape and 
guide end condition the national life of the Filipinos .tor gone* 
rations are new , by Japan's iron will, to be abandoned and given 
up completely and totally in exchange for a nominal and hallow 
independence which Japan cynically gave to the Filipinos, It is 
obvious that Japan wants us to exchange our', birthright* for a mess 
of pottage. 

'''Amidst the confusion of the world's turmoil and in spite-, 
of Japan's will , the Filipinos should never forget that the 
blessings of Western civilization and culture are theirs not to 



bo easily laid aside and discarded like a worn-out cloak, 
but to be kept and preserved- as a precious heritage Tor genera- 
tions yet unborn. Even more, the so blessings are theirs not 
to bo preserved for themselves alone., but to be transmitted to 
other peoples of the East, so that they likewise may be liberated 
from the benighted idea of divine right of rulers and from 
imperialistic influences and tyranny. The Filipinos have been 
chosen by the forces of history, it seems, and have been 
privileged to be the standard-bearers of democracy and freedom 
in the Far Eastern world. They can not shirk from this grave 
responsibility and trust. 

"The free Filipinos do not have the slightest doubt as to 
the proper and only course to follow at this time. All the 
misleading propaganda used by the Japanese to oajole the 
Filipinos into abandoning their way of life and adopting that of 
Japan will not influence us in thS l^.ast. Wo are not under the 
unrelenting and despotic power of Japan and we can see distinctly 
the evil and far-reaching consequences that will result from 
abdication of our culture and democratic principles. 3ut our 
brothers in the Philippines have no alternative; they are not 
free to choose for themselves the course of action which they 
know and feel in their inmost souls to be the right one to 
follow. Whatever influence and' power the Japanese are making 
to bear in the Philippines by superior force during the war, f 
am sure that, after the clouds of war shall have vanished from 
our skies and the liberating force s of democracy shall have 
destroyed the forces of oppression in our land, the Filipino 
people as a whole shall emerge stronger, more firm and more 
determined to preserve and perpetuate the democratic way of 
life in the Philippines. We will be like tempered steel made - 
strong by the intense and purifying heat of the crucible. %os\ 
their destiny as the spearhead of democracy and freedom aiiong 
the Oriental peoples shall reappear more resplendent after the 
most trying and dreadful ordeal in their history 9 That high 
purpose shall b^ carried out by the Filipino people as their 
contribution to the irresistible forward march of democracy 
and freedom throughout the world. 5 ' 



PR-20 



\ 



1617 I.Iassachusetts Ave., N.\7. 
Washington 6, D. C, 
HObart 1/..00 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORI1ATION AUD PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 lit M 0 N W E A L T K OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Kovenber 15, 1943 



FOR IMMEDIATE REL EASE : 

The following is a statement issued by President Manuel 
L 4 Quezon of the Philippines on the. occasion of the oomrnis* 
sioning of the U.S. 3. aircraft "Bataan" : 

"I wish the U.S.S. aircraft w Bataan TI and its officers 
and rien G-odspeed. 

"3ehind you is a glorious tradition embodied in a great 
name — Bataan. In that embsttled peninsula of the Philip- 
pines, for four months , American and Filipino forces — 
though starving, ill-eqtiipped , outnumbered, outgunned and 
without aerial support, repulsed the Japanese forces and 
astounded the world with an epic resistance that :.<,<j taken 
its place side by side v;ith the greatest heroic feats in the 
annals of history. 

! 'IIy hopes and prayers will always be with you who have 
been made heirs to this name symbolic of our fightinr love 
of freedom, of our hatred against oppression, and of our de- 
votion to the principles of decency and good will toward 
humanity at large. - I have unwavering faith in the courage 
of the U. S. armed forces and I am confident that from the 
U.S.S. aircraft n 3ataan w will fly men who will carry with 
them the avenging anger of American arms and even up scores 
for their Filipino and American comrades -in-r..rms- -who, f ell 
for America and the Philippines in Bataan. 

•PR-23 •' % 



"The commissioning 0 f the U.S.S, Bataan is therefore being 
made under the most auspicious circumstances. Soon it will be 
joining our mighty offensive against the enemy. Even' now we can 
visualize the brave fliers of the U.S.S. gg£aan< inspired by the 
name which their carrier bears, winging their 'ay to the Phil- 
ippines- on a mission of revenge and liberation with the ringing 
watchword 'On to :3 a taan.» Let us wish the U.S.S. Bataan 
godspeed, i} 

FR-24 



of arms alone" ana that HKSir ro.~l*- struggle; to coi^u-r tiio 
Philippines — tnoir fruit 1 osi effort to van. ilio loyalty of tho 
Filipino po o p 1 o — .'c o nt i nuo 3 to t.'...is day#'V- Trie >a..id tho aoaparato 
of fort d of tho Japanese propagandists by proclaiming that »»tho • 
Filipino people arc Oriental, not Occidental , !) will not uislead 
the Filipinos, .• ' . V- 

"It is true that tho Philippines arc gv.dgr,.p]ai.oaUy 
part of the Orient,-' explained Justice Hurphy* ''But it is not 



~2- 



goography clone that hi s determined trio spiritual and political 
character of the Philippine nation. That character is a 
composite of two ..oot.rn civilizations. From sixteenth century 
Spain there eaiau to the Philippines the Christian religion c.nd 
tho advanced culture of the- richest and most powerful nation 
of liluropo. And frori the united States, Aionc.n administrators 
of tiio twentieth century brought prooopts and ideals of 
American political dompcraoy. The result was tho only Christian 
nation, the onl; democratic state in tho Far Eas/t* This is tho 
nation that is now asked to join hands with tho feudal autocracy 
of Imperial Javai.' 1 

Justice Llurphy promised that the Aiioric.n nrouiSe of roul 
indepondenco of the Philippines will bo kept, doclarinc that 
when tho African flag is restored in tho Philippines, "it will 
bo a sifpi of liberation and a s^./ool of froodom* 1 ? 

"Our task will than havo boon ce. pl-ted," ho added. ..t 
that ouncturo tho Philippine people , already versed in tho art 
of Self -government .and spiritually strengthened by the ordeal of 
war, will take over the privilogas- and rosponsibilitios of 
sovereignty. " 

Justice llurphy stated thet on that day the Filipinos "will 
oxtond tho hand of Welcome to their gallant ...'resident, Manu.ol 
Quezon, and thoir distinpuisnod Vico President, Sergio Ootiona, 
who havo bean continued in their respective oiiicos by the 
Congress of tho United States until constitutional ;orocessos 
"and normal functions of &ovornitient shall h,vo been restored 
in the Philippines.'" 

,? Tho people of the- Philippines, having witnessed the 
destruction of their political institutions, will b.. : choired 
by this action of the Congress, i! said Justice. Ilurphy, "And it 
i3 victory, and the restoration of their hoi el^nd, that tho 
Filipino people desire above all ols.;." 

Full text of Justice Purpny's radio address follows: 



"Telegram: 



•THE '.fl-TITE HOUSE 
WASHINGTON 

November 15, 1943 

'Honorable Frank Murphy 
Supreme Court of the United States 
Washington, D.C. 

'Today, on this anniversary, and on every dav that 
shall pass until the Japanese enemy is finally and totally 
defeated, the American people send messages of hope and 
faith to you, the gallant people of the Philippine Common- 
wealth, We work and we fight for the day of your libera- 
tion — for the day when your Government shall be restored 
to Manila — when you shall enjoy the true freedom and 
independence and national dignity which you have so fully 
earned, 

FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT 1 



"That message was written by the President of the United 
States who sponsored and approved the establishment of the 
Philippine Commonwealth. He is the same President who has 
solemnly vowed that the freedom of the Philippines will be 
redeemed. You need only know his integrity and uncompromising 
tenacity of purpose to realize that this promise to the 
Philippine people will be kopt. 

"Eight years ago today, November 15, 1935, a quarter 
million people gathered before tho Legislative Building in 
Manila witnessed a momentous and he art -warming event. They 
saw the inauguration of a new democratic government established 
by and for a nation of 17 million Filipino souls with the aid 
and wholehearted approval of a nation of 132 million Americans. 
They saw a great world power (the United Stains) forswearing the 
fruits of conquest, commend the destiny of a rich and matchless 
archipelago into the hands of tho Filipino people. Before their 
eyes, a commonwealth was born. Participating in that event as 
the last Governor-General of the Philippines and relinquishing 
the reins of government to a president of their own choosing 
was a privilege that I shall always deeply cherish. 

"Today v/e mark the Eighth Anniversary of the establishment 
of the Philippine Commonwealth. It is the second to be 
observed by the Filipino people under tho hostile surveillance 
of a Japanese army of occupation. It may not be the last. 
But I have a strong conviction if on the next fifteenth of 
November the Japanese are still in the Phili >pines., their days 
in the Islands will be of brief number. For in the South Pacific 
the avenging hosts of the Allied armies and navies are mustering 
for a sweep to the North backed by all the power and might of 
this groat country. Their gaze is fixed on jlunila, and beyond 
Manila lies Tokyo. 

"It is nearly two years since the Japanese completed 
their military conquest of the Philippines. But their brief 
victory is one of arras alone. Their real struggle to conquer 
the Philippines -- their fruitless effort to win the loyalty 
of the Filipino people — continues to this day. How des- 
perately the invaders are trying to propagandize thuir victims 
can be seen in the news which is doled out every day over the 
Manila and Tokyo radios. Japanese speakers proclaim the 
slogan that the Filipino people are Oriental ,• .not Occidental. 
Therefore, it is argued, the Filipinos should cast their lot 



-4~ 



not with the Americans but with thoir brother Orientals, the 
J apanese, 

"There are few Filipinos who will be misled by a con- 
tention so obviously fraudulent. It is true that the Philippines 
are geographically a part of the Orient. But it is not geography 
alone that has determined the spiritual and political character 
of the Philippine nation. That character is a composite of 
two Western civilizations. From sixteenth century Spain there 
came to the Philippines the Christian religion and the advanced 
culture of the richest and most powerful nation of Europe. And 
from the United States, American administrators of the twentieth 
oentury brought the precepts and ideals of American political 
democracy. The result was the only Christian nation, the only 
democratic state in the Far East. This is the nation that is now 
asked to join hands with the feudal autocracy of Imperial Japan. 

"In furtherance of this program, the Japanese have 
advanced the claim that the Filipinos f ail od through years 
of struggle, to win thoir freedom from the United States, u.nd 
to complete this attempted hoax, the Japanese, to whom 
republican government is utterly foreign, h^Ve established an 
"ersatz" Philippine Republic with all the external trappings 
of legitimate self-government. Let those who may be in doubt 
look beneath this mask and they will find the sinister outlines 
of the Japanese military machine. They will find no genuine 
freedom or independence but the brute power with which Japan 
in years past has fastened a harsh imperial rule on Korea, 
Manchuria, and the unhappy provinces of occupied China. 
During this same period the American people were developing 
democratic institutions in the Philippines and providing in 
lav/ for their real independence in 1946, both economic and 
political. This was a covenant openly arrived at — not 
under the pressure of wartime expediency but in thu leisurely 
days of peace. 

"People of the Philippines, this covenant will be kept. 
We in America are determined to retake by force of arms that 
which our soldiers in oomp^ny with yours so bravely defended 
and lost on Bataan and Corregidor. We shall not falter or 
slacken our efforts until this defeat has been fully avenged. 
Our victories in Africa and Europe will be latched by further 
victories In Asia, leading to eventual deliverance of those 
who are now the unhappy and unwilling victims of Japanese 
aggression and treachery. We shall not rest until our 
colors are again joined with yours and the invader is driven 
from Philippine soil. 

"And when our flag is restored it will not be merely 
as a symbol of authority. It will be a final sign of liberation 
and a symbol of freedom. Our task will then have been completed. 
At that juncture , the Philippine people, already versed in the 
art of self-government and spiritually strengthened by the 
ordeal of war, will take over the privileges and responsibili- 
ties of sovereignty, a sovereignty which will belong to them 
as a matter of natural right and Divine law. .. 

"On that auspicious day, too, they will extend the 
hand of welcome to their gallant President, i'anuel Quezon, und 
their distinguished. Vice President, Sergio Osmena, who have 
been continued in their respective offices by the congress of . 
the United States until constitutional processes and normal 
functions of government shall have been restored in the Philip- 
pines. The people of the Philippines, having witnessed the 
destruction of tnolr political institutions, will bo cheered 
by this action of the Congress. For it was an action both 
of these patriotic statesmen approved and recommended in the 
belief that it would speed the day of victory. . And it is _ 
victory, and the restoration of their homeland, .that the Filipino 



-5- 



pooplo dosir^ above all ols 



with illnoss is 7 'il,^ ,' aU; ' 0U £" physically raekod 
.oononlc LaabUx^uon n,;-' 01 ' 1 '"! "»« SwP"taa for your 
victory is °on, inos! Cau?°f in tha days after 

*o**t*o» fraodoa tS JST*^ & * 

too ^caff^f -- n st a rfand 8 |S? ^ til *» 

proudly into Uanil,, Ba K I J ? "i 10 "* " s " llin ^ 

story of tha must ior Phi l , , ' )t ?° fls?a i '••"Murtacv that tha 
in tha blastod tunn III of CorraMdS fc, ** aoa *' «°* ond 
a few tresis R«+ ^° rr ^-Siapr. Sbe jnauy has written 

15th day If JjK: r , B l5i 5 aS t r SS£* tha 

tha saga to a hatrav ' ■ , 1 ln ° - ut hor yot will bring 

of pronis. than any tta^^^ 1 ^^ falr 

PR -22 



r 



^ «~» <~* a. uiiu u 



more planes, supplies and materials in order that he can carry 
out his one dream, which is to oust the Japanese from our shores." 

President Quezon reviewed the centuries-long fight of the 
Filipinos for their freedom up to now. He again sent words of 
encouragement to "our armed forces, who are fighting in the 
hills, mountains and jungles of the Philippines." fie told them, 
"You are writing with your sacrifices another chapter in the 
history of the Philippines that, like the epic of Bataan, will 
live forever in the hearts of lovers of freedom everywhere." 

"I have felt your sufferings so deeply and have constantly 
shared them with you that I have been a sick man since I arrived 
in WasMngton, and for the last five months I have been actually 
unable to leave my bed," President Quezon continued. "But sick 
as I am, I have not for a moment failed to do my duty. As a 
matter of fact the conference which resulted in the message of 
President Roosevelt was held practically in my bedroom." • 

President Quezon referred to President Roosevelt's message 
to Congress asking for authority to advance the date of Phil- 
ippine independence, previously set for July 4, 1946. 



1617 Massachusetts Ave,, N.W. 
Washington, D.C, 
HObart 1A00 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PU3LIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

November 15, 1943 



FOR gMDIATJ RELEASE ; 

President Manuel L. Quezon, in a message broadcast to tho 
people of the Philippines on the eighth anniversary of the estab- 
lishment of the Philippine Commonwealth, today said that he had 
it "on good authority that General MacArthur v/ill soon have the 
men and materiel he needs for the roconquest of our homeland," 

He assured his people "that the Government and people of 
the United States have never forgotten their obligations to you* 
He said that "General MacArthur has been constantly asking for 
more planes, supplies and materials in order that he can carry 
out his one dream, which is to oust the Japanese from our shores. 

President Quezon reviewed the centuries-long fight of the 
Filipinos for their freedom up to now. He again sent words of 
encouragement to "our armed forces, who are fighting in the 
hills, mountains and jungles of the Philippines." He told then, 
"You are writing with your sacrifices another chapter in the 
history of the Philippines that, like the epic of Bataan, will 
live forever in the hearts of lovers of freedom everywhere." 

"I have felt your sufferings so deeply and have constantly 
shared them with you that I have been a sick man since I arrived 
in Washington, and for the last five months I have- been actually 
unable to leave my bed," President Quezon continued. "But sick 
as I am, I have not for a moment failed to do ray duty. As a 
matter of fact the conference which resulted in the message of 
President Roosevelt was held practically in my bedroom." • 

President Quezon referred to President Roosevelt' a message 
to Congress asking for authority to advance the date of Phil- 
ippine independence, previously set for July 4, 194o« 



~ 2 - 



Full text of President Quezon's message follows; 

the Pb^ti^aJ^^^^W of the Commonwealth of 

ident. Tne achieverJnL^f ou, 8 P, t0day i~rated Pres- 

lishment I need not review fn^ Corn f lon wealth since its estab- 
invasion of our unS- / 7 ? U know fchem wel1 ' Before the 
peace, prosperity and nnfl Japanese, we wore living in 
provocation on our L mu oe f t : Then the enemy struck, without 
and cities. Our Deoole waS S ? ad ? w of deatn foil upon our towns 

or burned, our sacked shores' S ^ ^i 16 "' ° Ur 1101108 Wrecked 

snores trampled by the feet of the invader. 

heroism? ^/"y SS^E* 1 * ° nCe m *« our h ^itage « 
preservation, we LSk up arms a nS ? Uty h ? f self ^efense and self- 
respecting nation aoulMf shirkfHh * ^ ♦ self- 
treacherous attack that started in n J ? cnallen ge of that 
To have avoided that challenr l\l \ g U1 ° ° n Deo ^er 8, 19U. 
have been to lose all Dridfl f L to .? ave cowered before it would 
bottomless humiliation dignity, to have suffered a 



ff We Filipinos 

knee 



, to'anypgwerthal may* SuS^??!^" 4 * °™* ^ 
hold us in thrall. We have been oV^.V^^ 0 ° Ur cou ntry and to 
but we have never been outfon^hf °^ ercoriti ^ superior forces, 
but we have neyer been vanoSifhel °** nas been conquered, 

dared to overrun our count™ h«« ; ry power fcnat nas ever 
Filipino arms country has known the avenging anger of 

incident ^f tuf epic'rL'ista'nce^/ 7 and recall ev,ry 

Bataan. It showed that ti tr ° n jmn through Lingayen to 
courses in our veins n„ 1 13nt blood of Lapulapu still 

heart of su?h as Captain J sufvni' °* 6 2** in the 

Dagohoy, Dieeo Si ! ^ Villanor than in the hearts of 

& y, ui^go bilang, Antonio Luna and Gregiq del Pilar. 

United^eTto telfthexf^a^a^ f 5 the people of the' 

friendship is sealed in the blood of h and , C ^gidor, our 

and forever lasting t ™«n* J" ? ?J ner0es wn ich makes it sacred 
this one year ? ha ? S -f hL £ to .tell ny people today that during 
giving the niiMno^ tannin? 611 ln , Wica > this country has beSS 
but of its gratiiSde f^nll evidenc ^ ?°t only of friendship 
of liberty and freedom? uncompromising stand in the dcfeLe 

"Not only has President Roosevelt reeocnimd t-h, dmiI 
8 v*tSal r| 0 o^tion n o? ft T 8 of «"> Nations 

^^^^ 

, xxxiaaciaj. renabilitatioii and future security. 

undertaking' le^ntu'f oV^h n T/ iati <T in ^ b ^ half sinCG 
ment from the Citv ^ K*l- t affairs of our Commonwealth Govern- 
ident of the United Sto?^SS n n0 * e ™ a * a ^ ar ago, the Pros- 
of October 6 lilt t^rt**^*^*^.* ™ 33 «& to. the Congress 
establishment 4 V sp(clflc measures designed to effect the 
time that tul nl * ln ^P e ndent Philiopine Republic at the earliest 
•for o5r d.odL ?«?? ° 2V he War wiU 3afel y and to provide 

and S^OTi^t^ 8 *^ 1 rehabilitation and future economic 

antho^ffr S ^??f Roosevelt asked Congress that he be -given the 
n# 52 -? r c $ nsu l t ation with the President of the . Commonwealth 

£L ™? Philippine Islands, to advance the date provided in the 
existing law and to proclaim the legal independence of the Phil- 
ippines as a separate and self-governing nation as soon as 
feasible . ' • 

"The President's message goes beyond the commitments- made 
in the Tydings-McDuffie Act, for it recommends not only* the estab- 
lishment of an independent Philippine Republic, but it gives the 
assurance that the political and territorial integrity of the 



- 3 - 



States and the PWlfooin J »?t re } a " ous between the United 

the Philippines as an iT^lnaln^ft^l^ that wiU a3sist 
secure. It urges that ?h P ( f nation to become eoononioaliy 

economic rehabilitation**? SmLT^ 1 "^ f ° r Ule 

struction of all R ov er n r ,» t „1 ' U } pplMS ' an<i for t:ie recon- 
improvements that^ave bee." des^^f 3nd publi ° vorks and 
Damages caused to, and losses suKAT* tne Jo <>««" Evasion. 



private corporations and nriv^t^fn^-S 7 f overnnent as well as 
And more important still "thltZ lndlvid "als will be oovered. 

small properties?^ as tnei* Httf e P no *» haVe , l0St thelr 
etc., will be fully indemnified. houses, carabaos, ho r s, 



this war, the political ties whf^h i i thelr her01c rol ° in 
the bonds of friendship which S b0Und US to e eth ^ and 

future.' 1P wnich wil1 0°ih us together in the 

"I know that Japan has rrant(^c\ » ««n * • , 
the Philippines. How unreal ana ni,n,- T U ?u i n ? e P^deiice to 
is, you and I know. Tnt real puroose of X? th8t V ld ? pendenoe 
is contained in the text h • ° f this P^udo-indenendence 

National Assenbly October I» apS i* apy * paot rat i^i«d by the 

Donei report bro^casfbv ^r^^sS^tSt 1 ^^^ 
tract inr Darties ^h->i l „i-,t„i ' " nlon -'W 3 that 'the nifih con- 
economic and milUarv A, ,h " C03nerate °" matters political, 
of Greater last Isla!' successful prosecution of the war 

show i^tt^^*^ 83 a ™ oun ? ed * Tokyo , clearly 
the war of Greater a^ Asiat? s «^ssful prosecution of 

PhiliDDinefwn^^t,'^" ° y assuranoe that the Government of the 

for thei? or^ns P fnfl ft, W f °J thoBe who fou ^t in this war! 
uiibir orpnans and their dependents. 

is fW n?; 30 3^'? t0 assure you that the tine of your redeaotion 
Pacific AB f* loa is Sphering her strength In ?hi 

r oncl n f " Goneral rtacArthur will be able to start the 
fet??2S ^ ?w °. r nowela ^. Indeed, he has already won inner tan t 
feateft^ Souttlwest Pacific, in which he has deciSiv'ply de- 
lea ted the Japanese and driven then out of Oona, Buna runda 

Ihe la c4ntraf1o?,nn inSCh ?f en ' in * w ^ea, and KoJobangara,' in 
tne central Solouons, all preparatory for that conquest? 

bein/abanr^n^ jonetines you must have felt that you were 
Govefnmtnf t f ' ° nce a « ain 1 vant fco ^sure you that the" 

thL r r^bfiV^?. Pe °? le ° f thQ United 3tat!js hav « never forgotten' 
asking for g noie n nl^n.r U - °?? M?a * 1 -"Arthur has been conslanUy 
can clrrS ou? hi 2 ^ suppl1 ^ a ^ nateriols in order that he ' 

our shores That ? Wh i° h H t0 ° USt the ^ a P a n^e fror, 

that u • a 5 n0t raore ha3 beeil done so far is due to the fact 

or'seit t!n/ lm ?i y a .? at * er of i^ility to do nore up to the 
autho^tf, ?h\ p 6 S1 ^ uatl0n now changed. I have it on good 
rdate^Pi y h at ^ en S ral HacArthur will soon have the nen and S 
mater^l he needs for the reconquest of our honeland. 

qhaT1 ^ ave 5f your sufferings so deeply and have constantly 
shared then with you that I have been a sick nan since I arrived 
m Washington, and for the last five nonths I have been actually 
enable to leave ny bed. But sick as I was, I have not for a 
r-ionent failed to do ny duty. As a natter of fact the conference 
wnich resulted in the nessage of President Roosevelt was held 
practically in ny bedroom. 

"Nobody knows and feels as intensely as I do your sufferings 
and your sacrifices, how fiercely the flame of hate and anger 
against the invader burn3 in your hearts, how bravely you have 
accept^ the bitter fact of Japanese occupation. I know your 
hearts are full of sorrow, but I also know your faith is whole. 



Li t0 / eep that foitn unimpaired. Freedom is worth oil 

tutnl 9 and bl00dshe d. We are suffering today for our 

^^f r e .f enerafcl f J ?f. that fcley may be spared the anguish and the 
^f^\n ^• rep S tltl ? n 0f what we are now undergoing. We are 
their ^nninfn th ^ fron the ruins of t0 ^ r anfl thliS guarantee 
of our ^n^^' SeCUrl ' y - i: '° r tlle freedom, peace, and well-being 
of our generations yet unborn, we are now paying the price. 

and iun«les r o? r fhA £°??* s > a ^ fighting in the hills, Mountains 

coura^ 8 « ELm* ^ilippmes, ny tribute of admiration for your 
chaotfr ft? h S - 8 Writin ^ with sacrifices another 

Bataan S 11, I" 7 ° f ? he Philippines that, like the epic of 
everywhere! * ln ^ he8rtS of lov * rs of free ^m 

ha vp blL^^din^^r 6 ?'.? an pr0Ud of y°u. I know that you ' 
unitv and 5m ln S against the enemy two potent weaoons.; . Filipino 
unity and faith. Stronger than any arm of destruction vour 

she^t°s S o a f re stee f l Qn w?th T teihle Wronger ^tS an Thousand 

sneers 01 steel, with them you are invincible Cla-n-nv rm • an H 

moJSZ^g day ^^iVifa^ j» ^ ^ ' 

### 



whit el aw Reid, was one of the five American Commissioners who 
signed the Treaty of Paris on December 10, 1898. It was in this 
treaty, that the Philippines were ceded by Spain to the United 
States. 

"The Treaty of Paris is an important milestone in the 
history of America. In fact, it is as if the cay it was signed, 
America was placed on the crossroads of a new destiny. What road 
were the American people to take — the road to imperialism or 
the road to human liberty and freedom? 

"It is interesting to look back in retrospect now, from a 
vantage point that is free from the bias and prejudice- of those 
earlier years, and see how, from the very beginning, American 
thought has been unerring and rectilinear against any imperial- 
istic incursions and in favor of self-government of the peoples 
that had fallen under American influence and protection — the 
peoples of Cuba, Puerto Rico and the Philippines. 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N,W* 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HO hart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

November 17, 1943 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE : 

President Manuel L. Quezon of the Philippines, in an address 
before the Herald Tribune Forum, Hotel Waldorf Astoria in New 
York, declared that "in the interest of both the United States 
and the Philippines there should always be a very close relation- 
ship and cooperation between the American and Filipino peoples 
even after they have become politically independent cf one 
another. " 

"The security of both the United States and the Philippines, 

and perhaps the future peace of the Pacific, will depend very 

much on that relationship, 11 added President Quezon. 

President Quezon's address was delivered in his behalf by 

Col. Carlos P. Romulo, Secretary of Information and Public 

Relations in the Philippine Mar Cabinet, on November 16. 

Full text of President Quezon's address follows: 

"I regret more than I can say my inability to appear in 
person and address the Herald Tribune Forum, as it was my hoe 
when I accepted the invitation extended to mj* by Mrs. Ogclen Reid. 
It is most appropriate that the role of the Philippines in the 
world of tomorrow, with special emphasis on its future relations 
with the United States, -should be discussed in a forum under the 
auspices of a newspaper whose former owner and -edi-tor-in-chief , 
whitelaw Reid, was one of the five American Commissioners who 
signed the Treaty of Paris on December 10, 1898. It was in this 
"treaty that the Philippines were ceded by Spain to the United 
States. 

"The Treaty of Paris is an important milestone in the 
history of America. In fact, it is as if the day it was signed, 
America was placed on. • the crossroads of a new' destiny. "That road 
were the American people to take — the road to imperialism or 
the road to human liberty and freedom? 

"It is interesting to look back in retrospect now, from a 
vantage point that is free from the bias and prejuaice- of those 
earlier years, and see how, from the very beginning, American 
thought has been unerring and rectilinear against any imperial- 
istic incursions and in favor of self-government of the peoples 
tn at had fallen under American influence and protection — the 
peoples of Cuba, Puerto Rico and the Philippines. 



Cuoa has been for many years a free and independent nation. 
Puerto Rico will soon receive complete local autonomy. The 
Philippines has already been recognized by the United States as 
possessed of all >the attributes of complete and respected nation- 
hood. She is one of the United Nations, and the formal recog- 
nition of the Philippine Republic is about to take place. 

"Let us review briefly the various steps that led to this 
situation. 

"President McKinley emphasized from the start: 'The Phil- 
ippines are ours not to exploit but to develop, to civilize, to 
educate, to train in the science of self-government. 1 

_./ L ? te J\ William H - Taft > th e first American civil governor, 
epitomized American policy in the Philippines in that famous 
sentence, 'The Philippines for the Filipinos. ' 

^ " F f 2 m . tha J Jf? e on ' as one reviews Philippine-American his- 

^i y ^ i S . Suriklns t0 note that ever y st ep taken by America in 
the Philippines conforms strictly to a blueprint that seemed to 
have De en prepared in advance, the main feature of which is the 
political, social, and economic development of the Filipino 
people unoer the guiding hand of America. 

oll1 '' 0n t 5? soli 1 d foundation of our Christian faith and Latin 
culture wnicn ma.ee up our Spanish heritage, America built in the 
Philippines an enduring monument to Western culture and civili- 
zation. Spam had brought the Christian faith more than four 
hundred years before. American democratic ideals ano the 
American way of life had been deeply ingrained in the Filipino, 

r J ul y Oriental people who have preserved some of the best 
customs and habits of life of their ancestors had been western- 
ized in faith and political ideology by a happy combination of 
the bpamsh and American cultures. 

"Schools were opened by the Americans from the first cavs of 
American rule. American teachers were brought to the Philippines 
ano. sent all over the islands, roads were built, sanitation was 
improved, the standard of living was raised, and the economic 
development ^f the people was fostered and accelerated. It must 
be stated, in passing, that contrary to the belief of some people, 
all this was paid for, and gladly, by the Filipino taxpayer. 

"America then has answered the challenge hurled at her by 
Whitelaw R e id when oh February 13, 1899, discussing , the purport 
of the Treaty of Paris in Chicago, he said: 

'If we are unequal to a manly and intelligent discharge 
of the responsibilities the war has entailed, then let 
us confess our unworthiness, and beg Japan to assume the 
duties of a civilized Christian state toward the Phil- 
ippines, while England can extend the same relief to us 
in Cuba and Puerto Rico. But having thus ignominiously 
shirked the position demanded by our belligerency and 
our success, let us never again presume to take a place 
among the self-respecting and responsible nations of the 
earth that can ever lay us liable to another such task. 
If calledt:'- it, let us at the outeet admit cur unfitness, 
withdraw withln«our own borders and "leave these larger 
duties of the world to less incapable races or less craven 
rulers, 1 

"It is a record of accomplishment, founded on mutual faith 
and respect which the two Peoples had for each other, which 
they carried out with the greatest cooperation.- \.' In this there- 
tofore unparalleled treatment of a subject people by a sovereign 
nation, belief in racial superiority bega» to give, way to the 
more humane and correct philosophy of equality, regardless of 
color or race. 

"The first organic law for the government of the Philippines 
enacted by the Congress of the United States, v/ae in truth the 
Magna Chart a of the Filipino people ' s liberties. Later, unccr 
President Theodore Roosevelt the Philippine Assembly was 



- 3 - 



n 




created, and for the first time in their history the Filipino 
people were represented in the lower house of the legislature. 

tion "^ o V; ° odrow Wi lson assumed the Presidency, the Filipiniza- 
rnl^L n government service was accelerated. Ke appointed 
P.liZZr enera E f r lZ° n J° carr " v out **ta P 01 ^ and sent the 
I* I, «?L« S8 nf? t0 F111 P*no people: 'We regard ourselves 
but rnf fS'hSSff ^VJ 01, the adv ^tages of the United States, 
but for the benefit of the people of the Philippine Islands 
Every step we take will be taken with a view to ultimate inde- 

L^^t'^d^ho^i? 6 \° m °r e t0Wd ^ c« U raK as the 
safe^ ana the permanent interest of the Islands will permit. ' 

it 

the 
for 
has 

to withdraw their sovereignty over t^^^o^^^r^tr 
^^^^"^ - "™ - a stable £££&3?i£ 

Dliahmlnt rf^L^ declare J further that -for the speedy aoocm*. 
of *2£ nLnL n? ^S^SS??, " 13 ^sirable to place in the hands 
doniSti? o?i • 16 ^J^P 1 *" as large a control of their 
im^i^n/'t^' irS aS .° an 5 e giVen tbeK ^"hout, in the meantime, 
oeon^ of 1*1 fr X ^ C i S S.°: the righta of sovereignty by the 
else of LlnLl l: Qd ^ates, in order that, by the use and exer- 
£:??Jr popula ^ franchise and governmental powers, they mav be 
i n?^ ed 1° ful ^ assume the responsibilities id enjoy 
all privileges of complete independence. " 

nr. on! ,Un ^ er ^/ones Law a new Philippine Legislature was 
organizedon October 16, 1916, consisting of two houses, a 
benate ana a House of Representatives. The members of both 
nouses were elected by the Filipino people. 

ji . , " T ^® Tydings-l-lcDuffie Act was passed by the Congress of the 
Umced States on March 24, 1934. As president of the Philippine 
beriace, I came to this country again and worked for the passage 
of this new charter of liberty of the Filipino people which 
Dears the signature of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt, 
iin s was an Act 'to provide for the complete independence of the 

i P S e Islands > to provide for the adoption of - a constitution 
ano. a form of government for the Philippine Islrnds, and for 
other purposes.' It authorized the calling of a constitutional 
convention to frame a republican constitution for the Commonwealth 
oi tne Philippines which shall be the government of the Phil- 
ippines until the withdrawal of American sovereignty. It fixed 
the date of recognition of Philippine Independence and with- 
arawal of Anerican sovereignty on July 4, 1946. 

p , . " 0n November 15, 1935, I was inaugurated President of the 
ijniii rpines. On that occasion, George H. Dern, Secretary of 
War, representing President Roosevelt, proclaimed the estab- 
lishment of the Commonwealth of the Philippines. He said; 

'By direction of the President of the United States of 
America, I ... do hereby announce that the heretofore 
existing government of the Philippines is now termin- 
ated, and that the Government of the Commonwealth of 
the Philippines, in entering upon its rights, privil- 
eges, powers and duties t ,.s provided under the Consti- 
tution of the Commonwealth of the Philippines and. the 
laws of the United Stat es of America, is the successor 
to the heretofore existing Philippine Government and to 
all the rights and obligations thereof.' 

"Just before I took my oath of office, my predecessor, the 
last Anerican Governor Goner al, Frank Hurphy, declared.: 'This 
great and happy adventure of the American and. Filipino people 
is not yet ended. As in all good, books of high adventure and 
romance, we close this chapter anticipating the next: confident 
that the Divine Author will bring the' story to a fair ending in 
accordance with the faith and high purpose of the beginning. 



"I can soy for the Filioino people that America has d.is- • 
charged its responsibility in the Philippines in such a way as to 



- 4 - 

win our eternal loyalty and gratitude. On August 19, 1941, more 
than three months before the attack on Pearl Harbor, in a radio 
address to the United States, I said: 

K'Jn this grave national emergency, the stand of the 
Filipino people is clear and unmistakable. We owe 
loyalty to America and we are bound to her by bonds 
of everlasting w gratitude. Should the Unj ted States 
enter the war, the Philippines would .follow her and 
fight by her side, placing at her disposal all our . 
manpower ana all our material resources, however 
limited these might be. We stand with the United 
States in life, and in death. 1 

rst^A n k $T W W <2 n I made that addres s that I was making no empty 
Pledge. When the Japanese struck at Pearl harbor, and as part 
of the attack upon the United States, invaded the Philippines, 
the enemy met immediate resistance and was repulsed time and 
again by the combined Philippine and American armies under the 
supreme command of General Douglas MacArthur. These forces 
consisted of 19,000 United States Army troops, 12,000 
Philippine Scouts, and approximately 100,000 men of the newly 
mobilized ana but partially trained and equipped Philippine Army. 

t r, r ?? a } 1 t*, this J unct ure how for creating such an army 
I was criticized here and accused of building a military dic- 
tator snip in the Philippines. I had to defend myself against 
such accusation in a meeting held by the Foreign Prlicv Assoc- 

• a i SS« in this City of New Ycrk > at the Aster Kctel, sometime 
in _l y o 7 m 

" Tlle defenders of the Philippines were greatly outnumbered 
t>y the Japanese. After more than four months of constant 
fighting, short rations, disease, lack of medicine, and sheer 
physical exhaustion, Bataan surrendered on April 9, 1942, follow- 
ed by Corregidcr cn May 6. Seme 3,000 American soldiers and 
21,000 Filipino soldiers died. 

"'The effects of the desperate resistance offered by the 
Philippine Army and United States forces in Bataan, 1 says 
General Marshall in his biennial report, 'holding as they did a 
sizeable portion of Japanese strength, were now being felt. 
During the delay thus gained, men and materials were dispatched 
to Australia, New Caledonia and other Pacific Islands. ' 

"Further in the report General Marshall declares; 'The 
major miscalculation of the Japanese was the apparent expecta- 
tion that the Russian Army would c-llapse under the German 
grand assault then underway against Moscow which ended in the 
first winter fiasco. Also unanticipated was the prolonged 
defense of the Philippine Islands which upset their timetable 
for other offensive operations in the Southwest Pacific, in- 
cluding Australia. 1 

more 
Bat aa 
seventeen 

n Fr~m the first day of the Japanese invasion, their main 
propaganda has b.ccn t directed to ^in the Filipinos to their sid.e 
by telling them that the preBcnt\war has been waged by Japan to 
free the Oriental peoples from Anglo-American domihaticn. And 
after the establishment of the Japanese military regime in the 
Islands, their main effort, has boon directed tr. convince the 
Filipino people that their salvation depends ^p£n abandoning 
and forgetting their Occidental way of life* ': indeed, forcible 
measures have been used to compel the Filipinos to .adopt what 
the Japanese . call the 0rient£%way of life. 

"The Filipinos are' ; Malays'.'; No Filipino is prouder than I 
am of ray r%ce, nor of the f act . that"*we belong to the Orient, 
geographically and racially. *.e have preserved what is best in 
Oriental habits and customs. #ut none will bo found mere 
determined to fight and oppose'this Japanese propaganda than 
I am. F^r I am firmly convinced that the Filipino people, 




- 5 - 



tho?r taX a " d . at thG same tine Products of the West in 

volt to nSr^f l 0 ^ 1 ^ ian faith ' havc a distinct and important 
relationship i?ti h J. f ^ure of the Asiatic 'peoples in their 
relationship with the people of the Occident. 

f-reedom^f a ?h. e |?i 7 4 1±f 6 ' 8 Work to Promote and realize the 
United StftS J ^ iPln ° ?°S2 l0j that is > tllc ^cognition by the 
WtiL the LtL ^f^/^V 0 govern themselves, without dis- 
peopS which WoT WCS ? etwecn t*c American and Filipino 
years! S th 1 f S ? S^? 11 ? fnr S cd *urin^ the last forty 
both the Snl^I q?^ dS ' strongly that in the interest of 

be a v Jv p ™? *?? andthc Philippines there should always 
o ^ F n ^r 11 ^ and c ^Deration between the Amor- 
ally iSLS^ *hey have become politic- 

blind"tndeod t nnt 1 ? SS ° nS 2 J llC P?^eht war, me would be very' 
war reiaSonsMn 1%?*° ^ ^ Th ° W ° rlc ' ' io Want * thc P^ 1 
Hepubiie *t t hl P vnttT* V+ Q Re P ub } i0 of Philippines and thc 
oi the Unitea States should be ad close if not oloq-r 

Un^eTltatef aT^ th ° ™* T * c o^bo^SE' 

of the Pacirio wn? %^ 1 i ?PlneS ' and porh ^ s thc futu ^ Peaoo 
tnc Pacific, will depend very much on that relationship. 

"The preservation of the present way of life of thc 
a^e ?no G aKo e Ocoid ™ ou?turS ; 'whLS' if of foot 

o"Lnt n \^^ e ocSde^ n ^ W ° Uld S ° rVe aS a llnk between the 

lid 2^° V* 0 *™} °f a tru - and free union between the 
and the West, and it is our duty to humanity to think and 
in terms of cooperation between Occidentals and Oriental. 

"After a conference in Which I fully and frcelv oxer -send 
my views as to the role that the Filipino^ Sccpir^ui?^ ? n 
wrote ff ^ K ^ Panikkar, a great Indian patriot and statin, 
&slt^ ° f July 1943 ' Pushed by the' ' 

2-^ S T ^ fir " b ° liCf that thc Fili ^inos, an Oriental 
people with a European and Christian civilization, with 
their race rooted deeply in thc East and their culture 
rooted by three hundred years of contact with thc Vest 
have a great part to play in the Asia of the future. To 
the modernization of Asia they have a great contribution 



East 
act 



." 



That is the great destiny of my pec pi, 

### . PR-25 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.W» 
Washington 6 ^ D#c< 

HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

November 17, 1943 



FOR BMDIATE RELEASE : 

— 

President Manuel L< Quezon of the Philippines, in an 
International Students' Day statement today declared that "it 
is youth that is fighting this war and it is youth that is keep- 
ing the flame of resistance burning in the ,ccupied countries." 

He recalled that thousands of the men in B ataan and Ccr- 
regidor "put aside their boohs, when war was declared, to 
shoulder a gun." 

Full text of President Quezon's message fellows: 

the uZix tUrn 0U Z r , everent - i -al thoughts today to all these students 
the world over who have paid with their lives that freedom may 
not perish from the earth is a sacred duty. It is youth that is 
figh.ing this war and it is youth that is keeping the flame of 
blac^r^ occupied countries through the total 

DiacKcut of totalitarian invasion. Tnere is indeed a vast surslne: 
of resistance behind the enemy lines which has merely been damned 
up and which I have no doubt will rush down in a torment of 
defiance when the opportune moment comes. 

qtT , p J'I!; at moment is coming soon. Soon, this source of stored-up 
strength and passion will be tapped to the full. Soon, in 
^urope, in the Far E a st, in the Southwest Pacific, cur allies 
everywhere will arise to strike the invader from behind while he 
stanas up to meet the thrust of our counter-attacking forces, 
weii co the Japanese and Germans know the cruelties they have 

i2 H C t 8 t °' and the devastation they have wrought on the peoples 
oi the United Nations. 

"The thousands in Bataan and Corregidor and the many other 
Thousands in other, war fronts vrhc .gave up their lives in the ae- 
lense of their country and of freedom, must be avenged. A great 
nurnofir of them were students who put aside their bocks, when war 
was declared, to shoulder a gun. In their memory and in that of 
the hundreds of thousands all over the world who have fallen 
victim to the attack of the aggressor powers, let us render today 
our tribute of admiration and as an earnest of our gratitude, 
Pledge to them the best that there is in us that victory may 
speedily be achieved." 

PR- 2 6 



### 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.N. 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INF0R2.1ATI0N AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 M M 0 N W E A L T H OF THE P H I L I P P I N E S 

November 17, 1943 



FOR UJ.IEPIATE J W LEASE : 



Fr. Pacifico A. Ortiz, S.J. , Chaplain to President Quezon 
of the Philippines; sent an inspirational shortwave broadcast 
to the British Empire and English- speaking listeners in 
continental Europe. Father Ortiz' message, intended to bring 
spiritual comfort to all sects and denominations, was part .of 
the program commemorating the eighth anniversary of the estate . 
lishment of the Philippine Commonwealth, 

Recalling the defeat of Alexander the Great, Attila and 
his Huns, Genghis Khan and Napoleon, Father Ortiz said: "God 
sees to it that mankind, despite its crimes against itself, 
does progress toward freedom, and peace and brotherhood. ... For 
all peoples who place their trust in God, there can be trials, 
sufferings and reverses, but there can be no ultimate defeat." 

Full text of Father Ortiz' broadcast follows: 

"'I said to the man who stood at the gate of the year: 
"Give me a light that I may tread safely into the unknown!" And 
he replied: w Go out into the darkness and put thine hand into 
the hand of God. That shall be to thee better than li^ht and 
safer than a known way, 1 " 

"Perhaps many of you still remember these words. They 
were spoken by King George VI. of England in his Christmas 
broadcast to the English Empire four years ago. Those were 
dark days indeed for all of us. The lights of freedom were 
dying out one by one throughout the continent of Europe. One 
nation after the other fell under the iron heel of Hitler. The 
Nazi hordes goose-stepped like world-masters from Poland to 
France, from Norway to Greece. They were victorious everywhere . 
They seemed invincible. The cause of freedom was all but lost. 
Hitler bragged to the world that the German army was going to 
determine tke course of history for the next thousand years. 
It would have been so, indeed," but for the courage of freedom- 
loving peoples, the courage of the men and wome-n of our gene- 
ration who, in the face of tragedy and defeat and seeming 
hopelessness .refused to give up hope. They knew they were 
fighting for their God-given rights to life, liberty and the 
pursuit of hapniness. They knew that God was on their side. 
That is why;, despite Hitler's superiority in tanks and planes 
and guns, they were sure of final victory. 

"For victory is not always on the side of the strong. 
Victory does not necessarily march with the heavier tanks, sail 



-2- 



with the larger navy and fly with the fastest planes. Victory , 
in the long run, is always on the side of those who fight for 
freedom and for the rights of nan. God sees to that. God 
has a way of walking serenely and victorious!- through history's 
record. No tyrant has really succeeded in turning back the 
advance of civilization. i\r 0 r was there ultimate victory-for 
any 01 the hundred Hitlers who, m the course of history, 
rose burned with an incandescence that was created by blazing 
cities and flawing hatreds and then died down to cold dust and 
ashes* 

» 

Attn?^f h?S r T tiie Gr ^ at j?" brief1 ^ beyond defeat. So wore 
twS 1,1 m * F ° r llve cent ^ies the Mohammedans bo- 
th 1? n^l Tr e 1 ! lvlr \ clblG and the ultimate masters of 
Nann Tonl '^-^ Qe ^ ls and his fighting hordes. So did 

Napoleon and his Grand Army. Yet in the end, in the final 

inthe^A. and 01108 3? 0werf ^ armies melted away 1 ike snow 

vi-opi7°L^ d .- 8ee3 t0 i' b tliat ] ' lanJ ^^, despite its crimes against 
vtl ±l> d0 ? S .f-'°; r "r ss toward freedom, and peace, and brotherhood. 
Despite all uhe hating and the killing ana the dying that still 
goes on around us, wo know that our hope for victory and for 

ioS t i??T? e ? 0 V fl no V ust a mirage. The- road to final triumph 
may still be long ana tough and up steep, bloody hills. But we 
mean to travel that road. For we know that our cause is just 

23 JE+^f n0t al ° nG * f /e can SO out boldly into the darkness 
and put our hand upon the hand of God, and we know that His 
hand will be to us better than light and safer than a known way. 

*k ^ '-^ if only il1 Qod and through God's help that we can hope 
to build the foundations of a just and lasting peace, i'or peace 
aoes not come to peoples from external zaoans alone. Victory 
through might of arms can merely impose conditions of noaco. It 
cannot create peace. The forces that are to renovate the face 
of the earth must proceed from within, from the spirit. The 
re-education of mankind towards peace must be, above all 
spiritual and religious. It must proceed from God as from its 
indispensable foundation. It must be built upon the practical 
recognition of the sovereignty and fatherhood of God and the 
common brotherhood of man. Only if men. begin to realize that - 
they are orothers and children of the same Noavein> Father God 
can we hope to see the vision of a new and Glorious after-the- ' 
war world, the vision of a united humanity , of • men and women 
mdrchmg arm in arm towards a prosperous pe.^ce, not glaring 
hatefully at one another across geographical or comer cial 
lances, but sharing with each other of their own Particular 
wealth and gifts, conscious of thuir obligation to love their 
neighbor as themselves 



•'Tomorrow is a sacred and memorable day for one of our 
gallant and heroic allies, the poo >lo of the Philippines. That 
is the eighth anniversary bf the establishment of the Philippine 
Commonwealth. They are a bravo people, a fignting people. They 
fought unto the cud and in doing so they taught the world more 
than courage and loyalty. They taught the world faith in God 
ana faith in the brotherhood of man. \Ihon they fought side by 
side with their ^lorican comrades they were, fighting for the 
same cause, .the same ideals — the freedom of man. When they 
fought against tremendous odds their cause may have seeuod hope- 
less. But it was not. For they are a people of faith, and they 



defeat. '" 

PR- 2? 



1617 .Massachusetts Ave., N.W, 
V/ashington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPART! SPT OF BJFOI^TIO.T AND PUBLIC REL^IONS 
C 0 II M 0 N V % A LTH OF T II | P H ILIPPIN3S 

Novenber 17, 1943 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 



Following is statement by Vice President $er G io<03Mena at 
the commissioning of the aircraft carrier, V.G.s, Bataan. at 
Camden, New Jersey today (Wednesday): 

"The oopnoissioning of this aircraft carrier named Bataan is 
meaningful. It is evidence not only of America's mounting out- 
put of all the needed arr^aments but also of Aatrloats determina- , 
tion to fulfill her pledge to redeera the Philippines. 

: 'For Bataan is no longe? a mere geographical expression with- 
out meaning in terms of human value. Bataan is now an enduring 
monument to civilization, a symbol of freedom lost, a battleground 
where Americans and Filipinos sealed with blood a lasting friend- 
ship and gave expression to the supreme determination of our two 
peoples to fight together until the enemy is crushed and lost 
freedom regained, 

•'I can never forget the gaunt but courageous faces of the men 
left on Bataan and Corregidor, the valor and heroism which they 
displayed even in the face of certain .doom. I /hen President 
Quezon and I left Corregidor to continue here the struggle 
against the invaders, we did not give up hope that somehow rein- 
forcements would come soon and save those beleaguered men. 

■'YJhat a difference it would have made in the battle of the 
Philippines had airplane carriers like this succeeded in getting 
near Bataan in those fateful day si T ,7ho knows if with a score of 
planes the tide of tattle would not have turned in our favor i 

"But the SJpic of Bataan is not the end. It is oily the be- 
ginning. The forces of freedom are unconquerable. They are no 
longer on the defensive. Every day now, in the Pacific as in the 
other theatres of war, the enemy is reeling under the mighi^r blows 
of our forces on land, on sea and in the air. 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N. W, 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT CF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES' 

December 3, 1945 



FOR IMMEDIATE KLLSASE : 

President Manuel L. Q.uezrn cf the Philippines today hailed 
"the victory attained by China in Cairo" -as "the reward 5 f her 
supreme sacrifice in defense of her independence." 

Full text of- President Quezon's statement follows i 
"China should be congratulated upon the outcome of the 
Cairo Conference and, more particularly, the great leader of 
the Chinese people — President Chiang Kai-shek. The victory 
attained by China in Cairo is the reward of her supreme 
sacrifice in defense of her independence. " 

PR-34 



■i or our independence wheir'w^ ■ suddfJftily M)e on DecemUrer^S , 1941 
and the climactic event in Philippine-American relationship 
happened. The Filipinos stood to the death by America's side. 

.In the epic of Jataan, which lasted for more than four months, 
Filipino and American soldiers sealed with their blood eternal 
friendship. 

"It was no accident that twenty-one thousand Filipino 
soldiers died by the side of throe thousand American soldiers 
in their determined stand against tho invaders. Neither is it 
an accident that today, after almost tv/o years of Japanese 
military occupation, strong guerrilla resistance against the 
enemy is still going on in the mountains and remote towns of 
Luzon, Vis ay as and' Mindanao. For Filipino-American comradeship 
in thlfj war is nothing new. It is but the continuation of many 
years of close and cordial cooperation between the two peoples. 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.W. 
Washington 6, D.'C, 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

November 19, 1943 



FOR IIMEDIATE RELEASE ; 

Sergio Osmena, Vice President of the Philippines, in his 
broadcast as the guest of Richard Eaton on "The Anniversary of 
the Philippine Commonwealth," today (Friday) said that "Filipino 
American comradeship in this war is nothing new. It is but the 
continuation of many years of close and cordial cooperation 
between the two peoples. ... Having shared with America the 
fortunes of war as well as the blessings of peace, ^we shall work 
with her in the establishment of the post-war world of freedom, 
justice and security.'' 

Full text of Vice President Osmena' s statement follows: 

{, I am happy to address America's radio audience tonight 
to commemorate the eighth anniversary of the Commonwealth "of 
the Philippines. 

"The Philippine Commonwealth was born on November 15, 1935. 
Only eight years old, it has seen the dark days of war as'woll 
as the bright days of peace. Its first six years were devoted 
to the thorough preparation for the responsibilities of inde- ,<-... 
pendent nationhood. Among the problems we faced were national 
defense, stabilization- of the nation's economy, expansion of, 
the- educational system, improvement of the lot of the common 
man, a vast public works program, and development of agriculture, 
industry and commerce. 

'"We were peacefully engaged in this work of preparing 
for our independence when vrar suddenly r^oe on Deceiiltter«?8, 1941 
and the climactic event in Philippine-American relationship 
happened. The Filipinos stood to the death by America's side. 
In the epic of Bataan, which lasted for more than four months, 
Filipino and American soldiers sealed with their blood eternal 
friendship. 

"It was no accident that twenty-one thousand Filipino 
soldiers died by the side of throe thousand American soldiers 
in their determined stand against the invaders. Neither- is it 
an accident that today, after almost two years of Japanese 
military occupation, strong guerrilla resistance against the 
enemy is still going on in the mountains and remote towns of 
Luzon, visayas and' Mindanao. For Filipino-American comradeship 
in thlp war is nothing new. It is but the continuation of many 
years of close and cordial cooperation between the two peoples. 



-2- 



"From the beginning of her regime in the islands, America 
has forsworn any imperialistic or selfish motive. She has come 
not for territorial aggrandizement but to help the Filipinos 
along the path to self-government and freedom. Her avowed 
poixcy was •'tne Philippines for the Filipinos," a policy that 
has been consistently and faithfully followed to the letter and 
spirit, 

;" As so ° n as organized Filipino resistance was overcome, 
American soldiers laid down the rifle and became teachers. 
American doctors took up the task of eradicating epidemics and 
diseases, while American engineers built roads and bridges, 

Ar^-! m ! h tMs evid ;f nco of goodwill, it did not take long for 
America to win oyer the Filipinos. In 1901, the Filipinos 
participated 111 the first municipal elections held under the 
American flag, however, it was not until 1907, when the Philip- 
pine Assembly was established, that the FilipiAo people decided 
??? n Q * Poller or complete cooperation with the- United States. As 
!?L? Pe f? er 0f t!jlS first representative assembly in the Philip- 
pines it was my responsibility to lead the Filipino participation 
m the government. 

"America's altruistic policy in the Philippines reached the 
climax in 1934 with the passage by Congress of the Philippine 
Independence Act, providing for the establishment of the ' present 
government of the Commonwealth of the Philippines under a 
constitution of their own making and setting" the date for inde- 
pendence, July 4, 1946. 

'-'The assumption by the Philippines of a so, d-inde oendent 
status did not weaken its political ties with the United States, 
ihat one Filipinos wanted independence was well known- that 
the Amernp.nT.Q w ™n ft *i v« it to them was beyond doubt. But even 
with eventual political separation of the Philippines fro;, the 
united states already settled, the tender but firm attachment 
01 one to the other during the transitory period became oven 
more cherished, and Filipino-American cooperation went on as 
before , 



"When the Coimionwoalth was confronted with the 




Army was organized. 



"The United States also continued to place at the disposal 
of the Commonwealth noted Americans of business, of education and 
of science. Many of the Americans who had so loyally served 
the Philippine Government in the past offered their services to 
the new government. Trade relationship between the two countries 
remained on a mutually profitable basis. 

"l/hen, in the sixth year of the Commonwealth, war broke out ♦ 
m the Pacific and our loyalty to the United States was challenged, 
we presented to the world the Epic of Bataan. , > 

"Tonight, as we observe the eighth anniversary of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines, we can visualize the role of 
the Philippine nation — a daughter republic of the United States 
that will be ushe'red into the family of independent nations as 
soon as the enemy is driven out from our soil. Our cordial 
relationship with America will continue after our independence. 
Having shared with America the fortunes of war as well as the 
blessings of peace , we shall work with her in the establishment 
of the post-war world of freedom, justice and security." 

PR-28 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.v/, 
Washington 6, D.C. ' 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTl.iENT Q'ff INFORIIATIOM AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 U U O N W E A L T H OF THE PHILIPPINES 

December 4, 1943 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE : 

J. II. Elizalde, Philippine resident commissioner and Phil- 
ippine representative on the Council of the United Nations Re- 
lief and Rehabilitation Administration, m a statement issued at 
the end of the organization's Atlantic City session, declared that 
-immediate and humanitarian relief of peoples suffering from the 
revages of war all over the world? was -"uppermost" in the minds 
of the member countries of the Council. 

Mr. Elizalde said that the member countries also entertained 
: 'the practical idea that the sooner world rehabilitation is 
accomplished the sooner can. peoples of the world return to normal 
living. 17 

. He declared that the "initial international move toward im- 
mediate relief and early rehabilitation" was "an omen of hope" to 
all countries of the world. 

Full text of Mr'. Elizalde 's statement follows: 

ritv^^oSr 11 ? 11 ° f has had its first ^ssion at Atlantic 

ii ?• t y" I ? ur united and associated nations are represented 

^J 1 !* 01 * 10 oc casion. Dedicated to world-wide relief and 
lu^la £ a l 10n ofwar-strioken peoples and guided by an agreement 
^i 6 nea at the v/hite j.,.ouse on Navember 9th, -tire ^ouneal of SJ34RRA 
m this first session. set out to accomplish four distinct tasks, 

on -TP 18 first taslc was the acquisition of sufficient funds, from 
aii those -member countries that are not in a -oosition to make con- 
tribution, in order to provide immediate relief and ear ;habili- 
tation to the victims of war in liberated and to-be-i ■ e&ed 
areas, all over the world. 

"Secondly, the Council desired to obtain contributions from 
the member countries for carrying out the activities of : UNRRA, 
even if such contributions are to be made now or later, 'depending 
upon each country 1 s present ability or future capacity. 

"Thirdly, the Council wanted to lay down, general policies 
giving the Director-General all powers to carry out successfully 
the definite objectives of this great humanitarian undertaking. 

;, And fourthly, the Council wanted to elect a Director General 



- 2 - 



with the capacity to put the broad and general policies of 
UNRRA into effect. 

"All these four objectives have been accomplished, The 
forty-four member nations in reality have decided to join in 
this epoch-making convention to make the first effort toward 
relief of countries affected by the war. 

"All countries participating in this conference are giving 
generously for administrative expenses. With regards to funds 
for relief, those that do not contribute are unable to do so 
because their countries are overrun by the enemy or their 
resources are out of reach. It is, nevertheless, true that no 
country considers itself at this time free from future parti ci* 
pationtin the activities of UNRRA. -There can be no doubt that 
each country will "do its full share, if and when it is in a 
position to do so, 

"All member countries of the Council have in mind two 
principal considerations. Uppermost is the immediate and 
humanitarian relief of peoples suffering from the ravages of war 
all over the world. Secondly, there is the practical idea that 
the sooner world rehabilitation is accomplished the sooner can 
peoples of the world return to normal living and realize economic 
security and stability for the benefit of all concerned. If the 
objectives of UNRRA are carried to a successful conclusion, the 
rehabilitation of reoccupied countries will bo done without 
delay. Consequently, it is to be hoped that by the work of 
UNRRA the whole world will be brought back to normalcy within 
a short period after the war. Thus, all peoples and nations will 
have benefited by having done everything possible to assist 
reoccupied countries get b 0 ck on their feet again and by having 
worked, together to bring about a peaceful and more prosperous 
world . 

"This initial international move toward immediate relief 
and early rehabilitation has now come to a close. That it has 
been crowned with success there can positively be no doubt. To 
all countries of the world this is an. omen of hope, and much more 
so to those countries now occupied anQ- f'-uffering under the heel 
of invaders. The hopes and best wishes of all these peoples, 
therefore, go to UNRRA for the success of its future work." 

PR-35 



xaexr iarcn unswenca, in President Roosevelt, in President 
4uezgn, and in General Mac Arthur r.tands unshaken. They know 
that America is solid behind President Roosevelt's pledge to re- 
deem the Philippines. And they know, that some day* very soon 
they pray, General ilacArthur will once again step on Philippine 
soil to free their country forever from under the heels of the 
war 1 or d s of Japan." 

Major Villamor was captain in the Philippine Army Air Corps - 
when the Japanese attacked the Philippines. On December 10, 1941, 
in the faee of heavy enemy fire from strong enemy air forces, he 
led his flight of three pursuit planes into action. 

ir By his conspicuous example of courage and leadership, and at 
a great personal hazard beyond the call of duty, his flight was 
enable! to rout the attacking planes, thereby preventing appreci- 
able damage to material at this station," says the citation for 
the Distinguished Service Cross awarded him. 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., l>T.W. 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPART! IE ITT Of INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 If M 0 N W E A L T H OF THE P H I L I P p I ft E S 

December 6, 1943 



EOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE : 

Maj. Jesus Villamor, No. 1 Filipino ace, who has just arrived 
from Australia, states that the Filipinos' -faith in America, 
in President Roosevelt, in President Quezon and in General Mac- 
Arthur stands unshaken- and that his people's loyalty to America 
and Quezon's government are manifested in "ferns other than 
words," such as extending "support- and cooperation" to guerrillas. 

Major Villamor, who was ordered out of the Philippines by 
General Mac Arthur in April, 1942, is in a position to report on 
existing conditions in his country. 

"I have seen our people weary, sick and battered, pick them- 
selves up irom the dusty ruins of defeat and lift high their 
torch of liberty in- our country," says Major Villamor. "I have 
seen how our people, despite sickness, hunger and all those 
things. which only the oppressed can suffer, remain steadfastly 
loyal to America and to our own exiled government. Their loyal- 
ty has manifested itself in forms other than words. They have 
toiled and sacrificed for the .guerrillas. I am sure that with- 
out their efforts- and the support and cooperation they have given 
to tne guerrillas, there would not be any guerrillas. The things 
&nat the people have done, the sacrifices they have endured and 
the contributions they have made undoubtedly will go down in 
Philippine history as one of the most compelling chapters in' the 
story of Filipino participation in this war. 

"Their faith im*^Tl(m*rttT?8m:$eflt; RSosevelt, in President 
Quezon, and in General Mac Arthur stands unshaken. They know 
that America is solid behind President Roosevelt's pledge to re- 
deem the Philippines. And they know, that some day* very soon 
they pray, General Mac Arthur will once again step on Philippine 
soil to free their country forever from under the heels of the 
war lords of Japan." 

Major Villamor was captain in the Philippine Army Air Corps 
when the Japanese attacked the Philippines. On December 10, 1941, 
in the faee of heavy enemy fire from" "strong enemy air forces, he 
led his flight of three pursuit planes into action. 

"By his conspicuous example cf courage and leadership, and at 
a great personal hazard beyond the call of duty, his flight was 
enabledto rout th« attacking planes, thereby preventing appreci- 
able damage to material at this station," says the citation for 
the Distinguished Service Cross awarded him. 



He was awarded the Oak Loaf Cluster for "extraordinary 
heroism" later. During an attack on the airdrome at Batangas 
by 54 enemy bombers, Captain Villamor took off an'd led six 
pursuit planes to engage the enemy. He and his companions 
succeeded in driving the enemy bombers away. Villamor himself 
downed one of them, 

!> I am proud of our people," says Major Villamor. "I am 
proud of the way they fought the enemy from the beginning to the 
end of the Philippine campaign; I am proud of their magnificent 
and soul-stirring fight in the jungles of Bataan and the rocky 
fortress of Corregidor. I am proud of the way they have con- 
sistently resisted enemy occupation and control. And I am 
proud of the brave manner they are presently undergoing suffer- 
ings to demonstrate to future generations that our people, when 
the true test came, were not found wanting." 

Major Villamor, who is 29 years old, is five feet, four 
inches tall, and weighs 128 pounds, is the son of one of the 
Philippines most distinguished jurists. He took up commercial 
aviation. Later he joined the Philippine Army \yud was sent to 
Randolph Field, Texas, for further training, specializing in 
aerial photography. He is now with the United States Air Force. 

Major Villamor has a message to the people of the United 
States. 

• . "It is a message from the Filipino people," he says, "It 
was never expressed to me, but I have seen it clearly in the 
tear-filled eyes of a mother staring at a hungry and dying child, 
in the steady finger's- of a guerrilla about to pull the trigger 
on an approaching lap, in the untiring and devoted efforts of 
our leaders — military and civil ; in the ghastly spectacle of 
entire families dead from malaria, in the efforts and sacrifices 
of all the people in all areas in the Philippines. It' is this: 
Tell America that, over here we do not pray for victory, for 
victory is sure to come. R ther we pray that God may speed the 
"day of their coming which shall also be the day when we can 
once again breathe the air of peace and liberty, 1 ' 



m 



PR-36 



niy great privilege and honcr to be a member of that delegation 
as adviser on health and welfare. This conference brought to- 
gether in Atlantic City 33 United Nations, 10 associated nations, 
and the French National Committee of Liberation to discuss the 
problems of relief and rehabilitation that will confront us «, 
after the war. 

"The Conference is almost over new and one of the most 
important things decided upon is the establishment of a standing 
committee on Health. There are other standing committees, but 
the Committee on Health was among the first to take shape be- 
cause all the delegates discussing the subject, mostly doctors, 
biologists and public, health men, quickly came to the conclusion 
that the medical services in the countries that have been 
invaded by the enemies should be quickly re-established, both 
in their preventive and curative aspects, otherwise the program 
of rehabilitation may not be carried out. 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.W. 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 || •: 0 N % E A L T H OF THE PHILIPPINES 

November 27, 1943- 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE : 

The importance to the postwar Philippines of the Committee 
on Health of the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Con- 
ference was stressed by Dr. Arturo B. Rotor, Secretary to the 
President of the Philippines, in a message broadcast today to 
the Filipino people. 

Dr. Rotor, a member of the Philippine delegation to the 
Atlantic City conference as adviser on health and welfare, de- 
clared that he expected the Philippines will share the benefits 
of the "greatest pool of scientific knowledge, experience and 
supplies which the world has ever seen." He revealed that the 
Committee on Health had discussed reports from various occupied 
countries shewing that "control of disease, particularly tuber- 
culosis and venereal diseases, and facilities for study and 
research have broken d^wn. 11 

Full text of Dr. Rotor's radio message follows: 

■ "As you heard a few days a 0 o, President Quezon appointed a 
delegation to represent the Philiopines at the United Nations 
Relief and Rehabilitation Conference in Atlantic City. It was 
my great privilege and honor to be a member of that delegation 
as adviser on health and welfare. This conference brought to- 
gether in Atlantic City 33 United Nations, 10 associated nations, 
and the French National Committee of Liberation to discuss the 
problems of relief and rehabilitation that will confront us 
after the war. 

"The Conference is - - almost over ncv; and one of the most 
important things decided upon is the establishment of a standing 
committee on Health. There are other standing committees, but 
the Committee on Health was among the first to take shape be- 
cause all the delegates discussing the subject, mostly doctors, 
biologists and public health men, quickly came to the conclusion 
that the medical services in the countries that have been 
invaded by the enemies should be quickly re-established, both 
in their preventive and curative aspects, otherwise the program 
of rehabilitation may not be carried out. 



- 2 - 



ir 



'We discussed reports from various occupied countries 
which showed that control of disease, particularly tuberoulosis 
and venereal diseases, and facilities for study ana research 
have broken down. Malnutrition, and even starvation, prevails 
over the occupied countries. Everybody understood that unless 
the United Nations acted in concert, serious epidemics may 
follow in the wake of war and complete the destruction wrought 
by bombs and shells. For this purpose we bound ourselves tc 
pool not only food and medical supplies, but also information 
regarding communicable diseases. We also agreed that we should 
loan our experts to one another whenever necessary. Cf course, 
the very nature of the draft agreement of the UNRRA presupprses 
that these activities will be carried out in consultation with 
our government. Whenever possible, the UNRRA will utilize the 
national and local organizations that we already have. 

"I expect that our country, as one of the United Nations, 
will share with the ether United Nations, all the benefits cf 
this greatest pool cf scientific knowledge, experience and 
supplies which the world has ever seen. Under President 
Quezon's unflagging guidance, we are at present studying- our 
country 1 s needs so that we shall have ready & program cf re- 
construction as scon as the war ends." 

PR-ol 



General MacArthur in April, 1942, is in a position to report on 
existing conditions in his country.. 

"I have seen our people weary, sick and battered, pick them- 
selves up from the dusty ruins of defeat and lift high their 
torch of liberty in- our country," says Major Villamor. "I have 
seen how our people, despite sickness, hunger and all those 
things which only the oppressed can suffer, remain steadfastly 
loyal to America and to. our own exiled government. Their loyal - 
ty has manifested itself in forms other than v/ords. They have 
toiled and sacrificed for the guerrillas. I am sure that with- 
out their efforts- and the support and cooperation they have given 
to the guerrillas, there would not be any guerrillas. The things 
that the people have done, the sacrifices they have endured and 
the contributions they have made undoubtedly will go down in 
Philippine history as one of the most compelling chapters in the 
story of Filipino participation in this war. 

■ : :? Their faith in America, in President Roosevelt, in President 
-iuezon, and in General I lac Arthur stands unshaken;-- They know 
that America is solid behind President Roo3eve It ' s pledge to re- 
deem the Philippines. And they know, that some day, very soon 
they pray, General MacArthur -will once again step on Philippine 
soil to free their country forever from under the heels of the 
war lords of Japan. " 

Major Villamor was captain in the Philippine Array Air Corps - 
when the Japanese attacked the Phili ^nines. On December 10, 1941, 
in the fa«e of heavy enemy fire from strong enemy air forces, he 
led his flight of three pursuit planes into action. 

'•'By his conspicuous example of courage and leadership, and at 
a great personal hazard beyond the call of duty, his flight was 
enabled to rout thfc attacking planes, thereby preventing appreci- 
able damage to material at this station," says the citation for 
"tbe ."Distinguished Service Cross awarded him. 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.W. 
Washington 6, D.c. ' 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT Off INFORMATION AND FUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 M M 0 N W E A L T H OF THE PHILIPPINES 

December 6, 1943 



f 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE : 



Maj. Jesus Villamor, No. 1 Filipino ace, who has just arrived 
from Australia, states that the Filipinos' -'faith in America, 
in President Roosevelt, in President Quezon and in General 1 lac- 
Arthur stands unshaken-' and that his people's loyalty to America 
and Quezon's government are manifested in "forms other than 
words," such as extending "support and cooperation 1 ' to guerrillas. 

Major Villamor , who was ordered out of the Philippines by 

General MacArthur in April, 1942, is in a position to report on 

existing conditions in his country.. 

"I have seen our people weary, sick and battered, pick them- 
selves up from the dusty ruins of defeat and lift high their 
torch of liberty in- our country," says Major Villamor. "I have 
seen how our people, despite sickness, hunger and all those 
things which only the oppressed can suffer, remain steadfastly 
loyal to America and to. our own exiled government. Their loyal- 
ty has manifested itself in forms other than words. They have 
toiled and sacrificed for the guerrillas. I am sure that with- 
out their efforts and the support and cooperation they have given 
to the guerrillas, there would not be any guerrillas. The things 
that the people have done, the sacrifices they have endured and 
the contributions they have made undoubtedly will go down in 
Philippine history as one of the most compelling chapters in the 
story of Filipino participation in this war. 

"Their faith in America, in President Roosevelt, in President 
Quezon, and in General I lac Arthur stands unshaken*-- They know 
that America is solid behind President Roosevelt ' s pledge to re- 
deem the Philippines. And they know, that some day", very soon 
they pray, General MacArthur will once again step on Philippine 
soil to free their country forever from under the heels of the 
war lords of Japan.'' 

Major Villamor was captain in the Philippine Army Air Corps - 
when the Japanese attacked the Philippines. On December 10, 1941, 
in the fase of heavy enemy fire from" strong enemy air forces, he 
led his flight of three pursuit planes into action. 

i? By his conspicuous example of courage and leadership, and at 
a great personal -hazard beyond the call of duty, his flight v/as 
enabled to rout the attacking planes, thereby preventing appreci- 
able damage to material at this station," says the citation for 
the Distinguished Service Gross awarded him. 



He was awarded the Oak Loaf Cluster for "extraordinary 
heroism" later. During an attack on the airdrome at Batangas 
by 54 enemy bombers, Captain Villamor took off and led six 
pursuit planes to engage the enemy." He and his companions 
succeeded in driving the enemy bombers away. Villamor himself 
downed one of them, 

"I am proud of our people," says Major Villamor. "I am 
proud of the way they fought the enemy from the beginning to the 
end of the Philippine campaign. I am proud of their magnificent 
and soul-stirring fight in the jungles" of Bataan and the rocky 
fortress of Corregidor. I am proud of the way they have con- 
sistently resisted enemy occupation and control. And I am 
proud of the brave manner they are presently undergoing suffer- 
ings to demonstrate to future generations that our people, when 
the true test came, were not found wanting." 

Major Villamor, who is 29 years old, is five feet, four 
inches tall, and weighs 128 pounds, is the son of one of the 
Philippines most distinguished jurists. He took up conmercial 
aviation. Later he joined the Philippine Army toad was sent to 
Randolph Field, Texas, for further training, specializing in 
aerial photography. He is now with the United States Air Force. 

Major Villamor has a message to the people of the United 
States, 

"It is a message from the Filipino people," he says, "It 
was never expressed to me, but I have seen it clearly in the 
tear-filled eyes of a mother staring at a hungry and dying child, 
in the steady finger's- of a guerrilla about to pull the trigger 
on an approaching Jap, in the untiring and devoted efforts of 
our leaders — military and civil, in the ghastly spectacle of 
entire families dead from malaria, in the efforts and sacrifices 
of all the people in all areas in the Philippines. It- is this: 
Tell America that over here we do not pray for victory, for 
victory is sure to come. R ther we pray that God may speed the 
"day of their coming which shall also be the day when. we can 
once again breathe the air of peace and liberty," 

M PR-36 



'and intolerance wil'l have no place. For such a world the sac- 
rifices of all liberty-loving peoples will not have been in vain.' 

PR- 3 9 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.W, 
Washington 6, D.C, 
robart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 M IT 0 N f E A L T H OF THE PIIILIPPIK E S 

December 7, 1943 



FOR BMEDIATE RELEASE : 

President ITanuel L. Quezon of the Philippines today hailed 
the' tripartite declaration at Tehran and looked forward to the 
•postwar world, which will afford security to small nations -as 
well es large ones, 

"The conference at Tehran of President Roosevelt, Prime 
Minister Churchill and Premier Stalin, following the conference of 
the first two chiefs of state with Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, 
should clear all doubts as to the war and the peace that will 
follow it," said President Quezon. 

"Germany and Japan will both be, crushed and reduced to 
impotence, so that they may never again disturb the peace of the 
world, 

"The ceace that will follow will be enduring. The new world 
will be constituted by a world family of democratic nations -- 
large and small alike --where tyranny and slavery, oppression 
'and intolerance will have no place. For suclt a world the sac- 
rifices of all liberty-loving peoples will not have been in vain." 

PR- 3 9 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., i'.U. 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 M M ON WEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

January 1, 1944 



FOR RELEASE JANUARY 2, 6: 00 PM ; 

Sergio Osmena, Vice President of the Philippines, in an 
address before the Filipino Community 0 f Chicago at the Hotel 
Sherman on January 2, stressed the need for strong American- 
Philippine military, cultural and political collaboration after 
the war. 

Vice President Osmena came from his office in Washington to 
deliver the main address at the Chicago ceremonies ccmmemorating 
the 47th anniversary of the martyrdom of Jose'Rizal, Filipino 
patriots. 

"The maintenance of adequate naval and air bases across the 

Pacific, anchored in the Philippines "and protected there by Fil- 

, . . V i 

lpmo troops will assure the mutual protection of both the United 
States and the Philippines, and preserve the Pacific Ooean for •• 
the peaceful purposes of all the nations," said Vice President 
Osmena. "To the Philippines such plans are vital to its liberty 
and growth. To the United States such plans mean that no enemy 
may approach your Western shores. In a joint resolution, already 
passed by the Senate and now pending in the House, the President 
of the United States is authorized to enter into negotiations 
with the Government of the Philippines fcr the selection of 
suitable bases in the islands, I have reasons to believe that 
from our side the United States may expect full ''cooperation in 
this regard. " 

Mr. Osmena, speaking of Filipino culture, pointed ..out that 
the Filipino way of life is Occidental/ Christian and democratic, 
"it is then natural that intiaate cultural relations will .* » _ 



- 2 - 

continue between the United States and the Philippines, 11 he 
added. 

"In the political field,' 1 Mr, Osmeffa declared, "cooperation 
between the United States and the Philippines is only logical. 
After having worked together towards the building up cf the 
Philippine Nation, the United States and the Philippines can then 
devote their joint efforts toward assisting in the solution of 
the manifold postwar problems. As a daughter republic of the 
United States and a *fl a new birth of liberty in the Far East, the 
Philippines can serve as the vanguard of democracy and as the 
beacon of hope in that part- of the globe. If, through the 
Philippines, the sway cf American democracy could reach the less 
fortunate peoples of Asia, then the cause of world peace would 
be greatly served. Moreover, the Philippines is peculiarly 
qualified to serve as America's bridge of goodwill to the peoples 
of Asia. As the veritable sample of America's handiwork, the 
Philippines stands as a vivid example of the success of the 
policy of trusteeship — the policy which the nations of the West 
can and must follow for all dependent peoples everywhere. To 
these dependent peoples, a free and independent Philippines sym- 
bolizes the goal that can be attained not by distrust, bloodshed, 
and violence, but by friendship, understanding and collaboration. 
Thus, by remaining close pclitical allies, the United States and 
the Philippines will go a long, way towards the building up of a 
new world of peace, justice , ' de..xcracy and freedom." 

Full text of Vice President Osmefia' s address fellows: 
"FELLOW COUNTRY!^ AVD FRIENDS: 

"Rizal Day iSil national holiday observed by Filipinos every- 
where. Coming at a propitious time about the end of the year, it 
affords us the opportunity to rededicate ourselves for the ccming 
year to the lefty ideals and noble aspirations that made Jose 
Rizal a symbol of redemption, not only of the Filipino people but 
also of other peoples of the world, struggling fcr freedom. 

"In the roll of Filipino heroes, there are others who figure 
prominently and who have earned our admiration and respect, but 
none of them has gained the universal love of our people and the 
general respect of the outside world as Rizal. The reason for 
this is obvious. More than any other man, he had given himself 
so completely and unselfishly to the cause of his people. With 
his writings, he opened the eyes cf the masses; and with his 
martyrdom, he gave them an example of supreme devotion to the 
native land. It was he, in the dark hour of our history, who 
lighted the torch of freedom which Spanish oppression could not 
quench. 

"When America came to the Philippines, succeeding Spain, she 
found the torch of Philippine freedom already aflame. Far from 
stifling it, she unsolfishlv stimulated its growth and radiance. 



- 3 - 



One of her first official acts in the islands was to proclaim 
Rizal D a y a national holiday. But she did more than this. She 
proclaimed to the world that she was holding the Philippines in 
trust for the Filipinos — for their interest and welfare, their 
freedom and happiness. And as she said, she fulfilled. 

"It is unnecessary for me to reoite at length the progress 
achieved by us drying the forty-five years of American trustee- 
ship. The record is well known to all. Suffice it for me to 
say that no people under the guidance of another have achieved 
so much as we have within the same period cf time. 

"Not only have we gained recognition cf all the essential 
rights and liberties which Rizal staunchly worked for; we have 
also made tremendous strides in tho economic, social, educational 
ana political fields, making our country one of the most pro- 
gressive nations in the Par East, As a fitting climax to her 
Philippine policy of liberation, America, recognizing our cap- 
acity for self-government, granted us independence. 

Our people were peacefully engaged in the preparation for 
the responsibilities of independence when, in December, 1941, 
Japan suddenly attacked. In the bitter struggle against a 
numerically superior and better equipped invading army, thousands 
of Filipino soldiers fell by the side of their American comrades 
m arms. 

"But they did not die in vain. By their prolonged end. deter- 
mined resistance, Japan was forced to divert large contingents 
from other war fronts, thereby delaying the fall cf the S a st 
Indies, halaya, Singapore, and Burma, and thwarting the Japanese 
program for an early invasion of Australia and New Zealand. 
They also afforded the United States precious time to repair the 
destruction wrought by Japan's insidious attack on Pearl Harbor, 
ana enabled our allies in the Pacific to bolster their defenses 
and to prepare to deal counter blows against the common enemy. 

"Forty-five years of constructive association with America 
have afforded the Filipinos the opportunity to develop and prove 
thcir^ capacity for self-government, winning through peaceful 
negotiations formal recognition of that capacity and a promise 
of independence. Four months of bloody and heroic struggle on 
Bataan have tested the strength of ' this title to independence and 
proved Filipino capacity to 'shoulder the responsibilities of 
independence. Today-, we have America's pledge that Philippine 
independence will not only be established and protected, but 
also will become a consummate fact, even before 1946, as socn as 
the invaders are driven away from Philippine soil anc" free 
democratic processes aro_ ..restored. 

"With the final victory of the United Nations and the formal 
recognition by the United States of Philiooinc independence, tho 
question naturally arises as to whether this Philippine-American 
collaboration should be continued and maintained in the future. 

"I propounded this same question in- a speech I delivered in 
Manila way back in 1939, wherein I reviewed the many years of 
harmonious Philippine-American relationship. I ventured then to 
offer an affirmative answer. Nov;, with perfect American-Filipino 
comradeship, as shown in the ilpic of Bataan, and with America's 
offer of protection and other pronouncements in the course of 
this struggle*, there can be no doubt about postwar collaboration 
between the United States and the Philippines. Tho logic of 
events, the inescapable obligations arising from this war, and 
the common interests of both peoples, make this collaboration 
not only advisable but also necessary. It will find expression 
in many fields, Let mo explore a few of thorn. 

"The war will necessarily leave its tragic marks on our bo- 
loved country. Destruction will be widespread, sufferings will 
bo acute, poverty and hunger will be rampant. Long years of 
privation and hardships will have diminished tho physical re- 
sistance of the masses, making them easy victims of diseases. 
Adequate and immediate relief will therefore be imperative. 
Fooo, clothing and medical care must corac first. It is nopcel 
that side by side the American Red Cross, accompanying our ,aa- 
vanco troops, will bo a Philippine Red Cross. 



- 4 - 



. ar 5 P r °t>lem °£ relief in general is the rehabili- 

2? 2 Ur ^Jf rms and industries. This will require provisions 

Jm ,mLJ 6 f lzerfl ' farn ^Piements and work animals. In 

np^« 5f ?^ lng !; y ? shculd ^ ive Particular attention to the 

«nfl hi a nlit T a v 1 ? nd 0Wner wh0 have lost hls onl y carabao 
ana nis only nipa hut. 

r. P .t2?t e iL eC !f nS I rU 5 ti0ri , 0f cur lnc1 - u strial establishments and the 
™S £f J jestroyed properties, both public and private, 

SSJlJl «nri ded f°*J , This incl ^es, among other things, pro- 
vinciai anct municipal bull flincra a^r^i* \ -u ;/ n 

streets and bridges builc - in * s ' sch <^ls, churches, hospitals, 



ti 



w JS™ L ?' W ° 8ha11 have t0 faoe tnc manifold problems 
nrfdf? ?n«tf^ 0 i? 8ing f nd insol y^ey of our banks, insurance • 
unLun^ pliv s^tutione, tho adulteration of our currency with 
°J ' ??^LJ, 8VeS i the im P- ira -nt of the basis of taxation, 
?hn ^ " ° f ° Ur P ublic 9 °hool system as a result of 

??nn in i?S ? J 0 ?* 7 *?? 1 ?? 1 8 an * of anti-democratic indoctrina- 

«i? %S institutions which have remained open. Without 
nSXj f i 3 s ° hccls in operation before the war should be re- 
SSta^S^^^ ^ edUCatl0n ° f P^^tism, democracy 

flonir^ at f Ver prog ^ a ? v . of roliof and rehabilitation is finally 
decided upon — and the items I have discussed are only a par*. 

?L; *"« WG a 5 6 al r cad y assured of America's help and collabora- 
geeponding to the recommendations of the President of the 
united States tnc Senate has approved a joint resolution which 
provides for the organization of a commission of Americans and 
Filipinos, charged with the study of the relief and rehabilita- 
tion problems oi tho Philippines. To this commission is P lsc 
entrusted the task of surveying the econcmic situation in the 
islands with a view to economic stabilization and the formulation 
oi a plan lor future trade relations between the United States 
ana the Philippines. 

"As will be remembered, tho ten year transition ooriod of 
the Commonwealth was provided for in order, among other things, 
;° enable the Philippines to stabilize her economy with an eye 
to her future independent existence. This preparation was al- 
ready at an advanced stage when war broke out and everything 
built up was destroyed. . It will be within the province of tho 
joint commission when organized to study how to keep up with 
the lost years and to recommend measures for the reostablishmont 
of such commercial. relations with the United States and ether 
countries as will assure us a reasonable level of public and 
private prosperity. 

"The policy of free exchange of commodities followed by 
Congress has brought material benefits to the Philippines and 
economic advantages and profits to American labor, exporters, 
and businessmen, This economic tic has so affected Philippine 
economy that the major export industries of the Philippines have 
become dependent up-n the American market, necessitating a 
reasonable period of adjustment preceding ultimate independence. 
With this beneficial and satisfactory record of economic collab- 
oration, the Aior ican-Phili vpino Commission will have a fine 
background with which to formulate a postwar commercial relation- 
ship which will redound to the welfare of both countries. 

"The defense plans of the Commonwealth, formulated with the 
advice of the American Military Ilission headed by G-cnoral ilac- 
Arthur, wore in the process of execution when Japan struck. With 
the recenquest of the islands, wc shall resume this work, making 
such adjustments as circumstances and. experience require. 
American technical assistance will continue to be needed. More- 
over, our program should be worked out, taking into consideration 
not only our own defense but also the future military necessities 
of the United States. 

"This takes us to the question whether after independence 
mutual collaboration in defense measures will be advantageous 
both to the' United States and to tho Philippines. It can truly 
be said that during tho last fcur decades American-Philippine 
collaboration for defense existed. Tho United States Navy main- 
tained its principal base for the Asiatic Fleet at CaVlto and 
the United States Army held several camps and airfields, ittc 



- 5 - 

G 



fatlr the Phn vUf S f y cn Pili '? ino soldiery - Scouts, and 
totality of tlo'll ?° ^ ~ t0 ,1U its ran ks. That the 
to prevehf tS fL!So°f S Wa ? ina £?au a te in number and equipment 
?4ri^ n ? t^ b 8 Cn ,° f vastly, superior power, does not 
l^onlfemph^-^ 1 ^^ 0810 /^^ of mi ^^ry collaboration. 

estaSlLSnt a f & 1ho L?on n afT 8 ^ 108 ^ military 
across tho Paoifi? MS ntonanoo of adequate naval and air bases 

there by thc Philippines and protected 

both %S ^tSd^tSSfLTtholhS? ^ mutua ^ of 

Pacific Oaosn fnS i f Plull Ppincs, and preserve the 

PMUptt^S r p^, p ^ e '?iJT c ?? e ? f , a11 natlons - Tc th0 

the Unites States such ^1^*^'"***' *"* gr0Wth \ Tr 
vour Western qV WO T , 5 7 ? at no cncm y may approach 

^^rSid^ioaS* Mo p h!!S luti ?2' f rcady passcd by 

United States is euthcrizcci to nf ^Ti th ° P ^ sldont of the 
Government of tho PhiltJpinos foS nt ? n 2?otiation S with thc 
bases in tho i^l t J tho election of suitable 

stde the Sit ed £2 lis ^ILeot^l' 0 bclU T? that fr ™ ^ 
gard. " J expect full ooopcration in this re- 

has ^^AtSS&t^' ?2 op ! ratlon botwoon the two countries 
turies Filipino culture has been §a ed^ Sos torn 1 Seas ° "d" 
"J opening of tho twentieth century PllSino poll tic si 
thought has been absorbing the essential prlnolploe of An lo- 

ipiritS^f During por 8 ofof 'tSE 1 ? 1 ^ ' CUl *T a < ^ 

mot^^trv ^°™ CUrS ? aM SplritUal ooSorbetweon'the 
?£™« v, 7 a d uhc oolon y WGrc carried on by way of Mexico 

^otor^K 8114 ^ 011 ^ 1 ^ Plying in the manUa- 
fntHiLf SS'-W?* 5 rin !n in ! Spain ' Moxicr and the Philippines 
the eci?nL n> * ntimatc ^lations. When Destiny brought about 
w3£i P S f Paln aS a Wcrld pcwcr ' her colonics in thc 
Ph L among them, became independent States, but tho 

Philippxnes continued to be linked to the New World through her 

F?11 ni .nl t° Cia ? l0n n 7lth th ° UnltCd Statcs ' T hus it is that 
thoi? J.?^ 18 /?? 0 * 10 ' t0 th0 orl ginal Malayan foundation 
fo?av ?L *?iV| ded Asia 3 1 ?' Latin > and Anglo-Saxon elements, 
tho i' ° ^il^no. way cf life is thc Occidental, the Christian, 

cu?tu^? C ^^. Way • Xt is natural that intimate ' 

the Phiiiopincs GnS cont - inuo h^ween the United States and 

H n S?v? 0l 7 tlcal fiGl ^ cooperation between thc United States 
^v, . Phll v° pincs is cnl ^ logical. After having worked to- 
fr^rK 3 OV7arcs thc huil^inS' uj& of the Philippine Nation, the 
unioco. Spates and thc Philippines can then dovato their joint 
^f 0I,t s towards assisting- in thc solution of thc manifold post- 
war problems. As a daughter republic of tho United Stat.- s and 

n S JL n ° W Si rth 0f liDcrt :'' in the Far East, thc Philippines can 
servo as the vanguard of democracy and as the beacon cf hooc in 
„f a L5 a f of * hc I? 000 - lf > through thc Philippines, thc sway of 
oi American democracy could roach the less fortunate peoples of 
Asia, Chan thc cause of world peaoo would be greatly served, 
aorecver, the Philippines is peculiarly Qualified to servo as 
America's bridge of goodwill to the peoples of Asia. As thc 
veritable sample of America's handiwork, tho Philippines stands 
as. a vivid example of the success of the policy of trusteeship — 
the policy whi€h the nations of tho West can and must fellow for 
ail o.cpendont peoples everywhere. To these depondert peoples, a 
ire; and independent Philippines symbolizes tho goal that con he 
attained not by distrust, bloodshed, and violence, but by friend- 
ship, understanding and collaboration,, Thus, by remaining close 
political allies, thv United States and the Philippines will go 
a long way towards tho building up of a. new world of peace, 
justice, democracy and freedom, 

"With the final triumph of American arms in thc Philippines, 
the constitutional system functioning there before the war will 
bo reestablished, and the Philippine Commonwealth will become 
thc Philippine Republic. This, crowning event of Filipino^ 
American partnership in thc task of nation-building will 'net 
essentially change American-Philippine relationships. The ties 
of friendship and thc spirit of collaboration will last forever. 
In a f .ree Philippines, America, will continue to find a ready 



- 6 - 

partner for the defenso a nd the furtherance cf the ideals and 
policies which the two- countries held in common* America may 
rest assured that the ^Philippine Republic, born out of the 
suff !? :ings of Rizal ar^a of other Filipino heroes and martyrs, 
will rw how to cherish and defend its freedom, and that the 
Pil?;; .0 people, .whom she has so unselfishly helped in attaining 
sola, ^vcrnmcnt and i ndependence, will always be a friendly and 
grateful people. 

PR- 45 

tr 



■victorious return do tne nuiippmes, tnougn, we must sadly 
admit, not as fast as you and we all would wish. I an sure 
that the prayer of 17,000,000 enslaved Filipinos who love you 
is that God may bless you and protect you and hasten the day 
when you will free then from the invader of their country and 
the tyrant who has deprived them of their liberties. 

;, Af fectionately, 
"Manuel L. Quezon." 



> 



PR-46 



Filipinos whoTdied in prison camps from torture, starvation and 
resultant diseases is even greater than the number of Americans, 
The Filipino people will never forget nor forgive the savage 
treatment which the prisoners of war have received, and that is 
an adde r l reason for their continued resistance to the Japanese.*' 



PR-47 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N,W. 
Washington 6, D.C, 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 M U 0 N W E A L T H OF T H E PHIL I P PINES 

January 26, 1944 



FOR I MMEDIATE RELEASE : 

Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, cabled his 
greetings to General Douglas MaoArthur in Australia, on the 
General's 64th birthday, January 26, 

Following is text of President Quezon's cable: 
;? I am sure you are younger today than you have been since 
January 1942, for you are celebrating your birthday not in de- 
fensive but in offensive operations. You are already on your 
victorious return to the Philippines, though, we must sadly 
admit, not as fast as you and we all would wish. I am sure 
that the prayer of 17,000,000 enslaved Filipinos who love you 
is that God may bless you and protect you and hasten the day 
when you will free them from the invader of their country and 

the tyrant who has deprived them of their liberties. 

* ■* * 

"Affectionately, 
"1 Ianue 1 L . Que z on . '' 1 

'f PR-46 

w 

"Filipinos who'"' died in prison camps from torture, starvation and 
.resultant diseases is even greater than the number of Americans 
The Filipino people will never forget nor forgive the savage 
treatment which the prisoners of war have received, and that is 
an added reason for their continued resistance to the Japanese. 



PR-47 



1617 Massachusetts Ave„ } 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPiiRmiMT a? msanmcis AND public relations 

C 0 14 M 0 N » E A I T H 0? THE PHILIPPINES 

January 29, 1944 



FOR IMM EDIATE RELEASE : 

MIAMI, JANUARY 2 9 — Ulaninel L. Quezon, President of the 
Philippines revealed lastt ni_giit that two Filipino prisoners at 
Davao penal colony we- re ^responsible for the escape of Col. "Dyes 
and the other Americans -/hose story of the "March of Death" was 
made public, by the war ami Sfory Departments. 

President Quezon sa_id: ''The escape of Col. Dyess, Col. 
MellnlJc and Condr. IlcCoy- was made possible with the help of Wo 
Filipinos who had been sentenced to many years imprisonment and 
were confined in the pemal- «>©lpny wherein these three officers 
were kept as prisoners of .war. 

7? Upon learning of wvja&fc they did, I granted these prisoners 
absolute pardon e " 

In comment ing .pm t2i© acbrocity stories, President Quezon 
continued: 

i? I am horrified, at the cruelties committed by the Japanese 
on the American and Fil_ipirria prisoners of war. The number of 
Filipinos wheeled an prison oamps from torture, starvation and 
resultant diseases is even greater than the number of Americans 
The Filipino people wiHl n_ever forget nor forgive the savage 
treatment wbich the prd. sorters of war have received, and that is 
an adde<3 reason for" th_eir continued resistance to the Japanese. 



PR-47 



1617 Massachusetts Ave. , N.W. 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARHEENT OF INF0R11ATI0N AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

January 31, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE : 

Manuel L« Quezon, President of the Philippines, in his 
message to Filipinos in America, Hawaii, Alaska and elsewhere, 
urged them all to purchase War Bonds in the hepe that the 
Fourth War Loan Drive "will rosult in speeding up the reconquest 
ef the Philippines*" 

President Quezon called attention tc the fact that war is 
still going cn in the Philippines. "They are keeping up the 
fight with such arms and ammunition as Filipino and American 
officers who refused to surrender were able tc take along with 
them," he said* 

President Quezon stated that he is -resigned "with a bleeding 
heart to the decision that the war against Germany demands prior 
consideration." But, he askedl, "Has not the time arrived to 
drive the Japanese cut of the Philippines?" 

Full text of president Quezon's message follows; 
"After the revelation of the unspeakable atrocities perpetra- 
ted by the Japanese upen American and Filipino prisoners of war, 
the American people can gain some idea of the sufferings that the 
Japanese have also inflicted on the non-combatant elements of 
the Philippine population. It is true that the Japanese govern- 
ment and its high military com .and pursued a policy of attraction 
appealing to racial affinity and granting the so-called Indepen- 
dence. These deceptions failed, however, to win the Filipinos to 
the side of the Japanese because of the many and frequent cases 
of cruelty committed by their soldiery which include the raping 

of helpless women* 

"There is a scarcity cf everything new in the Philippines - 



food, medicines, clothing and other essentials. Peaceful and 
defenseless people are at the mercy of Japanese soldiers — the 
Filipino people are indeed enslaved. Of course the" Filipinos are 
not taking these abuses and fiendish cruelties and the deprivation 
of their liberties with ignoble and ■ owwardly resignation. 
Warfare is going on everywhere in the Philippines as Tckyc broad- 
casts unwittingly reveal now and then. Although the Filipinos 
are receiving neither arms nor ammunition from outside, they are 
keeping up the fight with such arms and ammunition as Filipino 
and American officers who refused to surrender were able to take 
along with them. The war in the Philippines is gcing on despite 
Japanese retaliatory measures by burning entire villages and 
killing civilians indiscriminately. 

"How long are the Filipinos going to be left alone to fight 
the Japanese? I hope the Fourth War Lean Drive will result in 
speeding up the recenquest of the Philippines, and the libera- 
tion of my people and those unfortunate prisoners of war still 
in the cruel hands of the Japanese. Mrs. Quezon and I are doing 
the best we can in purchasing War Bonds and we hope that Filipinos 
in America, Hawaii.,- Alaska and elsewhere will do the same. 

"With a bleeding heart, I am resigned to the deoisicn that 
the war against Germany demands prior consideration. But has 
not the time arrived- to drive the Japanese out of the Philippines? 
Remember, that only in the Philippines the American flag has 
been humiliated. Let us avenge Bataan N^WJ 

### 

pn-47 



1617 Massachusetts Avg. , N.w, 
Washington 6, D.C, 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

February 4, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE : 

Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, reiterated 
his support of the Fourth War Loan Drive, in a telegram to 
Secretary Morgenthau of the U.S. Treasury. "My wife and I have 
agreed to invest every cent we have in the purchase of 'Avenge 
Bataan' Bonds,'' said the President. 

Mrs. Quezon officially opened the "Avenge Bataan 1 ' War Bond 
Drive in Washington on February 2. The drive was sponsored by 
the Washington Post and the Treasury Department. All persons 
purchasing bonds during the week of February 2 to February 8 
will sign a scroll which will^be carried back- to the Philippines 
and, according to..Prej5 : ident Quezon, "will be given a place of 
honor in my country."* 

Mrs. Quezon purchased bonds in the name of the President, 
herself and their; three children. In an interview with the 

Treasury Department, Mrs. Quezon said: "I agree with my 
husband that we must put everything in bonds. For the time 
being, this is the most effective way of avenging those who 
died on Bataan and of rescuing those who still are prisoners of 
the Japanese. Actions are more important than words, < and buying 
Bonds is an action everyone can take," " j 

In speaking of the friendship existing between the women 
of the Philippines and the women of the United States, Mrs. 
Quezon said: "There is a sacred link binding the women whose 
sons and husbands died together at Bataan and still suffer 
together in Japanese prison camps. I hope this link will con- 
tinue always and I am confident that it will." 

Mrs. Quezon praised the Filipinos in the U.S. , Alaska and 



Hawaii for their purchases of War Bonds. "Filipino communities 
have oversubscribed their alloted quotas in other Bond drives," 
she said. "The recent publication of Japanese atrocities and 
inhuman treatment to Filipinos should spur then to extend their 
former records during the Fourth War Lean drive." 

m 

PR- 49 



"If with the 'I.Iarch of Death 1 the enemy intended to frighten 
and terrorize the American and Filipino peoples, he certainly 
has not succeeded. For even those who went through that ordeal 
emerged triumphant in spirit, while the exhibition of cruelty 
of the enemy has merely served to arouse the anger and hatred of 
our two peoples. 'Avenge Bataan' has become our pledge, and to 
help fulfill this pledge, I am sure that our people in the home 
front - Americans and Filipinos - will spare nothing within their 
means to buy more war bonds and make the Fourth War Loan Drive a 
great success." 

All Philippine Commonwealth officials and employees heartily 
supported the "AVenge Bataan" Bond drive, Gol. Carlos P. Romulo, 
Secretary of Information and Public Relations, said: "Let every 
Filipino and American in the United States, Alaska and Hawaii 
remember that the best way to express indignation against the 
Japanese atrocities is to buy War Bonds today," 

Vice President Osmena and Commonwealth officials affixed 
their signatures to the scroll of the purchasers of "Avenge 
Bataan ; ' Bonds immediately following those of President and Mrs* 
Quezon and -their three children, who were the first purchasers. 
The scroll will be taken back to the Philippines after the war as 
an ensuring monument to the gallant Filipino and American 
defenders of Bataan and Corregidor « 



PR-5C 



1617 Massachusetts Ave. , N.W. 
Washington 6, D,C, 
HObart 1400 

PEPARTL3ENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 M H 0 N W E A L T H OF THE P H I L I P P I N E S 

February 7, 1944 



FOE IMMEDIATE HE LEASE : 

Sergio Osmena, Vice President of the Philippines strongly 
seconded President Manuel L. Quezon's appeal to all Filipinos to 
buy war bonds during the Fourth War Loan Drive. In a statement 
to the Washington Post , during "Avenge Bataan Week.'*' suggested by 
the Post . Vice President Osmena said: 

"If with the 'March of Death' the enemy intended to frighten 
and terrorize the American and Filipino peoples, he certainly 
has not succeeded. For even those who went through that ordeal 
emerged- triumphant in spirit, while the exhibition of cruelty 
of the enemy has merely served to arouse the anger and hatred of 
our two peoples. 'Avenge Bataan' has become our pledge, and to 
help fulfill this pledge, I am sure that our people m tne home 
front - Americans and Filipinos - will spare nothing within their 
means to buy more war bonds and make the Fourth war Loan Drive a 
great success." 

All Philippine Commonwealth officials and employees heartily 
supported the "Avenge Bataan" Bond drive. Col. Carlos P. Romulo, 
Secretary of Information and Public Relations, said: "Let every 
Filipino and American in the United States, Alaska and Hawaii 
remember that the best way to express indignation against the 
Japanese atrocities is to buy War Bonds today." 

Vice President Osmena and Commonwealth officials affixed 
their signatures to the scroll of the purchasers of "Avenge 
Bataan" Bonds immediately following those of President and llrs, 
c/uezon and feheir three children, who were the first purchasers 
The scroll will be taken back to the Philippines after the war as 
an enduring monument to the gallant Filipino and American > 
defenders of Bataan and Corregidor* 

PR-50 



161?. Massachusetts Ave,, N.W* 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 M M 0 N IE A L T H OF THE PHILIPPINES 

February 25, 1944 



FOR R E LEASE SAT URDAY, FEB ._ 26, 4; 00 PM : 



Col. Carlos P. Romulo, Secretary of Information and Public 
Relations in the War Cabinet of the Commonwealth cf the Phil- 
ippines, pointed out that enduring peace must be based on 
'■'friendship, mutual respect and good will,'' in his address at 
the Metropolitan Opera Victory Rally, dedicated to the Phil- 
ippines, broadcast by the National Broadcasting Company from 
the Metropolitan Opera House in New York on February 26. 

Col. Romulo. declared: '"Science, it is true, has developed 
for us the most advanced means of communication known to man. 
But wireless and aviation can only flash and carry the thoughts 
and ideas of the human mind. Both are only the messengers, not 
the messages themselves. For the establishment and maintenance 
of peace, the paramount factor is the idea, and unless the mind 
is free from the barriers set up by bias, prejudice, intolerance, 
cupidity and hatred, communication between individuals and 
nations cannot be free and untramelled, and no matter how highly 
developed or how scientifically perfect, such means of communica- 
tion cannot bring about friendship and good will, the foundation 
stones of an enduring; peace . » 

Col. Romulo added: '"It we want an enduring peace, there must 
be. ;? eal friendliness between the nations, and there can be no 
such friendliness if ^uni cation between them is obstructed by 
barriers no' less repulsive and damaging because they are invis*- 
ible," 

Pointing ont that such barriers are not insurmountable, Col. 

, "DVi 1 1 n T-i Yi 1 tie s have shown to the 

Romulo said-: "America and the Philippines n 



world that two peoples of different races can rise above the 
walls of prejudice , intolerance and hatred, and shoulder to 
shoulder work together to achieve a common goal," 



Full text of Colonel Romulo's address follows: 

"We are fighting today to achieve for tomorrow an enduring 
peace. Peace to be lasting must be based on friendship, mutual 
respect, and good will. There can be real friendship only if it 
is predicated on confidence, just as mutual respeot and good 
will can exist only on a foundation of equality and justice. 

"When we think of the world of tomorrow, therefore, a world 
that will rise out of the debris of the present, it is im- 
portant that we give thought to what, in the light of our ex- 
perience, has contributed to the misunderstandings that have 
plunged us into the chaos of today. Just when our modern world 
was boasting of improved means of communication such as the radio 
and the telephone and that distances have shrunk to practically 
nil because of the submarine and the airplane, when we thought 
that countries and peoples had been brought closer together by 
the latest mechanical inventions that the human mind could de- 
vise, humanity suddenly found itself in the maelstrom of a 
global war that in scope and 'fury and fiendishness is unparallel- 
ed in the history of mankind, 

"Can it be said, then, that the means of communication of 
today have either helped to lead to the present catastrophe or 
have been powerless to prevent it? Neither is correct. For the 
root-cause of the present catac] Vsm is not to be found in mech- 
anical devices, machines, and otu.aT products of human ingenuity. 
It is far more basic and fundamental. Peace was not shattered 
in Europe only when Hitler led his goose-stepping troops and his 
Panzer divisions into Poland, nor was peace destroyed in the 
Pacific by Japan's sneak attack on Pearl Harbor, The causes of 
war are rooted in the human character, and it is there where we 
must trace their origin and inception. 

"Science, it is true, has developed for us the most advanced 
means of communication known to man. But wireless and aviation 
can Only flash and carry the thoughts and ideas of the human 
mind. Both are. only the messengers, not the messages them- 
selves. For "the establishment and maintenance of peace, the 
paramount factor is the idea, and unless the mind is free from 
the barriers set : up by bias, prejudice, intolerance, cupidity and 
hatred, communication between individuals and nations cannot be 
free and untramelled, and nr matter how highly developed or how 
scientifically perfect, such means of communication cannot bring 
about friendship and good will, the foundation stones of an en- 
during peace, 

"When we speak, therefore, of communications and the role 
that they must play in the maintenance of a permanent , world 
peace, a discussion of the various vehicles of communication 
such as the radio, the telephone, and the press is not so im- 
portant as the proper evaluation of the damage wrought by the 
invisible walls in the human mind that no air wave can surmount, 
walls that hamper and prevent a free exchange of idea3 and- thus 
breed the irritants that cause misunderstanding, suspicion, 
ill will, and distrust, 

"There is point to what Emerson once said when he wanted to 
stress the importance of knowledge as the basis of mutuality and 
good will. H hate that man,'-- the great American writer was re- 
ported to have declared, and then added, 'because I don't know 
him.' Knowledge is a key that opens the doors of understanding, 
but it merely opens' them. Information, data, s-ba"bis-bics i acjs 
and fibres, all that together sum up to make knowledge do not 
always give a true and correct picture of a people fa 
WtryT Unf ortunately, there has been too ^^^^/as thl ' • 
and U result has been that nations have ^^^P^^^Lo^oc:,, 
old tin-type photographs stiff , lifeleso remo » 
S^graphy and economics have their place in * di and . 
ajeople, but if there » to be a tetter^* , lt is .hi ( 
lship betweer 
;hat we real: 
rather than 



- 3 - 



import n ?f *? S ? raising nations only by the export~and- 
m< ff, he balance-of -trade yardsticks or- merely bv ethnic 
, m i0 classifications. In other words, we must know 
irJll* a f P! 0 J leS; n n °^ a f generalizations lost in the composite 
Picture of sectional, tribal or statistical aggroupments. 

kTin- v ipLp S n? re ^ Sel: ' jU ? eme ? ta s P r inging from lack of sympathetic 
# ?L°* h l r P eo Ples that give rise to bias and prejudice, 

£n we t-p if anC '' aP ^ Se PU P idit y > Dreed hatred. How often 
hacLIrd 5 X f 01 7 at i on wnich Presents another nation as 
?hl aecordin g to standards acceptable to us do we forge* 

peopled but V evL^n^ dS f^ 6 ' n0t onl ^ unacceptable to fther 
fi l6S n i ? trar ? t0 , th ? ir idea s of culture and civiliza- 

and ant^nniL ?i 10n breeds J^as and prejudice in us, resentment 
cribed S ?nin?pi« the . pe ?g le wh0 ha ™ been so condescendingly des- 
led^e «nd «n?«!^?o 6 ' 1S ^ . Spring of both inadequate kSow- 
on the^oonon?? £S^ U ?*J ity iS Bh «I»ned by an undue stress 
^DiSlt? ?pS"?c P ?i entlal1 ^ of a nation, and hatred is born when 
the exploited" P6 ° P beoomin S the exploiter ani another 

ness ! 'bPtwL^L an J ndurin S ? eace > there must be real friendli- 
if o^!2t?5 nations and there can be no such friendliness 
rGDulsi vp a 111 twe en them is obstructed by barriers no less 
are not L^lnSiv g b ^ ause the y are invisible. Such barriers 
to thf world +w + 16 * A ? erica and ^^e Philippines have shown 
the wall S i? Sol i W ° peop 7 es of Afferent races can rise above 

stouiSJ wnL P f eJU +i ee - > + lntO ^ Tan0e ' and hatred > and shoulder to 
a fr L! f together to achieve a common goal! It is not an 

?esL^? ?L ^ ,' ard . and arduous * ^ demands an unqualified 
n? he dl S nit y of the human soul. It exacts recognition 

fll t t™ aS 6Ve P' r nation ' s legitimate goal. Despite edition 
toSthf i° US J uarters > America was unswerving in this policy that 

Srica ftt pf-r' •° yalty ° f the Fili P in e people." Between 
t£t ^ Philippines was developed true friendship that 

35™ ? f ^ ual . confidence and respect. Such friend- 

of Rat* r, t$ f 1G ?- 7 Arilerican and Filipino blood in the foxholes 
oi aataan. It. is tms example of communication between one 

l 011 ,^ ano.ther that if -followed by the whole world will make 
i or a truly enduring peace, 

PR-52 . 



1617 Massachusetts Avenue, N.V/. 
Washington 6, D, C, 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT 0? INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 M M 0 N .•/ E A L T H OF THE PHILIPPINES 

March 13, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE R5LBASE : 

President Manuel L. Quezon of the Philippines, in his 
first public ceremony since his arrival in Miami Beach last 
December, decorated Col. Carlos P. Ronulo with the Distinguished 
Service Star of the Philippines, on March 8, in recognition of 
the Colonel's work in Bataan, Corregidor and later in America. 

The President, now convalescing in Miami Beach, also 
administered to Col. Romulo his oath of office as Secretary of 
Information and Public Relations. Col. Romulo was appointed to 
the President's War Cabinet last November, but due to the President's 
illness, was unable to take his oath of office before this time, 

The citation accompanying the award by President Quezon 
reads as follows: 

"For distinguished service in a position of 
major responsibility, The Distinguished Service 
Star of the Philippines is by order of His - 
Excellency, The President of the Philippines, 
hereby awarded to Colonel Carlos P. Romulo, 
Infantry, Reserve , Philippine Army. His services 
in- Corregidor and Bataan from December 1941 to 
April I-942 and later in Australia and in the 
United States as Public Relations Officer of 
the Commanding General U3AFFE and as Aide-de- 
Camp to General Douglas Mac Arthur have been of 
inestimable value to the Government of the 
Commonwealth" 

% "Maj.-Gen. Basilio J. Valdes 

Philippine Army Chief of Staff 
Secretary of National Defense" 

* Colonel Romulo has previously been awarded the Silver 

Star for gallantry in action by General MacArthur, and the 

Purple Heart by Lieutenant General Ma4nwright for bravery under 



fire. Two Oak Leaf Clusters have also been awarded to him. 

Col, Romulo is the author of two national best sellers 
in America today. His first book i? I Saw the Fall of the 
Philippines" is in its eighteenth edition, having sold more 
than 200,000 copies. His second book "Mother America;' pub- 
lished last November, is now in its fourth edition. 



PR -53 



"We are all extremely hanpy over the new 
honors conferred upon you by the King of England 
and the Australian Government. You deserve all 
these and more. The faith of the Filipino neople 
that you will return is unshaken. Affectionate 
regards , 

0JJEZ0N" 

I 



PR- 5 4 



1617 Massachusetts Ave. N.W. 
Washington 6, D. C, . 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

March 18, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE; 

MIAMI BEaCH, March 18 — President Manuel L. Quezon in 
a cable to General Douglas MacArthur (today) reiterated the 
faith of the Filipinos in General MaoArthur's return to the 
Philippines and expressed his happiness over the decoration 
of the Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath conferred upon 
the General 4 

Following is full text of President Quezon's cable to 
General MacArthur: 

"I7e are all extremely hanpy over the new 
honors conferred upon you by the King of England 
and the Australian Government . You deserve nil 
these and more. The faith of the Filipino neople 
that you will return is unshaken. Affectionate 
regards , 

QUEZON" 



PR- 5 4 



1617 Massachusetts Ave. N.,W< 
"Yashington 6, D, C. 
HO b art 14C0 

DEPART; ENT OF INFORMATION .JfD PUBLIC RBL.1TICHS 
C 0 II U 0 N $ E A L T H OF THE P H I L I P P I N E S 

•4 

March 20, 1?44 

7 OR Ill.EDIATE RELEASE ; 

Colonel Carlos P 4 Romulo 3 Secretary of Information and 
Public R3lations } Member of the War Cabinet of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines, has boon delegated by President Llanuel L, 
Quezon to be his special representative to visit the Filipino 
communities in California and nearby states. C -lonel Romulc 
Mill be on the Pacific Coast from April 7 to April 2C , during 
which time he will visit as many Filipino communities as he 
can include in his schedule, 

With reference to this trip, Colonel Roinulo made the 
following statement-. 

f, I am being sent by Hie Excellency, the President of the 
Philippines, to visit as many Filipinc communities in the Pacific 
Coast as I can include in my schedule. President Quezon is 
keenly interested in the welfare of the Filipinos in the Unite \ 
States, and desires to have a first-hand report on their present- 
day condition, their needs, desires, and aspirations, 

•'It is ,my aim, therefore to get in touch with as many 
of our f ell ow countrymen as I can reach, talk to them, visit with 
them, and .ge^t their views and reactions, I .y vi .it is not 
sponsored by any particular organization. 

,? I would like to request that no expense be incurred, 
either individually or collectively, by the Filipino coi.imunities 
in arranging for my visit. No one should be barred from 
listening to my message by reason of an admission price. 
The' meetings I am to address must be free for everyone. 

■ ? I am looking forward to the pleasure of meeting my 
fellow countrymen of the Pacific Coast for whose industry and 
patriotism I have always had a sincere admiration." 



PR-55 



1617 Massachusetts 'Ave „ , N 0 W„ 
Washington 6, D c C c 
HObart 14 00 



DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELAT CONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

March 29, 1944 



RELEASE FOR SUNDAY PAPERS , APRIL 2; 



Rotary International ' has delcared April 3 to April 9, 
as Rotary Philippines Week, The 5,200 Rotary Clubs in the 
United States, Hawaii and Alaska are dedicating this week 
to the Filipino people and the Philippines, This is the 
first time that Rotary International has planned such a 
wide-scale ceremony in honor of one nation* Their programs 
during the week will center around the Philippines and their 
speakers will recall the exemplary relationship between 
America and the Philippines and stress the loyalty of the 
Filipino people to America,, 

To open the commemorative ceremonies, the Department 
of Information and Public Relations of the Philippine 
Government arranged a national hookup over the Mutual 
Broadcasting System on April 3, from 4:30 to 5:00 PM, EWT. 
Hon, Paul V. McNutt, Chairman of the War Manpower Commission 
and former High Commissioner to the Philippines; Colonel 
Carlos P 0 Romulo, Member of President Quezon's War Cabinet 
and former Vice-President of Rotary International ;• and Mr. 
Charles Wheeler, President of Rotary International, will 
be the principal speakers „ 

Sergeant Crisanto Bautista, Philippine Scout, veteran 
of Bataan, and Lieutenant Benjamin Ayesa, Filipino command- 
ing officer of an LST, and recently returned from the South- 
west Pacific, will give dramatic interviews of their expe- 
riences at the fighting fronts* 

Father Pacifico A* Ortiz, Chaplain'to President Quezon,' 
will read a spiritual message and prayer . Miss Enya Gonzalez, 
talented and attractive Filipino concert soprano will close 
the program with the singing of the Philippine National Anthem, 

The Department of Information and Public Relations 
has asked the cooperation of leading clergy and heads of 
religious societies in the United States in arranging special 
services and prayers for the American and Filipino soldiers 
who gave their lives in Bataan and elsewhere in the Philippines 

As the Rotary Philippines Week coincides with the 
second anniversary of the fall of Bataan (April 9), many of 
the networks were inspired to produce programs on the 
Philippines,- The Wrigley Show, "American Women" , beard 
weekly over the Columbia Broadcasting System* s coast-to- 
ooast hookup, will dramatize the story'of heroic Laura 
Samonte, taken from Col, Romulo* s book, "I s &? ™® fj 11 ° f 
the Philippines." This CBS program will be broadcast 
April 5, 5:45 to 6:00 PM, CNYT,, 

Background material on the Philippines ^f^f been * 
current information on the Commonwealth Government n 
furnished to columnists and news commentators 1 or . P 
^nilippine mention during this commemoratxve wee*. 



- 2 - 



Leaders of the individual Clubs of Rotary Inter- 
national were furnished material by the Department of 
Information and Public Relations to plan their programs for 
the week. This material included posters, a photograph of 
President Quezon, summary of the history of Philippine - 
American relations, words and music of the Philippine Nation- 
al Anthem, outstanding incidents of the Battle of^Bataan, 
factual stories of American and Filipino heroes of this battle, 
and copies of a dramatic letter written by Tomas Confesor, 
Governor of Panay, showing the intensity ' and strength of 
Filipino resistance in the Islands today, 

i 

Keynoting the Philippine Rotary Week, President 
Quezon issued the following message to all Rotarians: 

"I am grateful to Rotary International and to 
all^the Rotary Clubs in the United States for dedi- 
cating this week, April 3rd to April 9th, to the 
Philippines and to the Filipino people e Rotary 
believes in international friendship and goodwill 
and all its efforts since it was founded by Paul 
Harris in 1905, more than thirty-nine years ago, 
have been directed towards the realization of the 
brotherhood of men, 

"It is fitting that Rotary should turn its 
thoughts to my country and my people during these 
days when the world is in the midst of a terrible 
global war. For the Philippines has been the testing 
ground for the ideals of Rotary and it is in the 
Philippines where their workability has been shown. 
America went to the Philippines with Rotary »s creed 
"Service Above Self" as its animating spirit. Her 
record shows that she lived up to that creed. When 
the great American president, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, 
signed the Tydings-McDuf f ie Act in 1934, it was the 
culmination of a series of steps that America had 
taken in the Philippines that proved to us that her 
purpose was to help the Filipino people become self- 
governing and independent, 

"Because the foundation-stone of American \ 
policy was an unqualified respect for the dignity 
of the human soul, and because America gave us - / 
every opportunity to assert the genius of our race, / 
when' the hour of danger struck for the American 
flag, t£e Filipinos rallied to its defense and 
in the foxholes of Bataan, Rotary' s ideal of the 
brotherhood of men, irrespective of race, was 
sanctified in American and Filipino blood, 

"In behalf of the Filipino people, I greet the 
Rotarians of 'America and thank them for this tribute 
to my people o It comes at a most propitious time 
for it will hearten them in their courageous resist- 
ance of 'more than two years against the Japanese 
invader. It -is truly a people's war, a war waged 
relentlessly, heroically, while waiting for the 
day when America's liberating arms, led by that 
gallant soldier, General Douglas MacArthur, will 
■ land on Philippine shores. May this Philippine 
Rotary Weefc help speed the day of Philippine 
redemption," 

"MANUEL L, QUEZON" 



PR62 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.W. 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT CF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 M M 0 N W E A L T H OF THE PHILIPPINES 



March 29, 1944 



ATTENTION OF RADI O EDITORS ; 



Rotary International is dedicating the week of April 3 
to April 9 to the Philippines. Fifty-two hundred individual 
Rotary olubs are participating in this Philippines Rotary Week, 

Mutual Broadcasting System is carrying opening broad- 
cast on Monday, April 3, from 4:30 to 5:00 FM, EWT» . with 
Hon. Paul McNutt, Chairman of the War Manpower Commissions 
Colonel Carlos P. Romulo, Member- of President Quezon's War 
Cabinet; and Mr. Charles Wheeler, President of Rotary Inter- 
national as principal speakers. 

Columbia Broadcasting System will dramatize the story 
of heroic Laura Samonte, taken from Colonel Carlos P. Romulo' s 
book, "I Saw the Fall of the Philippines, » This will be broad- 
cast' over a coast-to-coast hookup on the Wm. Wrigley Jr. 
show, "American Women," April 5, 5:45 to 6:00 PM, CNYT. 

PR-63 



tary operations conducted by the United States in the 
Carribean. ... Dewey's great victory in Manila Bay had created 
an international situation from which the United States 
could not escape. Moreover, it brought the Filipino people 
within the domains of American solicitude and responsibility. " 

Vice President Osmena then told his audience of the 
first Philippine Commission, headed by Dr. Jacob Gould 
Schurman, President of Cornell University, and sent to the 
Philippines by President McKinley, "to help the United States 
Army in the task of acquainting the people with America's 
altruistic purposes." 

But the Filipinos were disillusioned when America stayed 
on in the Philippines after they had fought to overthrow 
Spanish domination and hostilities broke out between American 
and Filipino forces. 

"Filipino resistance, in the face of America's superior 
arms and of her liberal pronouncements, could not last long," 
continued the Vice President. "Foreseeing the termination 



1617 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W. 
Washington 6, D, C, 
HO 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

4 

April 1, 1944 



FOR RELEASE AFTER 1:00 P.M. , MONDAY , APRIL 3 : 

Beginning with the arrival of Commodore Dewey in Manila 
Bay, Sergio Osmena, Vice President of the Philippines related 
the history of America in the Philippines and paid tribute to 
the American pioneers who helped build up the Islands, in 
his speech before the Naval Academy Women* 9 Club at their 
luncheon meeting in Annapolis today (Monday). 

"Important as was the Battle of Manila Bay," said Vice 
President Osmena, "it was only an incident of the big mili- 
tary operations conducted by the United States in the 
Carribean. • Dewey ? s great victory in Manila Bay had created 
an international situation from which the United States 
could not escape* Moreover, it brought the Filipino people 
within the domains of American solicitude and responsibility." 

Vice President Osmena then told his audience of the 
first Philippine Commission, headed by Dr. Jacob Gould 
Schurman , President of Cornell University, and sent to the 
Philippines by President McKinley, "to help the United States 
Army in the task of acquainting the people with America's 
altruistic purposes." 

But the Filipinos were disillusioned when America stayed 
on in the Philippines after they had fought to overthrow 
Spanish domination and hostilities broke out between American 
and Filipino forces. 

"Filipino resistance, in the face of America's superior 
arms and of her liberal pronouncements, could not last long," 
continued the Vice President, "Foreseeing the termination 



of hostilities, President McKinley sent to the Philippines 
a second Commission headed by an outstanding jurist, William 
H„ Taft." 

"It is to the credit of the United States that for the 
purpose of the pioneering work in the Islands, men of the 
highest qualifications were chosen," said the Vice President. 
"Mr. Taft and his colleagues of the Commission ably tackled 
the difficult initial problems of government. Through their 
patience and tact, limitless energy and enthusiasm, consid- 
eration and sympathetic understanding, they won for the 
United States the good will of the Filipino people." 

The Vice President then told of the progress made in 
the Philippines, in educational, economic, and political 
advancement . 

In closing, Vice President Osmena paid tribute to the 
soldiers, who established themselves in the islands as inde- 
pendent businessmen, farmers and manufacturers after military 

4 * * * 

service; and the missionaries, doctors, nurses, educators, 
engineers, lawyers, and all those who helped build up the 
Philippines. 

He said: "We owe much not only to the pioneers of 
America in the Philippines but also to the multitude of 
men and women of good will and stout hearts who have since 
gone to remote islands in the Pacific to join in the task of 
nation-building, keeping in mind the welfare of our people 
and maintaining always the good name of America. Many of 
these have returned to the United States and are living here. 
Others, like Dewey, Schurman and Taft have passed away. But 
to all of them -- living and dead, and, indeed, to those now 
suffering in enemy prison and concentration camps and to 
those" still fighting in the mountains of the Philippines, I 
wish to render a tribute of affection, admiration and 
gratitude in behalf of my people." 

PR 6k 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.W, 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPART! iffiSnr OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COM M 0 N W E A L T H OF THE PHILIPPINES 

April 3, 1944 



FOR RELEASE AFTER 5:00 PM TODAY (MOWDAv) . 

In conjunction with a nation-wide Rotary-Philippine Week 

(April 3-9), during which thousands of Rotarians will participat 

in commemorative ceremonies in honor of the Philippines and the 

Filipino people, the Mutual Broadcasting System presented a half 

hour program today (Monday), 4:30 to 5:00 PM, EWT. Hon, Paul V„ 

McNutt, Chairman of the War Manpower Commission; Colonel Carlos . 

Romulo, Member qf President Manuel L. Quezon's War Cabinet; and 

Mr. Charles L. Wkeeler, President of Rotary International were 

the principal speakers, 

Mr. McNutt, former High Commissioner to the Philippines, 
paid tribute to President Quezon "who has fought long and hard 
for Philippine independence, which will be established as soon 
as the enemy is driven out." 

In recalling that April 9th will mark the second 
anniversary of the fall of Bataan, Mr. McNutt declared: "Bataan 
will stand forever as a monument to all liberty-loving peoples 
of this world, a monument to the loyalty and faith in America 
of the Filipino people*, America is pledged to liberate the 
Philippines, »; he continued. "It is the duty of every American 
to help redeem that pledge." 

Colonel Romulo, broadcasting from the Mutual studios in 
Chicago, read President Quezon's message to all Rotarians, in 
which the President praised the Rotary high objectives of 
"international friendship and good will," 

"<It is fitting," the President's message said, "that 
Rotary should turn its thoughts to my country and people during 
these days when the world is in the midst of a terrible global 
war, For the Philippines has been the testing ground for the 
ideals of Rotary and it is in the Philippines where their work- 
ability has been shown." 

Colonel Romulo called attention to the fact that two 
years ago the "fate of .civilization in the Pacific hung Pre- 
cariously in the balance. A small nation came forward ana at 
the sacrifice of the flower of its youth, stemmed the onrushmg 
tide of Japanese invasion and thus helped to save the Pacilic 
from being engulfed by the concentrated might of a militant 
tyranny.*-' 

"The freedom of the Philippines is not a 1°^ °^se " 
Col, Romulo added. "It has become a symbol and a pledge that 
the strong shall help and not oppress the weak. 



• • c ^ rles L " Wheeler opened the program in San 
Francisco. "Because one of the principal objects of Rotary 
international is the advancement of international understanding, 
good wiir and peace," Mr. Wheeler said, "this week of dedication 
to the Philippines and the Filipino people has a particular sig- 

n i f i? an T c T e .!°/SJ a f lans ' 0ne has only to review the relations 
of the United States and the Philippines in the last forty years 
;? 2 r 2 e f t0 f i^ d abundant proof that the principle expressed in 
that Rotary object can be applied successfully — between 
peoples of different races." 

Two heroes of the Southwest Pacific were interviewed, 
oergeant Crisanto Bautista, Philippine Scout and veteran of ' 
Bataan, told a dramatic story of how his leg was torn off by a 
bomb, and of how the courageous Philippine Scouts attacked 
waves of Japanese on their first landing in the Lingayen Gulf, 

^ + v, £ h( r. s f oond interview was with a young Filipino lieutenant 
01 the United States Coast Guard, whose name was not revealed 
for security reasons. As Commanding Officer of an LST, Lt, 
Juan de la Cruz, as he was called on the program, related how 
the Japanese had tried to prevent precious American cargoes fron 
reaching Gloucester, Finschafen and other Southwest Pacific 
battlefields. 

Recalling President Quezon* s encouraging words that the 
day of redemption for the Philippines is not far off, Lt. Juan 
de la Cruz declared: "I want to be one of the first, with my 
load of tanks, when we approach Philippine shores." 

Father Pacifico A. Ortiz, Chaplain to President- Quezon, 
who ©scaped with the President's party from Corregidor, "offered 
a prayer in "memory of our brothers and comrades v/ho died in 
Bataan for the freedom of our country." 

' "We pray not that Thou disarm our enemies," said Father 
Ortiz, "but that^Phou give us--the courage and the means to 
overcome tncm a " m 



The program closed wit>h Miss Enya Gonzalez, Filipino 
concert soprano, singing the Philippine National Anthem, 
accompanied by Dr. Rodolfo Corne jo, Filipino composer and pianist 

The program was the first of a series of commemorative 
ceremonies inspired by Rotary International's dedication of the 
week of April 3 'to -9, in tribute to the Philippines and the 
Filipino people, ' 

M 



PR-65 



1617 Massachusetts Ave, N.W, 
Washington 6, D 0 C a 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC ^LaTIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

April 6, 1944 



FOR RELEASE FOR SUNDAY PAPERS, APRIL 9: 

MIAMI BEACH BEACH, April 9 — President Manuel L. 
Quezon of the Philippines in a statement issued today on the 
second anniversary of the fall of Bataan, emphasized the Filipino 
people's unwavering faith and loyalty to America, He said: 
"Two years ago today, our American and Filipino troops in Bataan 
surrendered to the Japanese. But the Filipino people have not 
accepted defeat. Their loyalty to America is as strong pnd 
unwavering in defeat as it was before the war, and their adher- 
ence to the ideals of freedom and democracy is firm and 
unshakeable 0 " 

Following is full text of President Quezon's statement: 

•"Two years ago today, our American and Filipino troops 
in Bataan surrendered to the Japanese* But the Filipino people 
have not accepted defeat. Their loyalty to America is as strong 
and unwavering in defeat as itf was before the war, and their 
adherence t'o. the ideals of freedom and democracy is firm and 
unshakeable 0 J- 

"When Bataan fell, it was the time when the cause of the 
United Nations was at its lowest ebb. The Japanese had conquered 
Burma, British Malaya and the Dutch East Indies, They were 
threatening to invade Australia, But, as General Marshall, Chief, 
of Staff of the U. 3. Army, very well said in his report: 

"'The effects of the desperate resistance 
offered by the Philippine Army and United States 
forces on Bataan, holding as they did a sizeable 
portion of Japanese strength, were no 1 // being felt. 
During the delay thus gained men and materials were 
dispatched to Australia, New Caledonia and other 
Pacific Islands. 1 

"That is the meaning of Bataan and its place in the pre sen- 
global war, 

"Recent events show the tide has turned in the Pacific 
and that the Japanese aggressor is being driven back by America s 
fighting forces led by General I.lacArthur and Admiral Himitz, 

if Todav, on the second anniversary of Bataan' s fall, let 
us pray to Almighty God to continue blessing our arms so that 
complete victory may soon. bo achieved and the death of the neroes 
of Bataan may be av sn^d." 

PR-66 



1617 Massachusetts Ave* N.vV. 
Washington 6, D 0 C a 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC SStuiTIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OP THE PHILIPPINES 

April 6, 1944 



FOR RELEASE FOR SUNDAY PAPERS, APRIL 9: 

MIAMI BEACH BEACH, April 9 — President Manuel L 0 
Quezon of the Philippines in a statement issued today on the 
second anniversary of the fall of Bataan, emphasized the Filipino 
people's unwavering faith and loyalty to America, He said: 
"Two years ago today, our American and Filipino troops in Bataan 
surrendered to the Japanese, But the Filipino people have not 
accepted defeat. Their loyalty to America is as strong and 
unwavering in defeat as it was before the war, and their adher- 
ence to the ideals of freedom and democracy is firm and 
unshakeable 0 " 

Following is full text of President Quezon's statement: 

"Two years ago today, our American and Filipino troops 
in Bataan surrendered to the Japanese 0 But the Filipino people 
have not accepted defeat. Their loyalty to America is as strong 
and unwavering in defeat as it was before the war, and their 
adherence to the ideals of freedom and democracy is firm and 
unshakeable, 

"When Bataan fell, it was the time when the cause of the 
United Nations was at its lowest ebb. The Japanese had conquered 
Burma, British Malaya and the Dutch East Indies, They were 
threatening to invade Australia, But, as General Marshall, Chief 
of Staff of the U, 3, Army, very well said in his report: 

"'The effects of the desperate resistance 
offered by the Philippine Army and United States 
forces on Bataan, holding as they did a sizeable 
portion of Japanese strength, were 'now being felt 0 
During the delay thus gained men and materials were 
dispatched to Australia, New Caledonia and other 
Pacific Islands,,' 

"That is the moaning of Bataan and its place in the present 
global war, 

"Recent events show the tide has turned in the' Pacific 
and that the Japanese aggressor is being driven back by America s 
fighting forces led by General Mac Arthur and Admiral Nimitz e 

"Today, on the second anniversary of Bataan' s fall, let 
us pray to Almighty God to continue blessing 0 J r 0 ?f m ^ s ? h * h S* ops 
complete victory may soon be achieved and the death of the heroes 
of Bataan may be avenged." 

PR -66 



s 



1617 Massachusetts Avenue, N»W. 
Washington 6, D. C. 
HObart 1400 

. DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

May 17, 1944 



FOR RELEASE FR 3D AY, MAY. 19 « 7:00 PM : 



In closing the final plenary session of the 35th Rotary 
International Conference in Chicago, today (Friday), Colonel 
Carlos P. Romulo, Cabinet Member of the Philippine Common* 
wealth, and former Vice President of Rotary International, 
urged Rotary to ! 'focus its spotlight on the Orient where it 
has an unlimited field of expansion and service." 

Speaking for the "voice of the unconquerable s, " Colonel 
Romulo declared: i} They who know Rotary and believe in its 
creed want to ask us today to peer into the future and work 
and plan- so that after victory has been achieved a regime 
of peace, based upon tolerance and cooperation, may prevail. 

"The relative weakness of Rotary in the Far East up to 
the present," continued Colonel Romulo, "is readily under- 
standable. Rotary has required for its growth a certain 
degree of economic well being, the existence of leisure in 
which to develop culture and good fellowship. Life in the 
East has not been easy, and relatively few people there have 
been able to take time from the hard struggle for existence 
to listen to Rotary' s message." 

Colonel Romulo stressed the need of Rotary particularly 
in the Far East because, "First, the Far East is inarticulate 
and even before the war it was seldom that its voice could 
be heard here. And whenever it was heard it was either too 
faint to make an impression or too muffled to be listened to. 
Second, because the unconquerable s of Europe are so close to 
you by virtue of racial and other affinities that they need 
no spokesman to plead their case in court. Finally, because 
we in the East -are thirsty for understanding and tolerance 
and friendship, and after this war we want Rotary to help 
quench our thirst with the waters of Western good v/ill and 
amity and cooperation." 

Full text of Colonel Romulo' s address follows: 

"The sun has set for one-half of the peoples of the 
world. Groping in the darkness of totalitarianism, they 
are now wrapped in silence. But it is a silence portentous 
of a gathering storm. Mocked and traduced, denied and 
violated, they are confident that their instincts for truth 
and for justice will triumph in the end after this long 
night of cruelty and terror. At this, the 35th Rotary 
International Conference, I have been asked- to speak for 
them to be the voice of the unconquerables, they who re- 
present the undaunted spirit of freedom everywhere. 

"Here, indeed, is a fit place for them to be heard. 
For the core of Rotary International's objectives is the 
advancement of international understanding, good will, ana 
peace through a world fellowship of business and professional 

men united in the ideal of service.' ^ 1 V^o^thoso who 
ideal who will listen most readily to the cry of those wno 



-2- 

are-now living under the invader's heel. Besides, Rotary, 
too, is a victim of Axis aggression. The German and Japan- 
ese juggernauts have tried to crush it in their march of 
wanton destruction and' ruthless conquest. 

"What is it that these millions of oppressed. want to 
tell Rotary today? Actions speak louder than words, and 
they do not have to say how passionately they believe in 
freedom when they are risking their all- for it. For those 
who are fighting tyranny and oppression, there is suffering 
'every day in the hour, for in a minute there are many days.' 
Unceasingly, relentlessly, these unc on que rabies are resisting 
the invader, and only those who have come to grips with the 
enemy know the unspeakable atrocities committed on those who 
dare to oppose him. 

"But those of them who know Rotary and believe in its 
creed of international understanding, good will and peace, 
want to ask us today to think not so much of what they are 
suffering at present, for they know th^t is ephemeral, but 
to think of tomorrow. They want us to peer into the future 
and work and plan so that after victory has been achieved 
a regime of peace based upon tolerance and cooperation may 
prevail. They know that Rotary can help mightily in build- 
ing the better world which alone can repay them for their 
suffering and bloodshed. 

"Fortunately, Rotary is not bound by any doctrinaire 
social, religious, or political belief. However, it is 
necessary to point out, in order to understand better the 
role that Rotary has to play in world affairs, that the 
growth of Rotary has everywhere and always been attended 
by conditions of freedom and peace. In other words, Rotary 
has flourished in those countries where these conditions 
have been present. Therefore, when Rotary seeks to advance 
the cause of international peace and understanding, it does 
so not only for the sake of humanity in general, but for its 
own sake, seeing that Rotary itself will prosper only under 
those conditions which it is pledged to foster and promote. 

"If now we should turn our eyes to the Far East, we 
are confronted by a most interesting fact. ' That is, before 
the attack on Pearl Harbor, in spite of the troubled condi- 
tions in the Far East which was torn by a war no less terrible 
than that in Europe - the Sino- Japanese war - Rotary had 
successfully survived the fires of the struggle. In China 
and Japan, in the Philippines and Thailand, in Java and the 
Straits Settlements, in New Zealand and Australia, Rotary 
continued to exist and flourish. It is no exaggeration to 
say, therefore, that our organization at that time served 
to link countries together that were otherwise separated 
by enormous bodies of water or by the animosities of war. 

"I come from that section of the globe, and this, then, 
is the problem to which I want to call the attention of this 
conference, in behalf of the millions of Orientals who will 
have to play a vital role in the post-war world of tomorrow - 
the problem of extending the influence of Rotary in that 
part of the world after the defeat of Japan. A glance at 
the figures showing the distribution of Rotary Clubs through- 
out the world before America's entry into the second world 
war shows that the growth of Rotary reached a high P°-L n * of 
development in America and Europe where, with a combined- 
population of 390,000,000, there were in existence 
Rotary clubs, with a total membership of 186, 540. on tne 
other hand, in the Far East, with a combined PeP u l a ^ 0 £ ?* mta . 
970,000,000 there wore only 207 clubs with a total of 8 WmemGn,.. 
In short, in order that Rotary may have the same proportion- 
ate numerical strength in the Far East that it has in 
America and in Europe, at least 10,315 nc ^ oxuu 



v. 



Hp"- W / ' 



-3- 

membership of 454,024 Rotarians should bo organized. This 
conclusion is inescapable, once we admit that the strength 
of the Rotary movement in America and Europe where there 
is one Rotarian for every 2,090 people, has approached the 
ideal strength that Rotary should have throughout the world. 
On the principle that a chain is no stronger than its weakest 
link, and that a wheel is no stronger than its weakest spoke, 
one of the most important problems that Rotary must face 
after this war is -the problem of equalizing, so far as it is 
possible to do so, the force and influence of Rotary through- 
out the -world. 

n The relative weakness of Rotary in the Far East up to 
the -present is readily understandable. Up to the present 
day, Rotary has required for its growth a certain degree of 
economic well being, the existence of leisure in which to 
develop culture and good fellowship. Life in the East has 
not been easy, and relatively few people there have been 
able to take time from the hard struggle for existence to 
listen to Rotary *s message. However, Rotary must go forward.! 
It should be more than a mere outgrowth of existing condi- 
tions. If Rotary is to be true to its ideal of service, 
it must seek to serve those who need it, rather than to be 
served by those who can afford it. It must be an active 
participant in the promotion of progress everywhere. It 
must be heard all over the world - "and it must speak in 
stentorian tones in those regions and areas where it was only 
a thin, small voice in the wilderness. 

"The countries in the Far East will need, after the war, 
more than anywhere else and more than at any time before, 
the vitalizing force and influence of Rotary. Rotary must 
focus its spotlight on the Orient where it has an unlimited 
field of expansion and service, a field where its- high ideals, 
have so far not been heard adequately and applied, a field 
so rich in possibilities that nobody who has the interests' 
of Rotary at heart can afford to ignore the tremendous 
opportunities which it offers. 

,? In an. even more important sense, Rotary should fix its 
attention on the Far East because it is the stage whereon 
the next great drama of our time will bo enacted. After the 
achievement of victory, the Far East will be the theater of 
great happenings. If Rotary is to Do true to its name, it 
must seek every means by which its participation in those 
tremendous happenings may be insured. A Here 207 clubs and 
3,479 Rotarians in a part of the world where nearly a billion 
people live is concrete- proof that the opportunity for Rotary 
extension exists in a measure unknown anywhere else in the 
world. The spotlight of contemporary history has been 
focusscd upon the Far East. May the spotlight of Rotary 
idealism, and achievement be focussod in the same direction 
with equal clarity and force. 

"But if I speak for the unconquerables all over the 
world, why should I limit myself to the problems of the Far 
East? First, because the Far East is inarticulate, and even 
before the war it was seldom that its voice could be heard 
here, and whenever it was heard it was either too faint to 
make an impression or too muffled to be listened to. Second, 
because the unconquerables of Europe are so close to you by 
virtue of racial and other affinities that they need no 
spokesman to plead their case in court. Finally, because we 
in the East are thirsty for understanding and tolerance and 
friendship, and after this war wo want Rotary to help quenoh 
our thirst with the waters of Western good will and amity and 
cooperation. 



-4- 

"The unconquerable s of Europe and Asia belong to one 
world and to-one humanity. Whether it too m ^% 
or in Greece; in Czechoslovakia or in China, in Yugoola%ia 
or in Poland, the pattern cf totalitarian oppression and 
bestiality is the same. We are enduring the night mare of 
a hated invasion. The humiliation is painful* The whole 
structure of our lives has gone to smash. But sutiering 
distills courage and we have taken it on the chin, in ou± 
hearts and souls we have taken the bitter realities 01 
conquest in our stride. We have seen the face of the 
conqueror and we are not afraid. In our heart of hearts 
we know that he and his breed will not endure. The true 
and enlightened forces of the world will crush him in 
the 'end. 

•"And as for me, I am only living for the day when 
our triumphant army will march down the avenues of Manila 
in the day of our deliverance. How soul-stirring it win 
be to see the Stars and Stripes and the Philippine Sun 
and Stars again wave gloriously in the Philippine br cez.. 
How good it will feel to be able to clasp the hands of my 
fellow countrymen again and say, 'The dark night if over; 
the New Day begins. There is work to be done; let s go 
to it.' And we will.''. 

PR-70 



j.vxj.uvv ±o vu 'csudue xh&q a. new ureaiu worxu 01 zn.e ruture.' 

"The common attack of those who refuse to be enlightened 
by the example of Filipino-American relationship is to say 
that the approach is one-sided and that there is a strong 
tendency to skip the dull facts and draw an exciting blue- 
print of a Utopia. Too much idealism, they say, and they 
decry what they believe is -indifference to realities. 
There is always an attempt. ?to belittle the advocacy of free- 
dom and liberalism by a resort to the use of such statements 
as 'the idea of political independence has such brilliance 
that all other problems grow pale in its presence,' and that 
to dwell on it is to live in a 'rarefied moral atmosphere.' 

"Tljefcime has come whefe the legitimate aspirations of 
subject ''peoples must be uetlsquarely without innuendoes and 
indirections. It is not on$-sided to predicate beliefs on 
fundamental principles. We%Lre engaged in a global war and 
we are sacrificing the lives!' of the flower of our youth 
because we believe in freedbf. Freedom is indivisible, 
.hen we say we are fighting for fjgeedom, we mean freedom 
••for all. This is basic-., and paramount for all peoples of all 
races. While conditions may, ; varyMn different countries, 
the one invariable is t&at f%edon^must not only bo the _ 
ultimate goal for every nation but- that every step taken in 
the relationship between the overior and the governed wist 
lead to its achievement. 

"The time is Dast for the belief that the desire of 
nations to be free is more emotional phraseology, ije 
desire for freedom may bo basically emotional . ™t lex *s 

not ignore the fact that it is dl-so ^^ una ^l^ n ^°aione 
economics. Let me say now that Political freedom alone 

does not - and cannot - guarantee economic f C J ^Lnomic 
wellbeing for any nation or people. Tno ioau 



1617 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W. 
Washington 6, D. C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT CF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 M Iff 0 N V/ E A L T H . OF THE PHILIPPINES 

May 19, 1944 



FOR RELEASE SU NDAY, May 21, 1 1:30 PM : 



The National Broadcasting Company dedicated its program, 
"The Pacific Story' to the Philippines and the Filipino people 
on Sunday, May 21, 11:30 to 12:00 PM, EWT, This program, 
broadcast over a coast to coast hook-up, pays tribute to the 
heroic resistance of the Filipino people and to their con- 
tinuing efforts to defeat the enemy. It tells how the Common- 
wealth was established and its significance both to the people 
of the Philippines and to other peoples of the Far East. 

Colonel Carlos P. Romulo, Secretary of Information and 
Public Relations in the Philippine Government, participating 
in this nationwide broadcast, delivered the following address 

"Let those who scoff at idealism as the basis of the 
relationship between nations listen to the story of America 
in the Philippines and see if they can continue in their 
mistaken belief that the legitimate aspirations of subject 
peoples can be dismissed as mere emotional phraseology 
or that to hold it up as the pattern for the world to 
follow is to 'escape into a new dream world cf the future.' 

"The common attack of those who reiuse to be enlightened 
by the example of Filipino-American relationship is to say 
that the approach is one-sided and that there is a strong 
tendency to" skip the dull facts and draw an exciting blue- 
print of a uto'-oia. Too mubh idealism, they say, and they 
decry what they believe is -Indifference to realities. 
There is always an attempt,?to belittle the advocacy of free- 
dom and liberalism by a resort to the use of such statements 
as 'the idea of political independence has such brilliance 
that all other problems grow pale in its presence,' and that 
to dwell on it is to live in a 'rarefied moral atmosphere.' 

"Theftime has come wheti the legitimate aspirations of 
subject "ueoples must be metvsquarely without innuendoes and 
indirections. It is not onf- sided to predicate beliefs on 
fundamental principles. We lire engaged m a global war ana 
we are sacrificing the live&of the flower of our youth 
because we believe in freedofr. Freedom is indivisible, 
en we say we are fighting for freedom, we me ^ freedom 
or all. This is basic* and .par; it for all peoples of all 
races. Vlhile conditions may...,.;/ Vn <;irr,r,^_ oountr 1, , , 
the one invariable is that f r-eedoifmust not only be tne 
ultimate goal for every nation but that every taken in 

the relationship between the %over$or and the governed 
lead to its achievement', 

"The time is past for the belief ™? B £ll£**^* 
nations to be free is mere emotional ^^coiogy^ ^ 
desire for freedom may be basically sound 
not ignore the fact that " ^^ai fte elm alone 
economics. Let mo say now that political ^ Gcurity and 
docs not - and cannot - guarantee economic socu * 
wellbeing for any nation or people. Thv, ioaa 



-2 



security and wellboing is a long and arduous one for every 
nation under the sun. But no nation or people can set out 
on that road without political freedom. * 'for without politi- 
cal freedom, a people cannot attempt to build an economy 
most advantageous to itself, but must ever be subservient 
to the. economic welfare of the sovereign nation. 

"To draw the attention of the world today to America's 
record in the Philippines is to give to the world of the 
future not a dream but the example of an accomplished fact 
and to mankind a blueprint not of a Utopia, but of a master- 
piece in human relationship which is essentially human. Its 
leit-motif is unquestionably idealistic, but its success is 
due to America's realistic approach to the Philippine problem. 
America went to the Philippines compelled by the exigencies 
of the Spanish-American war. It was an entirely new venture 
for her. As a novice in colonization, she could have followed 
a pattern that was current at the time in the Far East. But 
American idealism won and she decided to blaze a new trail 
by following a policy of her own - 'The Philippines for the 
Filipinos, ' 

"For a white sovereign nation in the Far East to 
epitomize its policy in such words was the height of what 
was then sneered at as impractical idealism. But the Amer* 
ican people, who have an inherent contempt for imperialism, 
were unwavering in their determination to carry it out, and 
in pursuing it unswervingly, they won the friendship, grati- 
tude and loyalty of the Filipino people. America- at the 
turn of the century, found herself in the Philippines at 
the crossroads of idealism and exploitation. She chose tc 
respect the dignity of the .human soul, and in showing that 
respect, she selected the realistic approach. For in the 
foxholes of Bataan, the Filipinos showed the dividends 
earned by American idealism. What greater victory, what 
greater profit can a nation covet than America's preeminent 
place in the grateful hearts of seventeen million Filipinos? 

"The roots of unsatisfactory conditions in colonial 
areas lie not so much in the unsatisfied yearning for self- 
determination of subject peoples, as in their conviction 
that the fulfillment of promises of freedom made to them is 
dependent more on the economic interests of the sovereign 
nation than on their own welfare. America, conscious of this 
because she herself had had to overthrow a foreign yoke to be 
able to assert her genius as a nation, recognized freedom as 
an essential to Filipino progress, and therefore not only 
promised freedom but afforded the Filipinos all the instru- 
ments necessary for the attainment of their national .goal. 
Real freedom never can be a gift but is the result of an 
organic growth. America did not hand freedom to the Fili- 
pino people on a silver platter. But America helped the 
Filipinos to grow to deserve freedom. Independence is never 
given; it is earned. 

"If the world can only catch the spirit behind America's 
work in the Philippines and realize that freedom is not an 
abstract doctrine but a concrete objective, so concrete and 
so definite that all freedom-loving nations today have thrown 
all their resources in manpower and material to defeat its 
enemies, we would be laying the foundations of permanent peace. 
America has shown the way." 



PR- 71 



1617 Massachusetts Avenue, N, '.••/. 
Washington 6, D. C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 M M 0 N V/ E A L TH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

May 26, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE : 



A Bill to authorize the naturalization of Filipinos, was 
introduced in the House of Re pre sent at ives, May 18, by Hon. Dan 
R. McGehee (D) of Headville, Miss. The Bill (H.R. 4#26) was 
referred to the Committee of Immigration and Naturalization. 

Full text of H.R. 4#26 follows: 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Rep- 
resentatives of the United States of America 
in Congress- assembled , that the Nationality 
• Act of 1940, as amended, is ai'.iended to read 
as follows : 

Sec. 303. The right to become a naturalized 
citizen under the provisions of this Act shall 
e extend only to white persons, persons of 
African nativity or descent, descendants of 
races indigenous to the Western Hemisphere, 
Chinese persons or persons of Chinese descent, 
and Filipino persons or persons of Filipino 
descent . 

Sec. 2 Section 324 (a) of such Act, as amended, 
is amended by striking out after the word "person 1 ' 
the words '''including a native-born Filipino." 



PR-73 



Distinguished Service 
in action. 



Star by President Quezon for bravery 

PR-74 



1617 Massaciiusetts Avenue, N.W. 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1406 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

May 27, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE ; 

Colonel Manuel Nieto was todajr appointed Secretary to 
the War Cabinet of the Commonwealth of the Philippines and a 
member thereof by Manuel L, Quezon, Philippine President, 
Colonel Nieto, who has the undivided confidence of the 
President, will be the liaison between the Chief Executive 
and the Cabinet during the President's absence from Washington* 

Colonel Nieto is the Senior aide de camp to President 
Quezon and has been so since the President's inauguration in 
1935, He is a former member of the House of Representatives 
in the Philippines, to which post he was elected by one of 
the districts of Isabela. Before the inauguration of the 
Commonwealth, Colonel Nieto was Secretary to the President 
of the Senate in the Philippines for several years. He has 
travelled extensively with President Quezon in the Orient, 
the United States, South America and Europe. Before the 
outbreak of the war he was the Manager of the National 
Tobacco Corporation, a government subsidiary. After the 
attack on Pearl Harbor, he was recalled to active duty. 

A veteran of Bataan and Corregidor, Colonel Nieto was 
awarded the Silver Star by General KacArthur and the 
Distinguished Service Star by' President Quezon for bravery 
in action. 

PR-74 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.W. 
Washington 6, D. C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF D5FOR1 iATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE P H I L I E PINES 

Tuly 28, 1944 



FOB IMMEDIATE RELEASE: 



SARANAC LAKE , N.Y. , July 28- -With plans rapidl r 
moving ahead for the early rehabilitation and reconstruction 
of the Philippines, President Manuel L. Quezon is organizing 
his staff for this tremendous task. Today he appoii ted 
Colonel Alejandro Me Ichor as Under-Secretary of National 
Defense. Major-General Basilio J. Valdes, Chief of Staff 
of the Philippine Army, is Secretary. 

President Quezon also recalled to active duty Ssbastian 
Ugarte , legal advisor to Resident Commissioner Eliza Lde, with 
the rank of Major in the Philippine Army. 

Colonel Melchor, former head of the Department of 
Engineering at the Philippine Military Academy, was sent 
to the United States in I94O for graduate studies at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Following this he 
spent months at ,/est Point and Annapolis as an official 
observer. A regular officer of the Philippine Army, Col. 
Melchor has been rendering service to the U. 3. 'Army on 
the 'staff of the Engineer Board at Fort Belvoir. His work 
has been described as ''an invaluable contribution to the 
advancement of science and the defeat of a common foe.'' It 
was at the recommendation of President Quezon that Secretary 
of Jar Stimson ordered Colonel Melchor to Fort Belvoir. 

Major Ugarte has been appointed Executive Officer in 
the Department of National Defense. He came tc the United 
States in 1939 to serve as legal advisor to the Resident 
Commissioner. He enlisted in the Philippine Army shortly 
after war broke out, and attended the School of Infantry 
at Fort Benning, Georgia. On graduation he returned to 
serve the Philippine Government. Called to active duty 
as of August 1, Major Ugarte will continue serving the 
.Resident Commissioner in a legal capacity as well as 
\assuming his duties in the Department of National Defense. 

PR-95 



l'6l7 Massachusetts Ave., N.W. 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

May 29, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: 



Manuel L. Quezon, President of the Philippines, issued the 

following statement for Memorial Day (May 30), f rom Asheville , N.G 

"On Memorial Day we think of those who died for us. From 
Mac tan to Bataan there are legions of them. They gave their last 
full measure of devotion that as a nation we may live a life of 
our own choosing. They laid down their lives unquestioningly for 
freedom. Their memory is enshrined in our hearts. 

"On this Memorial Day, however, I do not think only of the 
soldiers who fell on the battlefields in the Philippines. My 
reverential thoughts are turned today also to the anonymous heroes 
who have resisted the invader and because of their courage and 
patriotism have aroused his ire and gained his unrelenting en- 
mity. Many of them lie in nameless graves. These patriots belong 
to the army of the people. They deserve our everlasting admira- 
tion and gratitude. To them I say: a grateful people will re- 
member you forever. When the day of liberation comes we will 
not forget. 

"To 'our u^counfed soldiers who fell on the field of glory 
we give our pxifcge that we will not rest until the invader has 
been driven from our shores-. That day is fast approaching. In 
the day of our deliverance it will be they who sacrificed then- 
selves without counting the cost that are entitled to our nation* s 
grateful remembrance. The memory of these honored dead v/ill be 
the guide and. the inspiration for the living. Let us be worthy 
of them." 

i 

PR-75 



7 ■ 



?W--xixx->xlios. xx it iwfum, it wouxa mean a sej-oaoiw xa our 
slow uarch to independence . Those who made the rnixx. _-me 



I0I7 Massachusetts Ave,, N.'.;. 
,/ashington 6, d. C. 
Hob art 1A00 • 

DEPARTMENT OF INPC DICTION AND PUBLIC RELaTIINS 
C 0 M M 0 N WE A L T H OF THE PHILIPPINES 

August 29, 1944 



FOR RELEASE AFTER 12; 30 PH T^AYjTOBSDAT) : 

Col. Carlos P, Romulo, Resident Commissioner of the Phil- 
ippines to the U.S. , delivered his first address on the floor 
of Congress today, (Tuesday, August 29), the 28th anniversary 
of the passage of the Jones Act. 

Following is full text of Commissioner Romulo' s address— 
THE JONES ACT — FOUNDATION STONE OF BATAAN: 

"Mr. Speaker: 

•'TYenty-eight years age today, upon this floor, America 
gave its first pledge of freedom to the people of i>iio Ihilippines. 

"On that day the Congress of the United States approved 
tho Jones Act, promising independence to the subject Philippines 
in a covenant that is without parallel In the world's history, 

-It is .hot my purpose to .review the Filipinos' fight against 
America during the early d,ays w lRf American occupatioii, nor stress 
the fact th£'t it took the UnijRS States three and one-half years 
of actual fighting to subdue i&he Philippines. r e were not con- 
quered j in ..the final analysiJpby guns, but by the practical de- 
ne nst ratio* in the "'hill )_ine.4. of America's concept of democracy. 
American teachers brought us aew methods of education. Public 
health, -.road building, govorrjHsnt training — such things were 
given us. Gradually our feeljfiig toward Aider ica chan'od from 
resentment and suspicion to cwf idence and loyalty. 

"That loyalty was sealed'jjay the passage of the Jones Act. 

The long struggle for imlippine Independence the t was to 
cv.lrd.hate in the passage of that Jones Act was waged - en this 
floor. It was a strange struJBjfc,, carried on i^amity and under r 
standing, for only Americas oOiixd comprehend the de iocratic 
drear. s of our Filipind le, ..ere were two *of "these fiery 

young nationalists "U10 j - ti i.t for independence. Manuel 

Luis Quezon, as Resident Jo.. . usuie. • , on this,, floor , set here 
the do: lends for the outposts', of iKmocracy in Mb. Philippines , laid 
mere the foundation of Bataah. Hit it was in'»e Philippines 
Liieve the strategy of the whole fight was planfed unaoi Sergio . 
"Jxicna, Speaker of the- Phil i opine Assembly, who:,; as. one n leader 
>f the Pllipino people, gave purpose and direction go the peace- 
ful campaign for freedom. 

-••The first Philippine .Assembly that convened on October 16, 
1907, was the supreme test of our. ability to govern ourselves. 
If it succeeded,' more self-governing powers would be awarded 
the Pili^inos. If it failed, it would mean * se ^r°^\^* our 
slow march to independence. Those who made tne rnxxij^Aae 



- 2 - 



Assembly a success were men of courage and vision, and our Phil- 
ippine democracy became the monument to their struggle and their 
sacrifice. I would like to call their roll today, yet however 
long and glorious the list, we must come to one name at last, that 
of the new President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, 
Sergio Osmena. As Speaker of that historic Assembly, he united 
its various elements and steered its course, establishing for 
the first time- the policy of Filipino collaboration with America., 
He lead us then through a crucial period in our history, to 
emerge triumphant in the test that resulted in the recognition, 
through the Jones Act, of our capacity for self-government and 
freedom. He is leading us today, as President in exile, through 
darker days of travail, and the crowning service of this patient 
and self-effacing' statesman will be to establish after victory 
has been achieved, the Philippine Republic. 

"The Jones Act, approved on August 29, 1916, placed the 
legislative power in Filipino hands. It provided for the 
creation of the Philippine Senate to be elected by the people and 
to be composed entirely of Filipinos. It gave the first glimpse • 
of democracy to the benighted Far East at our back, to millions 
of enslaved Asiatics. The American name of Jones carried to the 
Far East America's words that had hammered the year 1776 into 
history — independence and equality. It was a vested interest 
in the future that must assure economic and spiritual decency for 
all men, 

"I would like to call attention to the fact that on exactly 
that same date six years before, on August 29, 191C, Japan 
against the will of the Koreans, formally annexed the ancient 
kingdom of Korea and ended its independent existence of 420C 
years! 

"What curious coincidence could better show the contrast in 
ideology between the United States and Japan. These two histor- 
ical incidents reveal why Japan and America are now at war. With 
the annexation of Korea, Japan started on its blood-stained 
march of conquest that was to culminate in the sneak attack on 
Pearl Harbor, while America, with the Jones Act, set a course of 
freedom and democracy for all peoples. 

' ."The Jones Act was our victory. You let us win it upon this 
floor. It was a. pledge made, and America has kept that pledge. 
In 1934 the Tydings-McDuf f ie Act set the independence date, for 
July 4, 1946. Recently, Congress passed S.J. Resolution No. 93 
advancing the date of independence as soon as the Japanese in- 
vader is driven from Philippine soil and constitutional processes 
are restored in the Philippines. 

"We too kept the pledge. You gave us the Jones Act, We 
gave you Bataan,. For Bataan and Corregidor were dividends paid 
back out of our loyalty and our faith in America. On this day, 
twenty-eight years ago, we of the Philippines were promised a 
place beside our fellow Americans as men equal and free. We 
earned that position in 1941, when we offered our lives beside 
Americans, in the blackest hour America has known. 

"Bataan, where Filipinos fought under the American flag to 
preserve democracy, was the ultimate outpost of freedom in the 
Far East. 

"Half the world lies between the foxholes of Bataan and the 
floor of Congress, and yet I cannot feel myself a stranger amcng 
the representatives of a people for whose flag and ideals my 
countrymen did not hesitate to fight and die. I speak for them,- 
a nation' of prisoners, their tongues stopped with fear or with _ 
death, because they cast their lot with Americans ,• against their 
"fellow Orientals" the Japanese. 
J** < 

"I speak for them proudly, seventeen million of them, with 
new hope, for at last we see the way clear back to the Phil- 
ippines, and we dare speak of victory, 

"We know now there will be victory, and palms such as are 
laid on the graves of Arlington will be placed on the nameless 
dust of Bataan, On that bloodstained PhiliPP^ peninsula 



Mo.. i cans and Filipinos must meet over a common grave where 
lio the -bodies of their sons. We will remember then, after 
v.ctcry, how we valued then, those American and Filipino boys 
who died together for democracy. In our eyes they were . 

beautiful, they were .the nope of our lives, and our hearts will 
break again over their shared dust. 

E, We will meet., my fellow Americans, over that common gr,ve. 
; 0ut of that grave, a dream. 

"Others have died for that dream of world recognition "of 
the ordinary civilities and the divine rights of man. 

"A Jew named Christ carried that dream, via Golgotha, to 
a hill that is known as Calvary* 

•An American, Abraham Lincoln, carried that drea, . from a 
log cabin to the *Vhite House. He was assassinated, here in 
Washington. 

-The Filipino Manuel Quezon died for that dream, after 
taking his last stand for democracy in the tunnel on Corregidor, 

'"'And a boy named Jose', from Manila, and another boy named 
Joe, from Missouri, died for the same dream on Bataan, and their 
commingled dust is holy earth, 

:r How can we sift that dust by race for separate honor I 
Beth were young. Both loved life'. But they hated autocracy 
more then they loved living, and they share one grave on Bataan. 

"Out cf that grave, a/dream. ?Bloom forever, oh Renublic, 
from the dust of thy boson. 1 " 

ER-110 

0O0 



1617 Massachusetts Avenue, N. W. 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

June 6, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: 



From Saranac Lake, New York, where he is convalescing, 
Manuel L* Quezon, President of the Philippines, issued the 
following statement today (Tuesday), on the fall of Rome and 
the invasion of France, for shortwave broadcast to the Phil- 



ippines: 



;? My beloved countrymen: 

; 'The flame of hope burns higher today in the 
hearts of free men. Two days ago the armies 
of the United Nations entered the City of 
Rome in triumph, pursuing the remnants of a 
defeated German army; today, the armies of the United 
Nations have landed on the beacnes of France 
and the liberation of Europe has commenced. 

"In this global war, every blow struck for 
freedom anywhere in the world is a blow struck 
for our own freedom. On the beaches of Europe, 
the mighty armies under General Dwight D. 
Eisenhower have started operations that we pray 
with all our hearts will crush the forces of 
Nazi oppression and totalitarianism forever. 
Allied success in Europe will hasten the day of 
the liberation of our native land. Let us join 
in praying to the Almighty to bless Allied arms 
with a speedy victory. 

"In the meanwhile, our beloved General Douglas 
MacArthur keeps pressing forward steadily towards the 
Philippines. On April 25th last, under his 
leadership, United Nations forces captured 
Hollandia, thirteen hundred miles from our 
country o On May ? l8ch, Wakde Island fell under 
.the?- onslaught of fieneral MacArthur' s men. On 
♦iay 27th, Biak- i Jfend was invaded by United 
Nations troops, eight hundred and eighty miles "om 
Mindanao. Day by day the forces of ligation 

are advancing irresistibly towards the Philippine.,. 
«and by, my fellow countrymen, as 'you have aone 

111 these difficult months with that same courage 
lad faith that have won for you the admiration 01 

the world. Your' sacrifices will soon ^ rewarded 

wp.th precious gift of victory. Freedom will 

be ours again'." 



Saranac. Lake, N. 
June 6, 1944 



Y. 



•MANUAL L. QUEZON" 



PR-76 



1617 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W, 
Washington 6, D. C« 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT 01 INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 M M 0 N W E A L T H OF THE P H ILIPPINES 

June 7-, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE R ELEASE : 

Two Filipinos, Sergio Castro Molano fror.i Lingayen, and 
Vicente Lim from Manila, graduate from the U« S. Naval and 
Military Academies respectively. Midshipman L'olano graduates 
June 6 and Cadet Lim June 7» Molano was appointed to the 
Naval Academy by President Quezon, after attending the 
Philippine Military Academy at Bagnio, He was active in 
various sports during his time at the Academy, participating 
in soccer, battalion bowling, company Softball and battalion 
wrestling. In the regimental organization, Midshipman Molano 
held the rank of Midshipman First Petty Ofricer in the first 
group and Midshipman Lieutenant (junior grade) in the second 
and final groups. He will be appointed a Second Lieutenant 
in the Army of the United States upon his graduation. 

Vicente Lim, son of Brigadier General and Mrs, Vicente 
Lim, attended the University of the Philippines for opie year 
prior to receiving his appointment to West Point from President 
Quezon. During his first class year he was a cadet sergeant 
and is the 27th Filipino to graduate from 7/est Point. 

General Vicente Lim, Cadet Lira's f athe^ wa3 the first 
Filipino cadet to attend the United States Military Academy. 
He was serving on Bataan with General Mac Arthur at the time 
of the Japanese attack. Mrs. Lira, hero on u visit at the 
time war broke out, lives in California with her four 
children. 

Cadet Lim will be commissioned in the FieM Artillery, 

PR-77 



1617 Massachusetts Ave*, N.W, 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

June 14, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: 



SARANAC LAKE, NY, June 14— -On United States Flag Day (today) . 
which is the second anniversary of the signing of the Declara- 
tion of United Nations by the Philippines, President Manuel L. 
Quezon issued the following statement, for broadcast to the 
Philippines : 

"My countrymen: On this day, wherever you may be, pause a 
moment in silent prayer — a prayer of thanksgiving and petition,, 

"Today, June 14, is the day set aside by the President of 
the United States for the honoring not only of the flag of 
America but the flags of all the United Nations who fight for 
liberty. Today, June 14, is also the second anniversary of my 
signing the Declaration of United Nations on behalf of the Phil- 
ippines. By that simple act, the Philippines joined herself with 
thirty-four sovereign nations of the world in the fight against 
aggression. 

"In the midst of your sufferings — and I share them to the 
full — let us turn our thoughts today to our Flag of the Sun ana 
Three Stars, the flag that our heroes followed in unnumbered 
battles for freedom. Let us renew our pledge that our hopes for 
it will not be dimmed, nor our faith in it fettered, nor our love 
for it weakened by the invader, but that each returning sun will 
make us more determined in our resolve that, as in honor we in- 
herited it from our fathers, in honor we must bequeath it to our 
sons. That honor is the badge that only free men can wear. 

"Two yoars ago today, our Flag was unfurled side by side 
with that of the other United Nations in the fight for liberty 
and democracy. I do not have to stress the transcendental sig- 
nificance of our having been admitted as signatory to the declara- 
tion of the nations fighting Germany and Japan, as an independent 
government. When I signed it for the Filipino people and sub- 
scribed to the principles set forth in the Atlantic Charter, I 
knew that I was expressing our nation's determination never to be 
cowed by the Japanese invader. Your courageous resistance has 
shown the world we Filipinos can suffer and die for the cause 01 
freedom, 

"Let us give thanks for the friendship of America and our 
other allies in our common struggle against the enemy and or ,n 
victories of the armed forces of the United Na^ xori^ xn I^t aXy ... 
Russia, and in the Southwest Pacific. Let u sbo gr atef uith at 
the forces of liberation are coming ever closer *° our bWLo vod 
shores. . And today, let us humbly petition the ^|^ n f ^ Q thu 
continued success of our arms, and beseech Him to haotcn the 
glorious day of liberation for all peoples all over the world. 

, PR-7B 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.W. 
Washington 6, D. c. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COM M-.O'N W E 4 L T H OF T 1:1 E PHI L I P P I N E S 

June 15, 1944 



FO R IMMEDIATE RELEASE ; 

Captain Paulino Ugarte of the Philippines, has just 
been awarded the Third Oak Leaf Cluster to the Air Medal for 
achievement in bomber combat missions over Brandenburg, Berlin, 
Kiel and other targets in Europe while serving as Liberator 
pilot. 

Captain Ugarte recently received his second Oak Leaf 
Cluster for "exceptionally meritorious service 1 ' while 
participating in bomber combat attacks on Kiel and Hanover. 
He was promoted to Captain shortly thereafter. 



PR-62 



Saranac Lake, N.Y* 

July 4, 1944 PR-91 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.V/. 
Washington 6, D.C . 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

June 15, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE ; 

SARANAC LAKE, NY. , June 15— In view of the assignment given 
to the Resident Commissioner of the Philippines to the United 
States, Joaquin M. Elizalde , to represent the government of the 
Philippine Commonwealth in the United Nations, the Nationals 
Division which has been under his office will henceforth functio 
under the President of the Philippines as a separate division, 
according to orders issued by President Manuel L. Quezon. 

Manuel A. Adeva will assume the position of heed of this 
Division. 

The Nationals Division promotes and protects the interests 
and. takes care of all nationality problems of Filipinos in the 
United States, 

PR- 81 

9 ----- _ - - 



6 £1 r an ac L ako y N <, Y « 
July 4, 1944 



PR-91 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.W. 
•Tasliington 6, D.G. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

June 15, 1944 



FO R HI'lEDIATE RELEAS E : 

SARANAC LAKE , NY. , June 1$— Joaquin M, Slizalde, Resident 
Commissioner of the Philippines to the United States, was 
appointed by President Quezon to represent the Government of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines in the United Nations, of which 
the Philippines is a full member. As such he will represent the 
Government of the Philippines in the UNRRA, the United Nations 
Commission on Food and Agriculture, in the International Sugar 
Council and the Institute of Pacific Relations. He will take 
charge of all matters affecting Philippine relations with the 
United Nations, 

PR-30 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.W. 
Washington 6, p. 0. 
HObart 1/+00 

DEPARTMENT l' INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 II M 0 N ./ 1 A L T H OF THE PHILIPPINES 

July 5, 1944 



FOR B oMEPIATE ^JLE.AOE : 



Manuel L. Quezon, Fresident of the Philippines issued the 

following statement for broadcast to the Philippines oh July 4: 

"lay fellow countrymen: 

Fourth of July this year has a special meaning to us 
in the Philippines. We have celebrated it in "the past as a 
milestone in the history of the United States. 'It marks the 
day of American independence from an alien rule. 

A few days ago, President Roosevelt signed Senate 
Joint Resolution Ho. 93 advancing Philippine independence 
prior to July 4, 1946. This year's July Fourth, therefore, 
takes on a new significance. Freedom is indivisible and 
America shows the world that its belief in freedom is so 
strong it does not deny it to others. It gives- the American 
soldier, wherever he nay be in this global war, an epitome 
of what he is lighting for: Freedom not only for himself 
but for other peoples as well. 

General ] uc Arthur continues pressing forward in 
his steady advance in the Southwest Pacific. His victories 
in Hollandia and recently in 3iak bring him and the army of 
liberation under his command nearer to Philippine shores. 
The. forces under Admiral Nimitz are also staging a series of 
spectacular victories. A staggering blow was recently dealt 
the Japanese fleet off the Philippine sea. 

4 

The forces of freedom and democracy are marching 
_ onward irresistibly. As we commemorate today's American 
"independence Pay, let us take renewed strength in the con- 
fident expectation that soon our own Fourth oi July from 
Japanese oppression will dawn for us. It ./ill not take 
.long now. 

MANUEL L. -■H.'LCN. 1 ' 

PR-91 



Saranac Lake, N.Y. 
July 4, 1944 



♦ 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N. './, 
Washington S, D. C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE P H I L 1 P P I HE S 

July 21, 1944 



RELEASE FOR SUNDAY IAPERS. _JTU.Y 23: 



SARANAC LAKE, N.Y. July 23 — The following is a 
statement issued by President Manuel L. Quezon of the Phil- 
ippines on the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission which will 
meet for the first time tomorrow noon, Monday, July 24, in 
Room 357, Senate Office Building: 

: 'I desire to avail myself of this opportunity to 
congratulate the United States Senate for the * designation of 
Senator Millard E. Tydings as Chairman of the Filipino Reha- 
bilitation Commission on the part of the American government. 
I know that the Filipino people welcome such a happy choice 
because they see in his selection as the head of the American 
group an earnest that their interests will be properly safe- 
guarded.' Senator Tydings has shorn himself to be our true and 
loyal friend and we are confident that as in the past he will 
be guided by the sincere desire tc help us establish a free and 
independent government. 

v "As provided in Public Law 381 - 78th Congress (S.J. 
Resfc 94), t3e purposes of the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission 
are 'as follows: 

(b) The Commission^ 3hall investigate all matters 
affecting post-war economy, trade, finance, economic 
stability, and rehabilitation of the Philippine Islands, 

• including the matter of damages to public and private 
property and to persons occasioned by enemy attack and 
occupation. 

(c) To formulate recommendations based upon such 
investigations and for fufcii£ trade relations between- 

Ifche United States and the independent Philippine Re- 
public when established an* to consider the extension 
<3f the present or heretofore agreed upon trade relations 
or otherwise' for a period of <years to make adjustments 
for tfte periipd of occupancy by the Japanese in order to 

' reestablish f&rade relations as provided for in the 
original Independence Act. 

M is needless < for no to dwell on what is clearly 
outlined lor the foregoing, npr is it necessary to stress how 
urgent it .m that the Coniaission should undertake to formulate 
a prqgram j& rehabilitation adequate to meet the needs of a 
peoples who^s country lias been ravaged and destroyed by the 
invader. I., can only say that if the enemy has wrought terrible 
destruction on the -liilip^ines as he has advanced victoriously, 
it is not difficult to foresee that when he is defeated, his 



-2- 



fury and savagery will be inconceivable, and his retreat will 
be marked by such havoc as I fear will, foe unrelenting and 
total. 

"The. Commonwealth Government -in-Exile lias been engaged 
in the study and preparation of plans for the relief and re- 
habilitation of the Filipino people as soon as the reconquest 
of the Philippines is started. With our knowledge of our coun- 
try and our people and with an understanding of their needs 
after more than two years under Japanese occupation, we made 
and completed certain studies and researches. On the basis of 
this, we formulated a program of immediate relief and rehabil- 
itation. We place this program at the disposal of the Com- 
mission for whatever use it may deem fit to make of it. 

"It is obvious that the task of this Filipino Rehabil- 
itation Commission is vastly more difficult th w n that contem- 
plated in the original Tydings-McDuf f ie Independence Act and 
the 1939 amendment thereto.- The original act and the amending 
act approved August 7, 1939, provided for the establishment of 
a conference of representatives of the Government of the United 
States and the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine 
Islands 'for the purpose of formulating recommendations as to 
future trade relations between the United States and the inde- 
pendent Philippine Republic.' The Tydings-McDuf i ic Act and the 
amending act of 1939 were passed at a time when this present war 
was not anticipated, and the task contemplated for the conference 
of representatives provided thereunder was to make adjustments 
in the trade relations between the Philippines and the United 
States which became necessary only because of the independence 
of the Philippines, under the normal conditions of peace. 

"The present war has not only caused widespread des- 
truction of property and completely • disrupted the internal eco- 
nomic conditions of the Philippines, and all other enemy-occupiec 
countries, but it has also disrupted and dislocated the economy 
and trade of the world as a whole* In formulating recommendationr 
for future trade relations between the United States and the Phi] 
ippines, therefore, the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission I hope 
will take into account not only conditions as they existed before 
the war, but the vastly more difficult and complicated conditions 
existing in the world today. Therefore, the studies and recom- 
mendations of the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission will help 
determine the entire economic future of the Philippines. 

-The Filipino Rehabilitation Commission also has the 
tasks, not contemplated in the original act and the amending act 
of considering and recommending measures for the payment for the 
damage caused to public and private property and to individuals 
as the result of enemy attack and occupation. It must also con- 
sider the need of the- Philippine Government for financial as- 
sistance, and the extent and manner in which such assistance 
should be given, the monetary assistance required by Philippine 
banks, and the rehabilitation of the Philippine merchant marine 
and aerial and other transportation system. 

the 

"With/establishment of this commission, we enter a new 
era in Philippine -American relations. Philippine independence 
is a settled question and now we enter the second • phase - envi- 
saged by President Roosevelt when on December 28, 1941, he 
solemnly pledged to the Filipino people 'your independence will 
be established and pr otected . T The protection of that inde- 
pendence and the establishment of a firm and durable relation- 
ship between the Philippines and the United States looking 
toward the preservation of peace in the Far East will depend 
to a great extent on the findings and recommendations to be made 
by the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission. 

; '..lien Senator Tydings and Congressman Bell introduced 
S.J. Res. No. 94, I mad© a statement to the press in which l 
called the resolution 'an act of statesmanship of the iirs-c 
magnitude. 1 I reiterate it now. I am confident that -the 
members of the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission wlXi De 
guided by the highest sense of responsibility ana good will, 



-3- 

cognizant of the fact that in their hands lies in n large 
measure the destiny of a people that has shown unmistakably 
its loyalty to America and to the principles of fresdom and 
democracy without counting the cost." 



Note to Editor: 

The American group is composed of: 
Sen. Millard E, Tydings (D, ,Md. ) 
Sen. Bennett Champ Clark (D . , Mo.) 
Sen. Arthur E, Vandenborg (R . ,Mich. ) 
Rep. C. Jas per Bell (D, -,Mo. ) 
Rep. Dan R. IlcGehee (D. ,Miss. ) 
Rep, Richard J. Welch (R. , Calif.) 
Wayne Coy, Ass't, -to Publisher, Washington Post 
Lynn R. Edrainster , Vice -Chairman, • U.S. Tariff Comm. 
Evett D. Hester, Department of Interior 



The Filipino group is composed of: 

Sergio Osmeha, Vice-President (Chairman) 
Joaquin M. Elizal'de , Resident Commissioner 
Jaime Hernandez, Auditor General 

Col. Manuel Nieto, Secretary of Philippine Cabinet 
Col. Carlos P. Romulo , - Secretary of Information 
Col. Alejandro Kelchor , Philippine Army 
Urbano A. Zafra, Corxiercial Adviser to Resident 
Commissioner 

Two other remaining members to be appointed by 
President Quezon. 

PR-94 



I 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N. 
Washington 6, D. C. 
HOI) art 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELi'.T! !0NS 
C 0 M M 0 N W B A L T H OF THE PHILIPPINES 

July 21, 1944 



RELEASE FOR SUNDAY P APERS, JULY 23 : 

SARANAC LAKE, N.Y. July 23 -- The following is a 
statement issued by President Manuel L» Quezon of the Phil- 
ippines on the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission which will 
meet for the first time tomorrow noon, Monday, July 24, in 
Room 357, Senate Office Building: 

;i I desire to avail myself of this opportunity td 
congratulate the United States Senate for the designation of 
Senator Millard E. Tydings as Chairman of the Filipino Reha- 
bilitation Commission on the part of the American government. 
I know that the Filipino people welcome such a happy choice 
because they see in his selection as the head of the American 
group an earnest that their interests will be properly safe- 
guarded. Senator Tydings has shows himself to be our true and 
loyal friend and we are confident that as in the past he will 
be guided by the sincere desire to help us establish a free and 
independent government . 

"As provided in Public Law 381 - 78th Congress (S.J. 
Res. 94), the purposes of the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission 
are as follows: 

(b) The Commission shall investigate all matters 
affecting post-war economy, trade, finance, economic 
stability, and rehabilitation of the Philippine Islands, 
including the matter of damages to public and private 
property and to per ons occasioned by enemy attack and 
occupation. 

(c) To formulate recommendations based upon such 
investigations and for future trade relations between 
the United States and the independent Philippine Re- 
public when established and to consider the extension 

of the present or heretofore agreed upon trade relations 
- or otherwise for a Period of years to make adjustments 
for the period of occupancy by the Japanese in order to 
reestablish trade relations as provided for in the 
original Independence Act. 

It is needless for me to dwell on what is clearly 
outlined in the foregoing, nor is it necessary to stress now 
urgent it is that the Commission should undertake to formulae 
a program of rehabilitation adequate to meet the needs 01 a 
people whose country has been ravaged and destroyed oy zne 
invader. I can only say hat if the enemy has wrought terrible 
destruction on the LUlltofoines as he has advanced victoriously, 
it is not difficult tc foresee that when he ueieated, nis.« 



-2- 



fury and savagery will be inconceivable, and his retreat will 
be marked by such havoc as I fear will be unrelenting and 
total . 

"The Commonwealth Government-in-Exile has be»n engaged 
in the study and preparation of plans for the relief i nd re- 
habilitation of the Filipino people as soon as the reconquest 
of the Philippines is started. With our knowledge of :>ur coun- 
try and our people and with an understanding of their needs 
after more than two years under Japanese occupation, wo made 
and completed certain' studies and researches. On the basisof 
this, we formulated a program of immediate relief and rehabil- 
itation. We place this program at the disposal of the Com- 
mission fcr whatever use it may deem fit to make of it. 

"It is obvious that the task of this Filipino Rehabil- 
itation Commission is vastly more difficult th^n that contem- 
plated in the original Tydings-McDuf f ie Independence Act and 
the 1939 amendment thereto,' The original act and the amending 
act approved August 7, 1939, provided for the establishment _ of 
a conference of representatives of the Government of the United 
States and the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine 
Islands 'for the ourposo of formulating recommendations as to 
future trade relations between the United States and the inde- 
pendent Philippine Republic, ' The Tydings-McDuf i ie Act and the 
amending act of 1939 were passed at a time when this present war 
was not anticipated, and the task contemplated for the conferenc 
of representatives provided thereunder was to make adjustments 
in the trade relations between the Philippines and the United 
States which became necessary only because of the independence 
of the Philippines, under the normal conditions of peace. 

"The present war has not only caused widespread des- 
truction of property and completely disrupted the internal eco- 
nomic conditions of the Philippines, and all other enemy-occupic.. 
countries, but it has also disrupted and dislocated the economy 
and trade of the world as a whole . In formulating recommendation, 
for future trade relations between the United States and the Phi. 
ippines, therefore, the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission I hop- 
will take into account not only conditions as they existed befor 
the war, but the vastly more difficult and complicated conditions 
existing in the world today. Therefore, the studies and recom- 
mendations of the Filipino Rehabilitation Coriiission will help 
determine the entire economic future of the Philippines. 

■The Fili'oino Rehabilitation Commission else has the 
tasks, not contemplated in the original act and the amending act 
of considering and rocomme riding measures for the payment for the 
damage caused to public and private property and to individuals 
as the result of enemy attack and occupation. It must also con- 
sider the need of the Philippine Government for financial as- 
sistance, and the extent and manner in which such assistance 
should be given, the monetary assistance required by Philippine 
banks, and the rehabilitation of the Philippine merchant marine 
and aerial and other transportation system. 

the 

"With/establishment of this commission, we enter a now 
era in Philippine-American relations. Philippine independence 
is a. .settled question and now we enter the second • phase • envi- 
saged* by President Roosevelt when on December 28, 1941, he 
solemnly pledged to the Filipino people 'your independence will 
be established and pro tected . ' The protection of that inde- 
pendence ana the establishment of a firm and durable relation- 
ship between the Philippines and the United Staves looKing 
toward the preservation of peace in the Far ^ast vrll J©P?» a . 
to a great extent on the findings and recommendations to be mad. 
by\fche Filipino Rehabilitation Commission. 

"•..hen 'Senator Tydings and Congressman Bel] : Reduced 
S.J. Res. No. 94, I ^ado a statement to the press in which 1 
called the resolution 'an act of statesmanship of th. lirsx 
magnitude.' I reiterate it now. I am confident that t ne ^ 
members of the Filipino Rehabilitation Coiaaisoion will do 
guided by the highest sense of responsibility ana gooa win, 



-3- 



cognizant of the fact that in their hands lies in a large 
measure the destiny of a people that has shown unristakably 
its loyalty to America and to the principles of fieedom and 
democracy without counting the cost." 



Note to Editor: 

The American group is composed of: 
Sen. Millard E< Tydings (D.,Md.j 
Sen. Bennett Champ Clark (D., Mo.) 
Sen. Arthur II, Vandenberg (R. ,Mich, ) 
Rep. C. Jasoer Bell (D.,hc.) 
Rep. Dan R. I.cGeheo (D.,Miss») 
, Rep. Richard J", V/elch (R. , Calif.) 
Wayne Coy, Ass't.-to Publisher, jtfashington P )St 
Lynn R, Edminster, Vice -Chairman , • U..C. Tar if.* Comm. 
Evett D. Hester, Department of Interior 



The Filipino group is composed of: 

Sergio Osmena, Vice-President (Chairman) 
Joaquin M. Elizalde, Resident Commissioner 
Jaime Hernandez, Auditor General 

Col. Manuel Nieto, Secretary of Philippine Cabinet 
Col. Carlos P. Romulo Secretary of Information 
Col. Alejandro helclior, Philippine Army 
Urbano A. Zafra, Commercial Adviser to Resident 
Commissioner 

.Two other remaining members to be appointed by 
President Quezon t 

PR-94 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N. "/. 
Washington 6, D. C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
G 0 M M ON WEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

July 21, 1944 



RELEASE FOR SUN DAY P.iPERS , JULY 23 : 

SARANAC LAKE, N.Y. July 23 The following is a 
statement issued by President Manuel L. Quezon of the Phil- 
ippines on the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission which will 
meet for the first time tomorrow noon, Monday, July 24, in 
Room 357, Seriate Office Building: 

?f I desire to avail myself of this opportunity to 
congratulate the United States Senate for the designation of 
Senator Millard E. Tydings as Chairman of the Filipino Reha- 
bilitation Commission on the part of the American government* 
I know that the Filipino people welcome such a happy choice 
because they see in his selection as the head of the American 
group an earnest that their interests v/ill be properly safe- 
guarded . Senator Tydings has shown himself to be our true and 
loyal friend and we are confident that as in the past he v/ill 
be guided by the sincere desire to help us establish a free and 
independent government, 

"As provided in Public Law 381 - 7#th Congress (3, J. 
Re's* 94), the purposes of the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission 
are as follows: 

(b) The Commission shall investigate all matters 
affecting post-war economy, trade, finance, economic 
stability, and rehabilitation of the Philippine Islands, 
including the matter of damages to public and private 

1 property and to persons occasioned by enemy attack and 
occupation . 

(c) To formulate recommendations based upon such 
investigations and for future trade relations between 
the United States and the independent Philippine Re- 
public when established and to consider the extension 

of the present or heretofore agreed upon trade relations 
or otherwise for a period of years to make adjustments 
for the period of occupancy by the Japanese in order to 
reestablish trade relations as provided for in the 
original Independence Act. 
\ 1 

It is needless for me to dwell on what is clearly 
outlined in the foregoing, nor is it necessary to stress how 
urgent it is that the Coaiaission should undertake to formulate 
a program of rehabilitation adequate to meet the needs of a 
people whose country has been ravaged and destroyed by the 
invader. I can only say that if the enemy has wrought terrible 
destruction on the Philippines a3 he has advanced victoriously, 
it is not difficult to foresee that when ho is defeated, niS 



-2- 



fury and savagery will be inconceivable', and his retreat will 
be marked by such havoc as I fear will be unrelenting and 
total. 

'The Commonwealth Government -in-Exile has been engaged 
in the study and preparation of plans for the relief and re- 
habilitation of the Filipino people as soon as the re conquest 
of the Philippines is started. With our knowledge of our coun- 
try and our people and with an understanding of their needs 
after more than two years under Japanese occupation, we made 
and completed certain studies and researches. On the basis ^ of 
this, we formulated a program of immediate relief and rehabil- 
itation. 'We place this program at the disposal of the Com- 
mission for whatever use it may deem fit to make of it. 

"It is obvious that the task of this Filipino Rehabil- 
itation Commission is vastly more difficult th^-n that contem- 
plated in the original Tydings-McDuf fie Independence Act and 
the 1939 amendment thereto.- The original act and the amending 
act approved August 7, 1939, provided for the establishment ^ of 
a conference of representatives of the Government of the United 
States and the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine 
Islands 'for the purpose of formulating recommendations as to 
future trade relations between the United States and the inde- 
pendent Philippine Republic.' The Tydings-McDuf i ic Act and the 
amending act of 1939 were passed at a time when this present war 
was not anticipated, and the task contemplated for the conference 
of representatives provided thereunder was to make adjustments 
in the trade relations between the Philippines and the United 
States which became necessary only because of the independence 
of the Philippines, under the normal conditions of peace. 

"The present war has not only caused wide spread des- 
truction of property and completely • disrupted the internal eco- 
nomic conditions of the Philippines, and all other enemy-occupicc 
countries, but it has also disrupted and dislocated the economy 
and trade of the world as a whole. In formulating recommendations 
for future trade relations between the United states and the Phi] 
ippines, therefore, the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission I hope 
will take into account not only conditions as they existed before 
the war, but the vastly more difficult and complicated conditions 
existing in the world today. Therefore, the studies and recom- 
mendations of the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission will help 
determine the entire economic future of the Philippines. 

''The Filipino Rehabilitation Commission also has the 
tasks, not contemplated in the original act and the amending act. 
of considering and recoi^ending measures for the payment for thu 
damage caused to public and private property and to individuals 
as the result of enemy attack and occupation. It must also con- 
sider the need of the Philippine Government for financial as- 
sistance, and the extent ana manner in which such assistance 
should be given, the monetary assistance required by Philippine 
banks, and the rehabilitation of the Philippine merchant marine 
and aerial and other transportation system. 

the 

"With/establishment of this ■ commission, we enter a now 
era in Philippine-American relations. Philippine independence 
is a settled opuestion and now we enter the second • phase - envi- 
saged by President Roosevelt when on December 28, 1941, he 
solemnly pledged to the Filipino people 'your independence will 
be established and pr otected . > The protection of that inde- 
pendence and the establishment of a firm and durable relation- 
ship between the Philippines and the United State s looking 
toward the preservation of peace in the Far East will depend 
to a great extent on the findings and recommendations to be maae 
by the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission. 

"./hen Senator Typings and Congressman Bell introduced 
S.J. Res. No. 94, I nado a statement to the press in which ± 
called the resolution 'an act of statesmanship of the lirsi 
magnitude.' I reiterate it now. I am confident thai ine 
members of the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission will be 
guided by the highest sense of responsibility and good will, 



cognizant of the fact that in their hands lies in a large 
measure the destiny of a people that has shown unmistakably 
its loyalty to America and to the principlas of freedom and 
democracy without counting the cost." 



Note to Editor: 

The American group is composed of: 
Sen. Millard E, Tydings (D.,Hd.) 
Sen. Bennett Champ Clark (D., Mo.) 
Sen. Arthur II. Vandenberg (R . 'iviich. ) 
Rep. C. Jasper Bell (D. ,Mo. ) 
Rep. Dan R. "i.cGehee (D.,lvliss.) 
Rep. Richard If. Welch (R. , Calif.) 
Wayne Coy, Ass»t, -to Publisher, Washington Post 
Lynn R. Edminster, Vice -Chairman , 'U. J. Tariff Comm. 
Evett D. Hester, Department of Interior 



The Filipino group is composed of: 

Sergio Osmena, Vice-President (Chairman) 
Joaquin M. Elizalde, Resident Commissioner 
Jaime Hernandez, Auditor General 

Col. Manuel Nieto, Secretary of Philippine Cabinet 
Col. Carlos P. Romvlo ,• Secretary of Information 
Col. Alejandro helclior, Philippine Army 
Urbano A. Zlaf ra, Commercial Adviser to Pvosident 
Commissioner 

Two other remaining members to be appointed by 
President Quezoim 



PR-94 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N. l/« 
Washington 6, d. C . 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INF OR! 'AT ION AND PUBLIC HSLi.T'ONS 
C 0 M, M 0 N W E A L T H OF T H E P H I L I P 0 I i! E 3 

July 21, 1944 



RE LEASE FOR SUNDA Y PAPERS, JULY 23 : 

SARANAC LAKE, N.Y. July 23 -- The following is a 
statement issued by President Manuel L. Quezon of the Phil- 
ippines on the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission which will 
meet for the first time tomorrow noon, Monday, July 24, in 
Room 357, Senate Office Building: 

;i I desire to avail myself of this opportunity to 
congratulate the United States Senate for the designation of 
Senator Millard E. Tydings as Chairman of the Filipino Reha- 
bilitation Commission on the part of the American government, 
I know that the Filipino people welcome such a happy choice 
because they see in nis selection as the head of the American 
group an earnest that their interests will be properly safe- 
guarded. Senator Tydings has shown himself to be our true and 
loyal friend and we are confident that as in the past he will 
be guided by the sincere desire to help us establish a free and 
independent government. 

"As provided in Public Law 381 - 7Sth Congress (S.J. 
Kes. 94), the purposes of the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission 
are as follows: 

(b) The Commission shall investigate all matters 
affecting post-war economy, trade, finance, economic 
stability, and rehabilitation of the Philippine Islands, 
including the matter of damages to public and private 
property and to per. ons occasioned by enemy attack and 
occupation. 

(c) To formulate recommendations based upon such 
investigations and for future trade relations betv/een 
.the United States and the independent Philippine Re- 
public when established and to consider the extension 

of the present or heretofore agreed upon trade relations 
or otherwise for a period of years to make adjustments 
for the period of occupancy by the Japanese in order to 
reestablish trade relations as provided for in the 
original Independence Act. 

It is needless for me to dwell on what is clearly 
outlined in the foregoing, nor is it necessary to stress now 
urgent it is that the Commission should undertake to formulate 
a program of rehabilitation adequate to meet the needs 01 a 
people whose country has been ravaged and destroyed oy ™ e 
invader. I can only say that if the enemy has wrought terrible 
destruction on the JhilipDines as he has advanced victoriously, 
it is not difficult to Icresee that when he is aeieatoa, aio 



-2- 



fury and savagery will be inconceivable, and his retieat will 
be marked by such liavoc as I fear will be unrelenting and 
total . 

"The Commonwealth Government -in-Exile has been engaged 
in the study and preparation of plans for the relief and re- 
habilitation of tho Filipino people as soon as the reconquest 
of the Philippines is started'. With our knowledge of our coun- 
try and our people and with an understanding of their needs 
after more than two years under Japanese occupation, we made 
and completed certain studies and researches. On the basis # of 
this, we formulated a program of immediate relief and rehabil- 
itation. We place this program at the disposal of the Cora- 
mission for whatever use it may deem fit to make of it. 

"It is obvious that the task of this Filipino Rehabil- 
itation Commission is vastly more difficult th_n that contem- 
plated in the original Tydings-McDuf f ie Independence Act and 
the 1939 amendment thereto,- The original act and the amending 
act approved August 7, 1939, provided for the establishment _ of 
a conference of representatives of the Government of the United 
States and the Government of the Commonwealth of the Philippine 
Islands 'for the purpose of formulating recommendations as to 
future trade relations between the United States and the inde- 
pendent Philippine Republic.' The Tydings-McDuf i ie Act and the 
amending act of 1939 were passed at a time when this present war 
was not anticipated, and the task contemplated for the conferenc 
of representatives provided thereunder was to make adjustments 
in the trade relations between the Philippines and the United 
States which became necessary only because of the independence 
of the Philippines, under the normal conditions of peace. 

"The present war has not only caused widespread des- 
truction of property and completely disrupted the internal eco- 
nomic conditions of the Philippines, and all other enemy -occupies 
countries, but it has also disrupted and dislocated the economy 
and trade of the world as a whole. In formulating recommendation: 
for future trade relations between the United States and the Phi. 
ippines, therefore, the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission I hop> 
will take into account not only conditions as they existed befor< 
the. war, but the vastly more difficult and complicated condition 
existing in the world today. Therefore, the studies and recom- 
mendations of the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission will help 
determine the entire economic future of the Philippines. 

"The Pilioino Rehabilitation Commission also has the 
tasks, not contemplated in the original act and the amending act 
of considering and re col. .ending measures for the payment for tin- 
damage caused to public and private property and to individuals 
as the result of enemy attack and occupation. It must also con- 
sider the need of the I-hilippine Government for financial as- 
sistance, and the extent and manner in which such assistance 
should be given, the monetary assistance required by Philippine 
banks, and the rehabilitation of the Philippine merchant marine 
and aerial and other transportation system. 

the 

"With /establishment of this commission, we enter a n 
era i.n Philippine-American relations. Philippine independence 
is a settled question and now we enter the second -phase -envi- 
saged by President Roosevelt when on December 28, 1941, he 
solemnly pledged to the Filipino people 'your independence will 
be established and pr otected . T The protection of that inde- 
pendence and the establishment of a firm and durable relation- 
ship between the Philippines and the United States looking 
toward the ^reservation of peace in the Far ;ast will J^? na , 
to a great extent on the findings and recommendations to be made 
by the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission. 




S.J. Res. 
called tho 

magnitude.' I reiterate it now. I am confident that the 
members of the Filipino Rehabilitation ConBisoion will bo 
guided by the highest sense of responsibility «na good will, 



i 



cognizant of the fact that in their hands lies in a large 
measure the destiny of a people that has shown umiistakably 
its loyalty to America and to the principles of fieedom and 
democracy without counting the cost." 



Note to Editor: 

The American group is composed of: 
Sen. Millard E. Tydings (D. ,Md. ) 
Sen. Bennett Champ Clark (D., Mo. ) 
Sen. Arthur II. Vandenberg (R . ,Mioh. ) 
Rep # C. Jasper Bell (D.,ho.) 
Rep. Dan R, I'.cGehee ( D . , Mi s s . ) 
Rep. Richard J. Welch (R. , Calif.) 
Wayne Coy, ^ss't.to Publisher, Washington Post 
Lynn R. Edminster, Vice-Chairman, • U. 3* Tariff Coimii. 
Evett D. Hester, Department of Interior 



The Filipino group is composed of: 

Sergio 0 sine ft a, Vice-President (Chairman) 
Joaquin M. Elizalde, Resident Commissioner 
Jaime' Hernandez, Auditor General 

Col. Manuel Nieto, Secretary of Philippine Cabinet 
Col. Carlos P. Romulo , - Secretary of Information 
Col. Alejandro I\elchpr, Philippine Ariay 
Urbano A. Zafra, Commercial Adviser to Resident 
Commissioner 

Two other remaining members to be appointed by 
President Quezon . 

IR-94 



i 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.j. 
Washington 6, D. C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC EOLATIONS 
C 0 M M 0 N W E A L T H OF THE- PHILIPPINE S 

July 28, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE : 



SARANAC LAKE, N.Y. , July 28— With plans rapidly 
moving ahead for the early rehabilitation and reconstruction 
of the Philippines, President Manuel L. Quezon is organizing 
his staff for this tremendous task. Today he appointed 
Colonel Alejandro Me ichor as Under-Secretary of National 
Defense. Major-General Basilio J. Valdes, Chief of Staff 
of the Philippine Army, is Secretary. 

President Quezon also recalled to active duty Sebastian 
Ugarte , legal advisor to Resident Commissioner Elizalde, with- 
the rank of Major in the Philippine Army. 

Colonel Me Ichor, former head of the Department of 
Engineering at the Philippine Military Academy, was sent 
to the United States in I94O for graduate studies at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Following this he 
spent months at .'est Point and Annapolis as an official 

•observer. A regular officer of the Philippine" Army, Col. 

.Me Ichor has been rendering service to the U. 3. Army on 
the staff of the Engineer Board at Fort Belvoir. His work 
has been described as ''an invaluable contribution to the 
advancement of science and the defeat of a common foe.'' It 
was at the recommendation of President Quezon that Secretary 
of ./ar Stimson ordered Colonel Melchor to Fort Belvoir. 

Major Ugarte has been appointed Executive Officer in 
•the Department of National Defense. He came tc the United 
States in 1939 to serve as legal advisor to the Resident 
Commissioner* He enlisted in the Philippine Army shortly 
after war broke out, and attended the School of Infantry 
at Fort Benning, Georgia. On graduation he returned to 
serve the Philippine Government, Called to active duty 
as of August 1, Major Ugarte will continue serving the 
Resident Commissioner in a legal capacity as well as 
assuming his duties in the Department of National Defense. 

PR- 9 5 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.Y/. 
Washington 6, D. Co 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT QJ liTPCPJL-.TION AHD PUBLIC R3L4TJONS 
C OMMONWE ALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

August 7, 1944 



FQ^^^ flDIA TB RELEASE : 

Sergio Osmena, President of the Philippines, in his first 
broadcast after taking the presidential oath of office paid fit- 
ting tribute to his life-long friend, the late President Manuel 
L. Quezon, President Osmena, speaking on the March of Time 
program Thursday, August 3, over the National Broadcasting 
Company' s coast-to-coast hook up, said: "The story of Manuel L. 
Quezon's life is the story of a people who love freedom and are 
ready to sacrifice for it. He is not really dead," the President 
continued. ft He lives in the heart of eighteen million Filipinos, 
and in that of every man who loves freedom." 

Full text of President Osmena' s broadcast follows: 

"Manuel L. Quezon's fighting heart ceased- to beat at 10:05 
last' Tuesday morning. He died in Saranac Lake, New York after a 
gallant *^ight against a pulmonary disease that had been sapping 
his vitality away these many years. Courageous to the end, he 
cpoke^lRie night before of how he would return to his beloved 
Philippines. ..His optimism was enhanced by the landings on Hum- 
foor Jsland &Lx hundred miles from the Philippines and the 
attacks on HaTLmahera and Palau by forces under General MacArthur 
and Admiral Nim.it z. 



]? The story of Manuel L. Quezon 1 s life is the story of a 
people who love freedom and are ready to sacrifice for it. It 
is also the story of Filipino loyalty to America and the ideals, 
for which America stands. Quezon rose in popular esteem and 
received more evidences of his people T s confidence and trust 
than any countryman of his as he grew to be more and more the 
symbol of the Filipino struggle for independence. At the same 
tlrlf, hi maintained his leadership because the Filipino nation 
knew he had en abiding faith in the sense of fairness and justice 
of the American people, and that when the crucial test came, his 
loyalty to America v/ould not bo found wanting. 

■•The tost came in the First World War, v/hen oocn after Amer- 
ica joined the war, Manuel 'L. Quezon, as President of the Senate, 
on behalf of .his ^ocplo offered to President ,/ilson a division 
of Fil.igj.non," 25,000 strong, to fight for America on the battle- 
fi.ol.do bf Europe. The test cane again in the second wOrM War 
when after the treacherous attack on Pearl Harbor, ne led his 
people to f%ht by the side of America, and he himself sick 



as he was, joined General KacArthur in Corregidor. 

"It is a real tragedy that we should lose him now. The 
iorces 03 victory are on the march everywhere, in Normandy, in 
1 plana in Italy; the German defenses are crumbling down and 
the united Nations arc advancing on everv front. In the Paci- 
iic,witn saipan and Tinian taken, with Guam practically in 
American hands, with the B-29's, America's super-fortresses 
engaged in destroying Japanese production centers, with our 
beloved General MacArthur hammering at Japanese outposts three 
hundred miles off the Philippines, with the United States Navy 
m the Pacitic converted into the most powerful fleet now 

- < SeVen Seas ' we are definitely on our way back to 
tne Philippines, Low tragic, indeed, that he whose every dream 
was to sue ohe complete liberation of his country should pass 
away now when the dawn of freedom is about to break for his 
people" 



a 



. We Wl11 miS£ him, and in missing him, his memory will be 
o-i- _ inspiration to continue in the path he has set out for us. 
m is not really dead. He lives in the heart of eighteen ■ 
million Filipinos, and in that of every man who loves freedom. 
Another name has been added to the list of immortals - 
Manuel L. Quezon." 



PR- 99 



J^J-LX-»-iiK_/ U.1XU w — ^ 

scldiers faced with heroism the overwhelming power of the Japanese 
invader were also his field of action during the Revolutionary Days. 
The city of Washington where his body temporarily rests was the scene 
of his early appeals and peaceful efforts for Philippine freedom. 
It was here, almost thirty years ago, where he secured from Congress 
the promise of independence - which is contained in the preamble of 
the Jones Law. Here, again, 18 years later, he succeeded in 
obtaining the passage of the Tydings-McDuf f ie r.ct - a reenactment 
with some slight amendments of the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law which was 
rejected previously by the Philippine Legislature 0 lursuant to 
the provisions of the Tydings-McDuf f ie Lav/, which was accepted by 
the Filipino people, we drafted our Constitution end established 
the present Commonwealth of the Philippines, and elected I'anuel L. 
Quezon as its first President. 

When the war came and it became necessary to evacuate Manila, 
President Quezon, frail and sick as he was, moved with his Cabinet 
to Corregidor where he shared with the soldiers the rigors of 
tunnel life and from there braved the hazards of a perilous journey 
to the Visayas, Mindanao, Australia and America, in order to con- ' 
tinue the fight for the freedom of his people. Here, in Washington, 
with his War Cabinet, ho functioned as the legitimate Government of 
the Filipino people and served as the symbol of their redemption. 

It was largely through his untiring efforts that the Philippines 
was made a member of the United Nations and accorded a seat in tno 
Pacific War Council. It was through his initiative that negotiations 
wore held, resulting in the introduction of Senate Joint Resolutions 
93 and 94. By the terms of Senate Joint Resolution 93; the advance- 
iient of tho date of independence "orior to July 4, 194o, was author- 
ized and the Dledgo given to the Pilipino people by I resident 



1617 Massachusetts "Avenue , N*W. 
Washington 6k D. C, 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC ..MIXTIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 



August 10, 1944 



FOR RELEASE AFTER 11 A # ,M* TODAY (THURSDAY): 

FIRST ADDRSSS OF PRESIDENT SERGIO 0SMEN-A TO 
HIS OABggTj THURSDAY . AUGUST 10, 19~44 



Gentlemen of the Cabinet: 

Nine days ago when I performed the painful duty of announcing 
the passing of our beloved leader, President Manuel L. Quezon, I 
said, in part: 

"President hie z on*s death is a great loss to the 
freedom loving world. No champion of liberty fought 
for such a noble cause with more determination and 
against greater odds. His whole life was dedicated 
to the achievement of his peopled freedom, and it is 
one of the sad paradoxes of fate that with- the forces 
of victory fast approaching the Philippines, ho should 
pass away now and be deprived of seeing the culmination 
of his labors - the freedom of his people. :? 

President Quezon was a champion of freedom in war and in peace. 
The plains and hills of Bataan where the brave Filipino and American 
scldiers faced with heroism the overwhelming power of the Japanese 
invader were also his field of action during the Revclutionary Days. 
The city of Washington where his body temporarily rests was the scene 
of his early appeals and peaceful efforts for Philippine freedom. 
It was here, almost thirty years ago, where he secured from Congress 
the promise of independence -which is contained in the preamble of 
the Jones Law. Here, again, 18 years later, he succeeded in 
obtaining the passage of the Tydings-McDuf f ie Act - a reenactment 
with some slight amendments of the Hare-Hawos-Cutting Lav/ which was 
rejected previously by the Philippine Legislature. lursuant to 
the provisions of the Tydings-McDuf f ie Law, which was accepted by 
the Filipino people, we drafted our Constitution end established 
the present Commonwealth of the Philippines, and elected Manuel L. 
Quezon as its first President. 

When the war came and it became necessary to evacuate Manila, 
President Quezon, frail and sick as he was, moved v.dth his Cabinet 
to Corregidor where he shared with the soldiers the rigors of 
tunnel life and from there braved the hazards of a perilous journey 
to the Visayas, Mindanao, Australia and America, in order to con- 
tinue the fight for the freedom of his people. Here, in Washington, 
with his War Cabinet, ho functioned as the legitimate Government of 
the Filipino people and served as the symbol of their redemption. 

It was largely through his untiring efforts that the Philippines 
was made a member of the United Nations and accorded a seat in the 
Pacific War Council. It was through his initiative that negotiations 
wore held, resulting in the introduction of Senate Joint Resolutions 
93 and 94. By the terms of Senate Joint Resolution 93', the advance- 
ment of the date of independence "orior to July 4, 1946, was author- 
ized and the kludge given to the Filipino people by President 



Roosevelt in 1941 - that Philippine independence will not only be 
established but also protected - was sanctioned by Congress. His 
efforts to secure the rehabilitation of the Philippines from the 
ravages of war resulted in the enactment by Congress of Senate 
Joint Resolution 94 which provides for the physical and economic 
rehabilitation of the Philippines, Even before Congress definitely 
acted on this resolution, he had already created the Postwar 
Planning Board, entrusting it, together with his Cabinet, with the 
task of making studies and submitting recommendations looking 
toward the formulation of a comprehensive rehabilitation program 
for the Philippines. 

In the last few moments before his martyrdom, the great Rizol 
lamented that he would not be able to see the dawn of freedom break 
over his beloved country, but he prophesied that his countrymen would 
see that day. "I have sown the seeds," he said, "others are left 
to reap." Quezon, more fortunate than Rizal, died with the comfort- 
ing thought that the freedom of the Philippines was already an incon- 
testable reality^ awaiting only the certain defeat of the enemy for 
its full expression. 

The immediate duty, then, of those of us who, under the mandate 
of the Constitution and the laws of the Philippines, ore charged with 
the mission of continuing President Quezon^ work, is to follow the 
course he has laid, to maintain and strengthen our partnership with 
America, and to march forward with the United Nations with unwover- 
ing faith end resolute determination until complete victory is won. 

The tide of the war which rose high against us in the early 
stages of the struggle has turned in our favor. The forces of 
victory are on the march everywhere — in Europe, in India, and 
China, and in the Pacific. Normandy and Brittany have been occupied 
by the Anglo-American forces. Poland is half reconquered by our 
great Russian ally. Two-thirds of the Italian peninsula are in 
our hands, while thousands and thousands of planes continue to 
batter and destroy German communication and production centers, 
bringing the war to the German homeland. 

In the Pacific, the progress of the war has been equally im- 
pressive. Most of the Japanese strongholds in the Bismarck archi- 
pelago, in New Guinea, in the Gilberts and in the Marshalls, have 
fallen. The Japanese bastion of Saipan is in Allied hands; so is 
Tinian. The reconquest of Guam is almost completed. B-29 T s, the 
American super- fortresses, are already penetrating the Japanese 
inner defenses, causing destruction in the eneny T s vital centers 
of production. General MacArthur f s forces are hammering the enemy* s 
outposts only 250 miles from the Philippines; while the United 
States Navy, maintaining mastery in the central Pacific, is relent- 
lessly attacking Palau, Yap, Ponape and the Bonin Islands, in its 
steady advance towards the Philippines, China and Japan. 

The size and strength of the Allied landings in Europe, supported 
by thousands of planes and using thousands of ships, surpasses the 
imagination. It is no wonder that before them the most formidable 
defenses of the enemy are crumbling. I believe that when our D-Day 
comes the same pattern will be followed, and the mighty Allied 
forces will join our brave loyal countrymen in an enic victory. 

But the forces of freedom will not land in the Philinnines with 
guns and tanks alone. They will also bring with them food, medical 
supplies and clothing which are so much needed by our suffering 
people. 30,000,000 pesos have already been set aside for the 
requisition of these supplies which will be sent to the front as 
soon as possible for distribution to our civilian population. As 
the war orogresses and as more troops are landed in the Philippines, 
increasing quantities of these supplies will be made available. 
Philippine relief will be prompt and adequate. 

As Philippine territory is wrested from the enemy, civil govern- 
ment will promptly follow military occupation so that the orderly 
processes of self-government may be established under the Constitution 
Red Cross units, both Filipino and American, will follow the armies 
of freedom to help alleviate the sufferings of the people. Hospitals, 
health and puericulture centers will be reestablished. All tne 



schools in operation before the war will be reopened in order to 
resume an education of patriotism, democracy and humanitarian! sm« 



The veterans of our wars for independence, and all those who 
supported our struggle for freedom, will receive for their labors 
and sacrifices the full recognition expected of a grateful nation. 
War widows and orphans will be provided for. Ample compensation 
will be made for the destruction of public and private properties. 
Roads and bridges destroyed by the enemy will be rebuilt. Dis- 
rupted communications by land, sea and air, will be repaired and 
improved. Towns and cities which either were destroyed or suffered 
damages because of the war will be reconstructed under a systematic 
and scientific town planning program. In this program, the towns 
of Bataan and Zambales will receive preferential attention. Bataan, 
the historic battleground where our brave soldiers, Americans and 
Filipinos, faced the enemy until death, will be made a national 
shrine • 

In providing for the reconstruction of our industries and the 
rehabilitation of our agriculture, immediate attention willbe^ 
given to factory workers and farm hands throughout the Philippines, 
and full and generous assistance will be given to the small farmers 
who, because of the war, hove lost with their nipa hut, their work 
animals and farm implements. 

We are making preparations to meet the manifold problems 
arising from the closing and insolvency of our banks, insurance and 
credit institutions, the adulteration of our currency with unsound 
enemy issues, the impairment of the basis of taxation and the 
initial difficulty of tax collection. Moreover, we are formulat- 
ing a long-range economic program with a view to securing that 
sound economic foundation which will give our independence 
stability and permanence. 

In the gigantic task of rehabilitation and reconstruction, 
we are assured of America's full assistance and support. The joint 
Filipino-American Rehabilitation Commission, created by Congress 
is already functioning. This Commission is under the chairmanship 
of a staunch friend of the Filipino people, Senator Tydings of 
Maryland. To it is entrusted the task of studying and recommend- 
ing to the United States and Philippine Governments measures cal- 
culated to secure the complete physical and economic rehabilitation 
of the Philippines and the reestablishment as soon as possible of 
such commercial relations between the two countries as will assure 
us a reasonable level of public and private prosperity. 

In the preparation and execution of the Filipino rehabilitation 
program, America's support and assistance are essential. But there 
are responsibilities which we as a people must undertake ourselves, 
and which can be assumed only if we ore faithful to our ideals, 
principles and commitments. 

We are a Christian people and the faith that we imbibed sprang 
from our contacts with nations of Occidental civilization. We 
embraced Christianity a century before the Pilgrim Fathers landed at 
Plymouth. For more than 400 years we have kept that faith. We 
cannot now turn back and be a pagan people. 

For centuries we have been a law-abiding people. We believe in 
and practise democracy. That is the reason why Section III, Article 
II of our Constitution provides that we renounce v/ar as an instru- 
ment of national policy and adopt the generally accepted principles 
of international law as a part of the law of the nation. It is 
repugnant to our Christian traditions and democratic ideals to ue 
the satellite of a conquering power or to be allied with the masters 
of brute force, whether in Asia, Europe or elsewhere. 

The mutual relationship between the American and Filipino people 
for half a century has revealed to the. Filipinos the nign laeais oi 
the American nation and the good faith that nas always animated the 
United States in its dealings with us. Out of ¥f a soc ation h /e 

arisen mutual understanding and continuous cooperation betv /een _ ens 

two countries, resulting in great national progress for the pnii^,. 
progress that is without parallel in history. In thc E P 1C 01 ™ 



-4- 



where the American and Filipino soldiers fought together, the 
enduring friendship of our two peoples was sealodo 

In this war between a free world and a slave world, the 
Philippines has freely and voluntarily taken side with the defenders 
of liberty and democracy. In the sane manner as the enemy is resort 
ing to every means to attain his evil ends, the United Nations are 
exerting their utmost to achieve complete victory. Pledged in this 
war to the finish, we will continue doing our best to help the war 
effort. Every commitment made by us in this respect will be ful- 
filled. 

The Filipino people, with their wisdom in peace and gallantry in 
war, have established their right to take a place in the family of 
nations as a full and sovereign member. We cannot renounce this 
right nor its obligations and responsibilities. We shall, as a free 
and self-respecting nation, fulfill our duties not only to ourselves 
but also to the entire freedom-loving world by participating in the 
establishment and preservation of a just peace for the benefit of 
mankind • 

Our path of duty is clear. It is the oath of notional honor, 
dignity and responsibility. It was laid out for us by the great 
heroes of our race — Rizal, Bonifacio and Quezon. We shall move 
forward steadily to reach our goal, maintaining our faith in the 
United States and fully cooperating with her. 

In the fulfillment of my duties as President of the Philip- 
pines, I ask in all humility but in all earnestness the coopera- 
tion of all my countrymen in the United States, Hawaii, in the 
homeland and elsewhere in the world. With their full and unstinted 
cooperation and support, and God helping me, I shall not fail. 



PR - 102 



1617 Massachusetts IT../, 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

August 11, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: 



Sergio OsmefTa, President of the Philippines, called the 
first meeting of his new Cabinet and delivered his first address 
as President on Thursday, August 10. The President administered 
the oath of office to his Cabinet Members and addressed his 
Cabinet in the presence of officials and employees of the 
Commonwealth Government and American officials, 

♦ 

President Osmeffa then issued Proclamation No, 2-W, declaring 
August 19, 1944, the 66th birthday anniversary of the late Pres- 
ident Quezon, a special public holiday. 

Full text of Proclamation follows: 

WHEREAS, President Quezon passed away on the first of this 
month at Saranac Lake, New York; and ' 

WHEREAS, President Quezon had consecrated his life to the 
cause of our • freedom; and 

WHEREAS , August 19, 1944, will be the sixty-sixth anniver- 
sary of the birth of Manuel L. Quezon, first President of the 
Commonwealth- of the Philippines; and 

; WHEREAS, it would be fitting and proper that a special public 
holiday be declared so that Filipinos everywhere may go to their 
churches to pray for our beloved leader and hold memorial ser- 
vices to honor his memory and oxtoll his character and public 
service ; 

4 Now therefore, in pursuance of the provisions of section 
thirty of the Revised Administrative Code, I, SERGIO OSMENA, 
President of tjie Philippines, do hereby proclaim August 19, 1944, 
a special public holiday. 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF; I have hereunto set my hand and caused 
the seal of the Commonwealth of the - Philippines to be affixed. 

Done at the city of Washington, District of Columbia, this 
• tenth day of August, in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred 
and forty-four, and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the 
ninth. 

SERGIO OSMENAs 
President of the Philippines. 



PR-103 



1617 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W. 
Washington 6, D. C. 
HObart 1400 



DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

August 11, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE : 

Colonel Andres Soriano resigned from the Cabinet as Secretary 
of Finance on April 1*3, 1944, but President Quezon asked that he 
continue in office in view of the fact that he was entrusted with 
important matters affecting Philippine rehabilitation, currency 
and other monetary problems. After completing his work, he again 
insisted on his resignation which was finally accepted by the late 
President, effective July 31, 1944. 

When the Cabinet was informed of the acceptance of his resig- 
nation on July 14, the following resolution was unanimously passed 

"Whereas, Colonel Andres Soriano has served 
his Government loyally and unselfishly, and given 
unstinted cooperation to all the members of the 
Cabinet, 

"Resolved, That the Cabinet wish Colonel 
. " Andres Soriano godspeed in his journey and success 
in his new assignment." 

President Osmena in his press conference yesterday mentioned 
that Colonel Soriano was not included in the reorganized Cabinet 
because he had resigned as Secretary of Finance before the new 
President assumed office, and because he insisted that he be sent 
back, to the front. Colonel Soriano is soon leaving for the South- 
west Pacific. PR-104 



1617 Massachusetts Ave,, N.L . 
.;"a;jiiington 6, D. C. 
HCbart 1/+00 

DEPARTMENT OF INFOmiATlON *.ND PUBLIC REL...TJCNG 
3 C M M 0 N V/ E A L T H 0 F THE 1- H I L I ? I I N E S 

August 24, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 



With the news of the liberation of Paris, President 
3ergio Osmeria issued the following statement, which was 
broadcast to the Philippines through the shortwave facilities 
of the Office of War Information: 

•"'Paris has been liberated from Nazi rule. This new 
Allied victory is significant because it is the culmination 
of a series of victories on the European mainland that 
started with the successful invasion of Italy and later of 
Normandy. When the Allied forces made their victorious 
advance on the Western front they showed the world that 
the much-advertised impregnability of Hitler's European 
■ fortress was nothing but a myth. The fall of Paris is the 
handwriting on the wall presaging the complete defeat of 
Geimany. 

"In the Philippines, the liberation of Franco- will be 
received with rejoicing not only because all freedom- 
loving nations have the highest admiration for the French 
people but because they see in the crumbling of the German 
forces the approach of their own freedom. The advance of 
the forces of victory is irresistible and whether it be in 
• Europe or in the Pacific, every Allied triumph is a score 
in favor of the eventual victory of liberty and democracy 
over tyranny and totalitarianism." 

PR- 108 



1617 Massachusetts Ave,, N . ;; , 
Washington 6, D. C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT 0? INFORMATION AND PUBLIC R3L..TICNS 
C 0 jl M 0 N W E A L T H 01 THE PHILIPPINES 

August 26, 1944 



for immediate; RELEASE : 



Among the many condolence messages to Mrs, Manuel L, Quezon, 
wife of the late President of the Philippines, was the following 
from His Holiness, Pope Pius XII, sent through the Apostolic 
Delegate : 

"My dear Mrs, Quezon: 

i! By His Eminence, the Cardinal Secretary of State, 
I have been instructed to convey to you the august 
condolences of His Holiness, Pope Pius XII, on the 
death of your distinguished husband, With these 
condolences goes the Apostolic Benediction of the 
Sovereign Pontiff, as a pledge of divine comfort 
and solace in this hour of trial for you and your' 
bereaved family. His Limine nee j Cardinal Haglione, 
has asked me to tender you likewise the assurance 
of his own personal sympathy in your loss, 

- ;i With sentiments of esteem and with every best wish 
■I I remain 

Sincerely yours in Christ, 



CI. Cicognani 
xj?chbishop of Laodicea 
Apostolic Delegate •'. 



PR- 10 9 

culminate in the passage of the Jones Act was Waged upon this 
floor. It was a strange struggle, carried o:i in amity and ^ under- 
standing , for only Americans could comprehend the democratic 
dreams of our Filipino leaders. There were two of these fiery 
young nationalists' who bo an the fight for independence ,, Manuel 
Luis Quezon, as Resident Commissioner, on this floor, set here 
the demands for the outposts of democracy in oho Philippines, laid 
here the foundation of Bataan. But it was in the Philippines 
where the strategy of the whole fight was planned under Sergio . 
Osi.iena, Speaker of the-PhilipplSe Assembly, who, as then leader 
jZ the Filipino people, gave purpose and direction .,o one peace- 
ful campaign for freedom, 

"The first Philippine Assembly that convened on Cctober 16, 
190V, was the supreme test of our ability *° S™™ 01 * ^ 8 ' 
if it succeeded, more self-governing powers ^^j^£ d ^ 
the Filfpinos, If it failed, it would mean JJ^Silinihe 
slow march to independence. Those who maue one i mm. . mo 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N,V/ # 
./ushington 6, D. C. 
Hobart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF BIFCLi .TION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 J! M 0 N W I A L T H OF THE PHILIPPINES 

August 29, 1944 



FOR RELEASE AFTER 12 > ?Q PM ' TODAY ( TUESDAY ) : 

Col. Carlos P. Romulo , Resident Commissioner of the Phil- 
ippines to the U.S. , delivered his first address on the floor 
of Congress today, (Tuesday, August 29), the 28th anniversary 
of the passage of the Jones Act. 

Following is full text of CoimrLssioner Romulo' s address— 
THE JCNES ACT— FOUNDATION 3T0NE OF BATAAN: 

-Fir, Speaker: 

•'"Twenty-eight years age today, upon this floor, America 
gave its first pledge of freedom to the people of the IMlippines. 

••On that day the Congress of the United States approved 
the Jones Act,' promising independence to the subject Philippines 
in a covenant that is without parallel in the world's history, 

1 "It is not my purpose to review the Filipinos' fight against 
America during the early days of American occupation, nor stress 
the', fact thet it took the United States three and one-half years 
of. actual fighting to subdue the Philippines. fe were not con- 
quered, in the final analysis, by guns, but by the :ractiCol de- 
monstration in the Philippines of America's concept o± domocracy. 
American teachers brought us new methods of education. Public 
hjalth, road building, government training — such things were 
given us. Gradually our feeling tov/ard America changed from 
resentment and suspicion to confidence and loyalty. 

"That loyalty was sealed by the passage of the Jones Act. 

"The long struggle for I hilippine Independence that was to 
culminate in the passage of the Jones Act was waged upon this 
floor. It was a strange struggle, carried 0:1 in amity and under- 
standing, for only Americans could comprehend the democratic 
dreams of our Filipino leaders. There were two of these fiery 
' young nationalists'" who began the fight for independence . Manuel 
Luis Quezon, as Resident Com; irssioner , on this floor, set here 
the demands for the outposts of democracy in the Philippines, laid 
here the foundation of Bataan. But it was in the Philippines 
where the strategy of the whole fight was planned unaor Sergio . 
Osmcna. Speaker cf the 'Philippine Assembly, who, as^ then leader 
j>| the Filipino people, gave purpose and direction go the peace- 
ful campaign for freedom. 

-••The first Philippine Assembly that convened on October 16, 
190V , was the stroremetest of our ability to gover yourselves . 
it it succeeded/ more self-governing powers would 
the Filipinos. If it failed, it would mean | M |4hif^Se 
slow march to independence. Those who maue 



- 2 - 



ffi Lmocracv LT™ !P ° f C0Ura ^ e and visl ™> and cur Phil- 
sacrifice I wn.nf ??S monuraent *« their struggle and their 
Sw and ion! H h f 6 *° cal1 their today, yet however 

of the new pSSfL^ 9 ^+t> We mUst corae to ™ e nine at last, that 
Sergio ! P f S1 ° f , the Connnonwealth of the Philippines,' 
its vLiouH^n S + Spea ? er of that historic Assembly, he united 
Hi f L L e ? ntB Steered its cou rse, establishing for 
He lead L SSL ?f POl i cy of Filipino collaboration with America, 
eie ft! ,™! through a crucial period in our history, to 
throSh fir? * ^. the t6St tiiat resulted in the recognition, 
fre?d™ L J ° ne ? of our opacity for self -government and' 

darker da.foft if -? e us ,, toda ^ as President in exile, through 
and 1+£Ia tWaU, and the crowning service of this patient 

h«q hllrT tJ? cin S- statesman will be to establish after victory 
has been achieved, the Philippine Republic. 

. " T £? ^nes Act, approved on August 29, 1916, placed the 
^!o^ atlV ! ?? Wer in Fili Pino hands'. It provided for the 
creation of the Philippine , Senate to be elected by the people and 
to be composed entirely of Filipinos. It gave the first glimpse • 
of democracy to the benighted Far East at our back, to millions 
oi enslaved Asiatics. The American name of Jones carried to the 
liar East America's words that had hammered the year 1776 into 
nistory — independence and equality. It was a vested interest 
in the future that must assure economic and spiritual decency for 
all men. 

"I would like to call attention to the fact that on exactly 
that same date six years before, on August 29, 191C, Japan 
against the will of the Koreans, formally annexed the ancient 
kingdom of Korea and ended its independent existence of 4200 
years J 

"What curious coincidence could better show the contrast in 
ideology between the United States and Japan. These two histor- 
ical incidents reveal why Japan and America are now at war. With 
the annexation of Korea, Japan started on its blood-stained 
march of conquest that was to culminate in the sneak attack on 
Pearl Harbor, while America, with the Jones Act, set a course of 
freedom and democracy for all peoples. 

"The Jones Act was our victory. You let us win it upon this 
floor. It was a pledge made, and America has kept that pledge. 
In 1934 the Tydings-iicDuf f ie Act set the independence date, for 
July 4 j 1946. Recently, Congress passed S.J. Resolution No. 93 
advancing the date of independence as soon as the Japanese in- 
vader is driven from Philippine soil and constitutional processes 
are restored in the Philippines. 

* "We too kept the pledge. You gave us the Jones Act, We 
• ; gave you Bataan, For Bataan and . Corregidor were dividends paid 
back out of our loyalty and our faith in America. On this day, 
twenty-eight years ago, we of the Philippines were promised a 
place beside our fellow Americans as men equal and free. We 
earned that position in 1941, when we offered our lives beside 
Americans, in the blackest hour America has known* 

"Bataan, where Filipinos fought under the American flag to 
preserve democracy, was the ultimate outpost of freedom in the 
Far East. 

"Half the world lies between the foxholes of Eataan and the 
floor of Congress, and yet I cannot feel myself a stranger amcng 
the representatives of a people for whose flag and ideals my 
countrymen did not hesitate to fight and die. I speak for them, 
a nation of prisoners, their tongues stopped with fear or with _ 
death, because they cast their lot with Americans, against their 
"fellow Orientals" the Japanese, 

"I speak for them proudly, seventeen million of them, with 
new hope, for at last we see the way clear back to the Phil- 
ippines, and we dare speak of victory, 

"We know now there will be victory, and palms such as are . 
laid on- the graves of Arlington will be pXaeed on the nameless 
dust of Bataln, On that bloodstained PhlliPP^e peninsula 



-3- 



Ame. Leans and Filipinos must meet over 'a common grave where 
lie ^ hie- bodies of their sons. Ue will remember then, after 
/ cucry now we valued thorn, those American and Filipino boys 
who area together for democracy. In our eyes they were 

beautiful, they were .the hope of our lives, and our Hearts will ' 
break again over their shared dust. 

iJ We will moet, my folic-... Americans, over that com ion grc,ve . 
-Out of that grave, a dream. 

-Others have died for that dream of world recognition of 
the ordinary civilities and the divine rights of man. 

, . '' A ,f e r nara ? d G hrist carridd that dream, via Golgotha, to 
a :iul that is known as C.lvary, 

"An American, Abraham Lincoln, carried that dream from a 
log caoin to bhe ,/hite house. He was assassinated,' here in 
hashing -con. ' 

. . : ' T *f? Filipino Manuel Quezon died for that dream, after 
taking his last stand for democracy in tho tunnel on Ccrregidor. 

''•'And a boy named Jose', from Manila, and another boy named 
Joe, from Hiss our i, died for the same dream on Bataan, and their 
commingled dust is holy earth, 

:? Hbw can we sift that dust by race for separate honor I 
3och wore young. Both loved life. But they hated autocracy 
more then they loved living, and they share one grave on Bataan. 

'•'Out of that grave, a'droam. 'Bloom forever, oh Ronublic, 
from the dust of thy bosom. ' - 

PR -110 

oOo 



4 



\ 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.7/. 
Washington 6, D. C, 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF OTOKMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
3 0 l . B O N W 3 A L T H 0 7 THE PHILIP ? I E B Q 

SeT.lember 7. 192i4. 



-t rv* 



President Sergio Osmena broadcast the following message to 
the Philippines on the occasion of his 66th birthday, September 
9, 1944: 

"My Beloved Countrymen: 

"On this my 66th birthday, I give thanks to the Almighty for 
having preserved my life and for having permitted me to dedicate 
two-thirds of it to the service of our country. It ;ould, per- 
haps, be proper as I begin a new year, which is also my first 
as the head of the Philippine Government, to give a brief account 
of our immediate past, starting from the time we v/ere forced by 
the existing emergency to move the seat of our government —first 
to Corregidorj later to the Visayas and to Mindanao, and finally 
to Washington, this beautiful and hospitable capital of the 
gre'oufc American republic, 

"The highlights of this historic development are as follows: 
the epic battle of Bataan, the subsequent military occupation of 
the Ihilippinos by the enemy, the establishment in Washington of 
the Government of the Philippine Commonwealth and the recognition 
accorded it by the United States and the other members of the 
United Nations, the reiteration of the promise made by the Pre- 
sident of the United States in December, 1941, that the indepen- 
dence of the Philippines will be not only established but also 
protected, and the subsequent rat j.f ication of that promise by 
Congress, together with the creation of the Joint Rehabilitation 
Co :i -ission to attend to the relief., reconstruction and rehabil- 
itation cf our country. 

'•We had the good fortune until the first day of August of 
this year- to count on the wise and patriotic guidance of our late 
President, Manuel L, Quezon, with whom it was my privilege to 
work closely and harmoniously as his' immediate elective asso- 
ciate. As I announced publicly upon succeeding him in office 
on Aucust 1st, it is my purpose to carry on the task of achiev- 
ing liberty and security for our people without any fundamental 
change in policy. Cooperation with the United States, which 
has been the cornerstone of all governmental policies of the 
Co i .onwealth since its establishment, will be faithfully main- 
tained, 

'•About the end of 1941, while we Filipinos were living in 
peace among "ourselves and with our neighbors and the entire world 
■while we v/ere singularly devoted to the peaceful task of com- 
pleting and perfecting the structure of our nation in preparation 
for the day .set by Our two Governments when we would enjoy the 

'-;s of independence, -the hordes cf militarism suddenly 
ate., led us.' »7e were unpre oared for this brutal assault, as were 
also the other democracies jhich were the victims^ of similar 
aggression, j/e were inadeouately defended, especially irom z&q 
air and the sea, but we met and resisted the* full lorco oi tne 
enemy, complying with our obligations as a f^^? m :^^ n ^? e °" 
pie, as a nation highly conscious "of - its national honor and 
. worthy to be independent.- un Bataan, Obrregidor Gebu .nd other 
places m the Philippines, we presented a single united Iront 



against the enemy, fighting side by side with our American comrades 
in-arms in the same manner that wo had labored with thoia for near- 
ly 40 years to assure the well-being and freedom of the Ihilippines 
and for the good name of America* 

'■Only because we did not have the material means with_ which 
to resist the invasion were' we unable to stop it. But despite the 
occupation of our country by the enemy, resistance continues, even 
though Bataan and Corregidor fell and our armed forces in the Phil- 
ippines surrendered. The reason for this lies in the fact that 
to the Filipinos this war has always been a people's war. Just as 
the greet majority of the soldiers who fought on Bataan were drawn 
from the civilian population, so also does the opposition to the 
enemy that has continued to this day come from them, 

"By means of surprise and treachery and because of an over- 
whelming superiority in men and materials, the enemy was able to 
achieve his first objective in the Philippines military occu- 
pation. But in his second objective, equally vital and necessary 
to the realization of his plans, the enemy has failed. Eo has noo 
been able to enlist the people to his cause. For the bayonets and 
bullets of the enemy, while they may still the lips of the people, 
cannot 'enotrate the soul of the nation, -much less gain its res- 
pect and affection. Show of brute force, acts of cruelty and des- 
potism can neither destroy nor win the spirit of the Filipinos-- 
a freedom-loving nation. The Filipino people's character has been 
tempered in the crucible of suffering and adversity. They have 
written their history in blood and tears. They have never con-^ 
sidered themselves inferior in any respect to the enemy except in 
the temporary possession of military power. They are convincea 
that they are defending a just cause and that their ultimate des- 
tiny as a free and sovereign people is assured. 

:-In December 194-1, while our soldiers were fighting by the • 
side cf their American comrades- in- arms in an unequal battle 
against the enemy, the President of the United States sent a mes- 
sage to the Filipino people recognizing their loyalty ana heicism 
and assuring them that their independence ■ will be no* only esta- 
blished but also protected. This message, containing ae 1. aia, 
a new promise to the Philippines, was received with deep -tisiaC 
tion and gratitude and without doubt contributed stron- iy ic the 
maintenance of the morale of Our fighting men during tnose terrible 
days cn Bataan. On August 13, 1943, President Rooseyext renewed 
hie remise cf 19U in a broadcast commemorating that date and a 
month later sent a message to Congress recommending the enactment 
of legislation which would authorize the advancement of •• nilip- 
pinc independence to a date prior to July 4, i?46, and >r ovlde 
for the security of both trie Philippines and the Jni^Sta tee 
and for the rehabilitation of our country. The legislation re 
commended was first introduced in the Senate and afterwards in 
the House of Representatives, In neither body-was ^his lcgisla 
tion considered a party measure and, therefore, when the yet. 
was taken, the Republican snd Democratic Senators and Be pre sen 
tativcs 'voted together .aid, as a matter of fact, passed it unan 
imously, 

■•One result of this legislation was the creation of thu 
Fill mo Rehabilitation Commission, composed 01 nin, ;^ lic ^; h 
and nine Filipinos, The Commission is already functioninc with 
Senatcr Tydings of Maryland as Chairman and with Sccrctar, 01 _ 
Finalcfe#fxfe-Chairman. Besides Senator. Tyding ^ro jg^ 
in til, American group two other Senators, throe Represent. t.^ , 
and three members appointed by President Lo °^:^^ with Thil- 
have either been in the Philip, ines or are ^f^Sabions, In 
ippinc conditions and are in sympathy with oux^x ^ apart 
the Philippine group, completing t >e |^T"j» t commissioner Romulo 



from Secretary of Finance Hernandez, PSiJ tho Co.... ission, 

end the other members of the Cabinet sorying to the President 
the military Adviser and the economic Anyisox rocogni tien of 
and Lrs, Pilar Hidalgo Lim, ./horn I appoint^a^ q , /0 men. Th 
the cultural and civic achievements 01 ^ ^ pro blem of rehab 
Com. hssion is studying all 'Che aspects ° curo 'the most ample 
ttatinp; the Philippines in an cf fort tc > e hich 1 am sure, 
help and assistance from the -United State-, 
will be given us by Congress, 



"Since the Commonwealth Government was established in Wash- 
ington, it -has been not only discharging the ordinary functions of 
government , but also studying the manifold problems which" we have 
to face after the expulsion of the enemy from the islands. The 
Commonwealth Government has also attended to matters of ir-'ernation- 
al character by taking part in international organizations and con- 
ferences. Our position in this respect has been greatly facilita- 
ted ^^strengthened by the liberal attitude of the President of 
the united States who has considered us as possessing the attributes 
of an independent government. Consequently' 1 , we are now one of the 
United Nations, we have a seat in the- Pacific War Council end we 
will undoubtedly have a place at the peace conference, moreover, 
our presence in //ashington has served as a constant reminder to the 
.vorld that there exists in the Far East a Christian and democratic 
people who cherish their liberty 'and have shown themselves ready 
and able to fight and die for it. 

••Cur heroic stand in this war has nroduced results of trans- 
cendental importance to the Philippines/ Because of it, our abil- 
ity to establish and maintain a free and democratic government has 
been universally recognized. - It also won for us the lasting gra- 
titude of the American people. This is the" reason why resident 
Roosevelt's message recommending the advancement of Philippine in- 
dependence was received in Congress with spontaneous and general 
approval. 

:i Senate Joint Resolution 93 authorizes the President of the 
United States to advance the date of independence as originally 
set by the TydingS-McDuf fie Law and to assure the permanence of 
that independence. We have already the assurances of the President 
of the United States that this authority will be exercised after 
consultation with oar government as soon as the enemy is expelled 
from the islands and constitutional processes are restored. The 
President has also assured us that all the forces and material re- 
sources available will bo usod as soon as possible to effect the 
expulsion of the enemy from u R5il and to restore normal conditions 
and constitutional government in the Philippines, for, as he stated, 
we Filipinos, by our courage and sacrifices and by our loyalty to 
the cause of a free and independent government , have more than 
earned every effort America con put forth to hasten the day of our 
liberation. 

"The advent of this day is, indued, already bein^ accelerated 
by the rapid progress of tho v/ar # So strong and ovorv/holiiiin£ have 
the Allied forces become that no defense which the cnciay has been 
able to put up has stopped their relentless advance • -^is armies 
are being destroyed on ovary front # 

4 4 4 

•*In Europe, France, Belgium, Holland and Luxembourg have been 
added to the list of the nations being liberated, while for the 
first time in 130 years, the war has been brought to the Gorman 
homeland. Germany is continually being battered from the air. 
She is hemmed in on three sides. Russian forces are storming the 
gates cf East Prussia, besieging "/arsaw- and cutting across the 
Carpathian Mountains. Rumania, Pinland, and Bulgaria have come to 
ter is with the Allies. In Italy tho Al 1 ied forces ar,.. Moving 
steadily into the Po Valley and are nearing the approaches to the 
vulnerable Brenner Pass; and in the West, the Allied Expeditionary 
forces arcs storming the Gorman Siegfried Lino. Germany is, most 
certainly, on the verge of final defeat. 

'The same fate is in store for Germany's partner in the East 0 
- • - - - ■ ■ - - - ies 

niry in Europe. Japan has already 
been bombed. She has also been forced to disgorge many of _ her ili- 
ac ' -red gains, such as N 0 w Guinea, the Solomons, the GilDorts, 
the l .tr shells and the Carolines. Palau, Yap; Ponape , and Halmahera, 
which form tho approaches to the Philippines, are being relentless- 
ly bombed and raked preparatory to Allied landings. Joon, the 
forces of freedom will be knocking at our gates. 

''Tile dark night cf our captivity is about to end. The dawn 
of freedom which Rizal, Bonifacio, Quezon and the otne, neroos oi 
our race visional is beginnin to spread its hue oi goia cn -one 



St- 



horizon. For by the 'laws of Goo. and of nature, by .very coripact 
oi a legal character, and by the innumerable saorificos eve have 
made throughout our history, the Filipino people hav3 tho inconto 
aoio right to bo free and independent. The might u" tho most 
powerful nation -on earth stands behind- that right; It would bo 
downright folly, cowardly non-feasance, unpardonable treason in 
tms supreme hour when victory is almost at hand for us to renounce 
our nerd-won liberty and accept the humiliating, rolj of being 
tools ci the enemy lor the attainment of his ovil ..ids. 

•-In this supreme hour, the groat need is unity among Fill- 
pxnjsa It was unity that saved tho cause of Philiu lino "freedom 
alter -che surrender of our revolutionary forces in ,.001. It was 
unroy cnat consolidated the forces of the Filipino moplu in the 
haxis ci the first Philippine Assembly, making that\issonbly a 
success. It was unity that made possible such gro^t orogress 
during the regime under the Jongs Law, convincing Congress that 
tho 'G ii.ie for granting independence to the Filipino people had 
arrived end that independence was actually granted. It was unity 
that enriched and consecrate.! the sacrifice of our soldiers on 
Bataan and Corregidor and opened for the Filipinos the doer to 
international recognition. It was unity that definitely scaled 
our spiritual alliance with nnorica and only through that alliance, 
founaod on the basis of a same Christian culture and civilization 
ana a common democratic ideology, can we achieve victory in this 
struggle in which we have become embroiled— between a sit ve . orld 
and a free world. 

"With victory assured, our liberation is inevitable. The 
hordes of despotism and brute force cannot prevent it. In accom- 
plishing that liberation, quite as important as tho forces of 
freedom that will land in overv;holmin.g strength on our soil so that 
the Philippines may be for the Filipinos, is the full Participation 
of the Filipino people themselves. I know that when the hour' 
striijos no one -will be deaf to the call. Everyone will take his 
place in the great crusade for liberty and security -- tho liberty 
and security not only for our People but elso for all the nations 
of the world, big and small. 

• "To 'all compatriots, wherever you may bo, in the homeland 
or abroad, in the towns and barrios or in the mountains, I send on 
this day my .warm brotherly greetings. May God bless, you all," 



F2-113 



1617 Massachusetts "Ave,, N,W. 
Washington 6, D. C, 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND IUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 



October 20, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE ; 



With Allied confirmation of landings in the Philippines,- 

4 

Hon, Jaime Hernandez, Secretary of Finance, in charge of the 

Philippine Government' in Washington in the absence of 

President Sergio Osmena, today issued the following statement: 

^ "We are happy beyond words over the landing in the 
Philippines because we know that this is the beginning of ,the 
expulsion of the invader from our country. 

We are grateful to President Roosevelt and to General 
Douglas MacArthur, both of whom are keeping their pledge to 
redeem the Philippines. 

To all those soldiers, sailors and marines, who are now ' 
landing on our shores go our prayers and our heartfelt thanks. 
The American people who have produced the guns, the ships, 
the ^ planes to equip the mighty invasion forces have reiterated 
their faith in the Filipino people. 7/o will never forget this 

We are mindful of the fact that there vail be hard and 
bloody fighting ahead— that this will mean a sacrifice of 
lives— both American and Filipino — and possibly further 
destruction of property. But we arc willing to pay the 
price— in blood once again if need be-- for the freedom 
we have always cherished and will always fight for. 

The liberation of the Philippines has commenced. Pre- 
sident Osmena and his staff are already in our homeland to 
lead our people to their independence. There can be no 
doubt that the 18 million loyal Filipinos will cooperate 
whole heartedly with the Allied forces in the final 
liberation of our country. 



PR-116 



1617 Massachusetts Ave. N w 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT CP IlLFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

October 20, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE ; 

Colonel Manuel Nieto, veteran of Bataan, who left the 
Philippines in 1942 with the late President Quezon, was asked 
by the Columbia Broadcasting System (today) October 20, at 
1:00 AM, to broadcast a message on the Allied landings in the 
Philippines. 

Col. Nieto, Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce in the 
Philippine Government in Yfashington, and aide de camp to the late 
President Quezon for many years, told his audience from the C3S 
studios in Washington: "The dawn of this day of liberation is 
an event of great rejoicing to all Filipinos. But it is also a 
cause of uneasiness and grave concern, especially for those of 
us who took part in actual combat, and saw with our own eyes the 
ravages of war and the suffering it inflicts on the helpless non- 
combatants . 

"Colonel Nieto declared: "In the Philippines, the enemy 
will find himself facing not only a we 11- organized attack frcm 
American forces of liberation, but also in the roar ho will be 
attacked by guerrillas of an irate and avenging population." 
Full text of Cel. Nieto' s broadcast follows: 
"The prayers of the whole Filipino people wont ashore 
today with General I lac'.rthur ' s soldiers on the island of Loyte. 
This is the fulfillment of a pledge which we know would be kept, 
and the beginning of a now generation of hope. 

"The dawn of this day of liberation is, of course, an ov 
of great rejoicing to all Filipinos, but it is also a cause for 
uneasiness and grave concern, especially for those of us who took 
part in actual combat, and saw with our own eyes the ravages of 
war and the suffering it inflicts on the helpless non-combatants, 

"More blood will be shod, more innocent lives sacrificed, 
and more earthly possessions will be razed to the ground. But 



• a m 

the Filipinos will not bo found - wonting, 

* ^J^LJ^f^ °,\i oyt ' Q is conclusive proof that tho link 
11 lie . iSv SSfSi Tn ° Artm ^ and tho Filipinos had net boon severed 
?LAr?h^Tf^f,J apanGSC - *t ^so spooks eloquently of Cxoneral 
f fh S ffnius, for Loyto is strategically the key 

t \ Lit I PP i -f * - ircin that island it will be possible for - 
MacArthur to strike m throe directions— south toward Mindanao, 
west toward Cebu and Ncgrcs and north toward Luzon and the 
capital at Manila. Besides this strategic advantage, there is 
another which is important tc tho people of the Philippines, 
The Japanese appear tc have concentrated most of their forces in 
the north and the south, where thoy expected tho attack to fall, 
so they may bo extremely weak on Leyte. If that proves to be 
^ tho lonfttagfl will be only lightly ocpesed and the ccst 

m both Filipino and American lives will be low, 

"MaeArthur aas just confirmed this observation," 
Wo know, of course, that more bloodshed and destruction 
will be _ inevitable. However, by comparison, it will not be as 
ccstly in human lives as tne rocencuost of Guam end the Japanese 
strongholds in the central and south Pacific. In Guam the 
natives were completely overwhelmed by the enemy. Other native 
populations were largely indifferent and passive. In the Phil- 
ippines, the enemy will find himself facing net enly a well* 
crgonized attack from American forces of liberation, but also in 
tho rear he will bo attacked by guerrillas of on irate and 
avenging population. 

tffhis contrast in popular attitudes is >asily explained. 
Tc the natives of some Japanese possessions, bio., struggles that 
laid waste their home lands meant nothing but ?, change in alien 
ruling groups. Bub to the Filipinos the resumption of organized 
warfare on the soil of their fatherland represents most of all 
continuation of thjir fight for freedom. ' " 

"President Osmona with his staff is ready tc reestablish 
normal civil government in the reconquered areas, and tc inspire 
the people to carry on the fight until every vestige of the 
invader is crushed. 

" As the late President Quezon well said In the Senate of tho 
United States in 1942, and I quote: 'The tio which binds cur two 
countries transcends all political and legal relationships. It 
depends not morelyapon a written alliance, a declaration or a 
treaty. It consists of spiritual kinship and relationship. Our 
aims, our hopes, our aspirations, are the same as your own. In 
the great moral causes, the principles of righteousness, of 
liberty, of peace, the United States and tho Philippines are in 
complete accord with one another; they are in absolute and 
hearty agreement.' 1 These words of the great departed leader 
express vividly and fully the sentiments of the Filipino people, 

"In the days which are fast -approaching, I know the great 
end generous people of the U.S. will not be found wanting in the 
discharge of their duties toward the people of the Philippines, 
My homeland was devastated by the enemy because my people chose 
to fight for the preservation of their freedom end the honor of 
the American flag. The people of America kn jv/ that. 

"As my late ce: aiander-in-chiof , President C.uezcn sc.id in the 
U.S. Senate, and I shall borrow his own words: 'I hope that the 
American people in this hour of their great responsibility to 
the world will always keep before them the memory i-f the 
devotion end sacrifices of tho people of the Philippines." 



PR-117 



1617 Massachusetts Ave,, n.W. 
Washington 6, D. C, 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

October 21, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE ! 



• ,J°ii?^ ns . tlxe news of the landing of President Sergio Osmena 
in the Philippines with General Douglas Mao Arthur, the Common- 
wealth Gove rnment in Washington released Executive Order No. 20-7 
prescribing instructions for the conduct of public affairs of the 
Commonwealth Government in the United States during the absence 
of President Osmena. The order was signed September 27, a few days 
before the President loft Washington for the Philippines. 

In accordance with this order, Hon. Jaime Hernandez, Secretary 
of Finance, - "shall be the representative of the President of the 
Philippines, and, as such he shall be charged with the conduct of 
the public affairs of the Commonwealth Government in the United 
States, with full authority to act on all matters which do r tain to, 
or affect said Government." 

He is also "vested with full authority' to confer with the 
proper officials of the federal, state and local governments, on 
matters affecting the Commonwealth Government. 

He is further "authorized to represent the Commonwealth of 
the Philippines in international organizations and conferences 
to which the Commonwealth may be invited, and to designate such 
delegates or members as may be necessary.'' 

The full text of Executive Order No. 20-'./ follows: 

"WHEREAS, the exigencies of the present emergency require the 
presence of the President of the Philippines outside the continent- 
al United States, the temporary scat of the Commonwealth Government: 
and 

"WHEREAS, it is necessary that during his absence and until 
the seat of the Commonwealth Government is re-established in the 
Philippines and normal constitutional processes of • government are 
fully restored, the functions of said Commonwealth Government in 
the United States should continue to be performed with regularity 
and dispatch; 

'[NOW, THEREFORE, I, SERGIO OSMENA, President of the Philippines, 
by virtue of the powers vested in me by the Constitution and pur- 
suant to the provisions of the Emergency Powers Law, do hereby 
prescribe and promulgate the following instructions for the conduct 
of public affairs of the Commonwealth Government in the United 
States during my absence from this country, any provisions of exist- 
ing law to the contrary notwithstanding; 

"1. The Secretary of Finance • shall bo -the representative of the 
President of the Philippines, and, as such, he shall be charged with 
the conduct of the public affairs of the Commonwealth Government 
in the United Statos, with full authority to act on all matters 
which pertain to, or affect said Government . This authority shall 
include not only the general administrative supervision, direction 
and. control of the departments and offices of said Government in 
the United States, but also the specific authority to appoint and 
remove any employee of the Commonwealth Government in the United 
States; to reduce, increase, redistribute or discontinue the 



activities of any department, office, or employee of said Govern- 
ment; and where necessary for the proper discharge of authorized 
^notions and activities, to employ technical, expert and other 
personnel by contract or otherwise and to fix their compensations 

"2. The Secretary of Finance as representative of the Pre- 
sident of the Philippines is hereby vested with full authority 
to confer with the proper officials of tho federal, state and ' 
local governments, their various departments, offices, agencies, 
and instrumentalities, on matters affecting the Commonwealth 
Government, and to decide and act upon such matters for and in 
behalf of the Commonwealth Government. On important matters 
where a change of established policy is deemed 'necessary or, 
where in his opinion, it is advisable to do so, the Secretary 
of Finance shall consult the President of the Philippines, 
through appropriate communication facilities, before taking 
action. 

"3. The Secretary of Finance is also hereby authorized 
to represent the Commonwealth of the Philippines in internation- 
al organizations and conferences to which the Commonwealth may 
be invited, and to designate such delegates or members as may 
be necessary. He shall make a report to the president of the 
Philippines of the results of such conferences. 

"4. All papers which, in the usual course of business, 
are ordinarily signed by 'the President, shall be signed by 
the Secretary of Finance, 'By authority of tho president.* 

"Done at the City of Washington, District of Columbia, 
United States of -America, this 27th day of September, in the 
year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and forty-four and of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines, the ninth. 

SERGIO QSM3NA" 



PR-118 



1617 Massachusetts Ave, w w 
Washington 6, D.C. 
HObart 1400 

EEPARB/ENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMON JEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINE 3 

October 25, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE ; 



The Philippine Commonwealth will participate in the 
International Civil Aviation Conference to be held in Chicago 
beginning November 1. The Chairman of the Philippine Delega- 
tion, Honorable Jaime Hernandez, Secretary of Finance, in a 
statement today (Wednesday) , stressed the importance of the 
Aviation Conference to the Philippines. He said: 

"This conference is one of the most significant in which 
the Philippines has been invited to participate. The importance 
of commercial aviation to all countries of the Pacific and the 
Philippines in particular cannot be overemphasized. Only a 
well developed system of commercial air lines can furnish a 
close link between the countries of the ',,'estern Hemisphere 
and their friends and allies of the Pacific. ;? 

„ - Following is a complete list of the members of the 
delegation ana its technical staff: 

Hon, Jaime Hernandez \ Secretary of Finance, Chairman 
Colonel Manuel Nieto, Secretary of Agriculture and 

Commerce, Delegate 
Dr, Urbane A, Zafra, Economic Adviser to the President 

of the Philippines, Delegate 
Mr. Joseph H. Foley, Manager of the Ihilippine National 

Bank, New York- Agency Delegate 
Jesus A. Villamor, Major, A.C., A. U.S., Technical 

Adviser 

Mr. Robert G. Thach^ Consultant 

Mr. Joaquin Cunanan, Senior Business Economist in the 
Office of the President, Technical Adviser and 
Secretary of the Dulegation. 



PR -120 



1617 Massachusetts Ave m w 
Washington 6, D c '* - W ' 
HObart 1400 



mzmmmT OF information and public relations 

COMMON ,7 E A L T H 0 Tr m tx < « „ 

tt OF THE PHILIPPINE 



S 



October 26, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE R ELRAftR. 

President Sergio Ooaona, Qn landing in tils Philippines, sont the 
following message to President Roosevelt: 

you"fn e this S tte «5 a ?2i2 ° f fi Philippines^ permit me to greet 
Lday wUh deneraf S ac ^?hur 8 Jd ?L aiS r t0he ^ Sin0e landin « 
e^as^rel^ 

^tits^^ t ^ * M ^ 

com^letf !? m ? pe °P le > calling on them to give their 

Sf e determined support to the armed forces of the United 
States and to rise to the cause of democracy and liberty. 

+ nJ^ thank 0n belialf of the Filipino people, for your con- 

tinued regard for their welfare and freedom, as conveyed in vour 
havf alsc^h^f \ I™ 3 ^i leg ea to'give to them. YoS 

Government ?r±- P f* at jJ ude for ^ POlioy in giving to our 
government in /Washington the recognition to which it was entitled 

StSion 6 *?t th0 ° f thC UnitGd StatGS and ^ cons- 

titution. It was thus possible for us to maintain the exorcise 

o^soyereignty coirmion to the independent nations! We arf also 
sillS g ratem ,. fc * all *he courtesies extended to our lite Pre- 
SwS ^ u ? 2 ? n > t0 ^self and to other members of the Philippine^ 
Government in Washington. ruixippxne 

ocZL itS n COn fn? U ? i0rial integrity unaffected by Japanese 
months 1 ??' L 16 fUl1 , le § al authorit y of the Commonwealth Govern- 
ed w h ?S now ready for exercise in areas freed from the 
oncmy where military control is no longer roauired." 

✓ * 

On October 20, President Roosevelt cabled to President Osmcna 
a message of encouragement to the Filipino people, as follows: 
from P me? Se deliVGr the foll °wing message to the Filipino people 

enrhiSS s ? fforin S) humiliation and mental torture that you have 
uTinrT+S 3 i?°?. t]:ie Da rbarous, unprovoked and treacherous attack 
thP \ + PpinGS nea ^ly three long years ago have aroused in 
tTZrr- a l- °1 th0 ^e^^ican people a righteous anger, a stern de- 
termination to punish the guilty, and a fixed resolve to restore 
peace and order and decency to an outraged world. 

''Until we were attacked at Pearl Harbor we had done our utmost 

;° ,L i ve friendly self-respecting neighbors of the Japanese in 
tne Pacific. 



.... 'for half a century, in spite of signs of a decadent and 
militaristic Japanese leadership, we studiously avoided any acts 
that might provoke distruct or alarm. Our decency was mistaken 
for weakness. 

„ J!!??* ? lans for tlie dignity and freedom of the people of 
the Philippines have been ruthlessly - but only temporarily - 
brushed aside by Japanese acts of exploitation and enslavement. 
When the Japanese invaders have been driven out, the Philippines 
will take their place as a free and independent member of the 
family of nations. 

4 '"? n thi ? occasion of the return of General MacArthur to- 
Philippine soil with our airmen, our soldiers and our sailors, 
we renew our pledge. We and our FUipino brothers in arms - with 
the help of Almighty God - will drive out the invader; we will 
destroy his power to wage war again, and we will restore a world 
of dignity and freedom - a world of confidence and honesty and 
peace.*" 

President Osmena replied to this message of President 
Roosevelt as fellows: 

"By means of leaflets and radio I immediately broadcast 
your message to the Filipino people who, by their ceaseless 
resistance to the Japanese during the darkest days following the 

fall of Bataan, have shown that their trust in the United States 
never weakened. This message of yours, Mr. President, will in- 
crease their gratitude to the people of America and will give 
their morale additional bolstering. 

"The Filipino people will take up again their onward march 
towards independence under your guidance and with your inspira- 
tion. The name of America will be blessed by a grateful people, 
for the advent of a new age of freedom and security which has 
begun for the races of the Pacific area. The forces of tyranny 
and barbarism in the Far East have been broken along with their 
evil plans for slavery, exploitation and domination as a result 
of. the assertion of power of the United States as witnessed in 
your solemn reaffirmation of the American principles of equality, 
freedom and justice and in this first blow against the enemy," 

On October 23, Secretary of Finance Jaime Hernandez cabled 

President Osmena as follows: 

"We rejoice with you for the landings in cur beloved country 
and send our fervent wishes for the speedy victory of General 
MacArthur' s forces. On this momentous occasion all our thoughts 
and prayers are with you and with our people there whom' we know 
you will lead to freedom and happiness. May God be with you 
always , " 

***** 



PR-a22 



1617 Massachusetts Ave,, N. /. 
Washington 6 , b. 3. 
HObast 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUB: 10 INFLATIONS 
COMMON W E A L T K OF THE PHILIPPINES 

October V}f i-ikK 



FOR BMC PLATE RELEASE : 

Recalling his last broadcasts over the Voice of Freedom 
radio station just before he left Bataan, Brigadier General 
Carlos P. Romulo spoke to the Filipino people from Leyte on 
October- 22: "People of the Philippines, after two years of 
silence, you are again hearing the Voice of -Freedom; ; .When all 
seemed black. for us, I said with confidence, 'America will not 
let us down*.* I said it to you from the tunnel of despair on 
Corregidor, I echo now the words spoken in that tunnel. 
This is liberation* The Voice of Freedom, with hope regained, 
returns, !? 

The original Voice of Freedom radio station was set up on 
Corregidor In the first few days of January, 1942, on General 
MacArthur's orders. He himself chose its name. It was put 
together from equipment brought from Manila just a few hours 
before the Japanese entered the city. On the trip across the 
bay, part of the equipment was- soaked in sea w. ter and other 
parts were lost. Nevertheless, the engineers assembled the 
scrambled and damaged parts and got the station in working order 
in forty-eight l^Jari 



The Voice of Freedom broadcas^^o the troops and the Fili- 
pino people up to the very day of/ surrender jx' Corregidor, After 
that it went off tho air, to return only with the landing of the 
liberating forces in the Philippines. 

Text of General Romulo ! s message of -October 22, as monitored 
by the Federal Communications Commission, follows; 

"People of the Philippines, after 2 years of silence, you 
arc again hearing the Voice of Freedom, It was the voice that 
first cried out to you in tho anguish of war. It speaks to you 
today in exultation, for it is liberation that brings us homo. 
Freedom returns to us by way of America, 

"Two 'years ago, I said to you, when our forces were trapped 
in Bataan. that America would not let us down, I can tell you 
now what you know yourselves: America did not let us down. For 
2 ye ecu - have lived close to -its war-stirred (heart), I have 
seen 'America swing into action, in thousands of miles of farm- 
land, in hundreds of' cities,, I have seen Americans give of them- 
selves without stint, to avenge Bataan, I did not have to say 
to the Americans, 'Remember Bataan'. They said it first: the 
boys in- she training camps, in crowded halls and forums, on the 
streets, at mass meetings, in great crowds at defense plants. 

''Men and woiioe laid down their tools to speak to me and tell 
mc again and again tho words that sounded the death knell of the 
Japanese invade?.' : Remember Bataan' «, I have watched the stars 
that symbolize sons in the service blossom in Jimcrican^ windows. 
Millions of Americans are striving. They have kept faith with' 
yoa. For 2 years you kept on fighting* In those bitter years, 
you::- ' v words missing) brothers in arms with the .American who 



-2- 



joined our valiant forces in the mountain and jungle warfare; 
the .American who, with his wife and children, remained free, but 
could not fight, you guarded and cared for at ccnstant threat to 
your lives. You must continue keeping faith aith them. You can- 
not now let American down. 

"Andres Bonifacio, Antonio Luna, Grcgorio del Pilar and our 
other warrior heroes Enjoin you to fight, Fight when the crucial 
moment comes; fight when the order is given; unshcath your bolo 
and let it flash to the Japanese our outraged people's vengeance; 
fight without quarter given or asked. The day of reckoning for 
the brutal aggressor is here. Fight him wherever you find him; - 
fight him to the death, for our flag that he has (words missing), 
for America and for freedom. 

"Yi/hon all seemed black for us, I said with confidence, 
'America will not let us down.' I said it to you from the tunnel 
of despair of Corregidor. The tunnel has led us to our inde- 
pendence. .It has 0 )ened the way to us for the fulfillment of a 
(word missing) dream. Freedom and Equality, words (words missing) 

in America in 1776, were pledged to us in the foxholes of Bataan, 
and in bomb-blasted Corregidor. I echo now the words spoken in 
that tunnel. -This is liberation. The Voice of Freedom with 
hope regained, returns. It carries the life and strength of 
Amerioa, It is the voico of the (Fil-American) unconquerable s. 
Here is our Douglas Mac-Arthur; here are our brother Americans. 11 

PR-123 



and fight — fight — without counting the cost." 

The full text of President Osmena's message, as reported in 
a dispatch from General LlacArthur's headquarters in the Phil- 
ippines follows: 
'My fellow countrymen: 

Forces of victory have landed on Philippine shores. They 
are led by Gen. Douglas MacArthur, trusted, tried and true friond 
of the Filipino people, 

'./hen he left two years ago he promised to return. That 
promise has been kept. He is standing now on Philippine soil. 

Your Commonwealth Government is also on our sacred land 
once again, but wo return not only to take up where we left off. 
While you were undergoing untold sacrifices opposing Japanese 
domination your Government wasn't stationary. We have advanced. 

ife come not merely to restore our Commonwealth Government. 
The Congress of the United States has recognized Filipino loyal- 
ty to America, to our beloved nation and to the sacred cause cf 
human freedom. Our independence will not be deferred to 194°, 
but will follow closely on the expulsion of the brutal Japanese 
invaders, We return to you, therefore, with our early inde- 
pendence assured. 

The freedom for which our heroes fought and fell from 
Balintawak to Bataan — for which our gallant forces and an un- 
conquerable citizenry are still relentlessly resisting — is 
ours at last. 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.L. 
Washington 6, D. C. 
HCbart 1400 

DEPARTMENT CF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMON V/ E A L T H OF THE PHILIPPINES 

October 31, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIAT E R ELEASE : 



On landing in the Philippines, President Sergio Osmena 
broadcast a message to his people, telling them that "the Con- 
gress of the United States has recognized Filipino loyalty to 
America, Our independence will not be deferred to 1946, but 
will follow closely on the expulsion of the brutal Japanese." 
He urged them to cooperate with the liberating forces, saying: 
"Strike when the tide of battle reaches your town or barrio. On 
that day strike hard against the eneinjr — whenever you find him — 
and fight — fight — without counting the cost." 

The full text of President Osmena' s message, as reported in 
a dispatch from General MacArthur's headquarters in the Phil- 
ippines follows: 
"My fellow countrymen: 

Forces of victory have landed on Philippine shores. They 
are led by Gen. Douglas MacArthur, trusted, tried and true friond 
of the Filipino people, 

V/hen he left two years ago ho promised to return. That 
promise has been kept. He is standing now on Philippine soil. 

Your Gommonwoalth Government is also on our sacred land 
once again, but we return not only to take up where we left off. 
While you were undergoing untold sacrifices opposing Japanese 
domination your Government wasn't stationary. We have advanced. 

■ Jo come not merely to restore our Commonwealth Government. 
The Congress of the United States has recognized Filipino loyal- 
ty to America, to our beloved nation and to the sacred cause cf 
human freedom. Our independence will not be deferred to 1946, 
but will follow closely on the expulsion of the brutal Japanese 
invaders. V/e return to you, therefore, with our early inde- 
pendence assured. 

The freedom for which our heroes fought and fell from 
Balintawak to Bataan — for which our gallant forces and an un- 
conquerable citizenry are still relentlessly resisting — is 
ours at last. 



Real freedom: Ours to enj oy, curs to uphold and ours 
topreserve. Unity is the nee d of the hour, V/e must all rally 
behind the banner of freedom. Isa this historic moment there can- 
not be cleavages, differences of tbovight or feelings of personal 
ambition or selfish interest. 

We are all Filipinos. Wee are brothers united by the 
ties of race and blood. We a_re one in our love for freedom 
above life itself. 

Leading us and enjoining uis t.o unite is the spirit of 
our heroes — Rizal, Bonifacio, Quaz on — we must be worthy of 
them. We cannot falter. 

Strike when the tide of battle reaches your town or 
barrio. On that day strike hiard uga&ist the enemy — whenever 
you find him -- and fight — figfcit --without counting the cost. 
Onward, fellow countrymen , to victory and to freedom! " 



PR-124 



"These inadequately armed patriots have fought the enemy 
for more than two years. Most azre Filipinos, but among these 
are a number of Americans who newer surrendered, who escaped 
from prison camps, or who were sent in to carry out specific 
missions, 

"Following the disaster v/hicin, J.n the face of overwhelm- 
ing superior enemy power, overtook our gallant forces, a deep 
and impenetrable silence engulfed, th e Philippines, Through 
that silence, no news concerning the fate of the Filipino 
people reached the outside world.., until broken by a weak signal 
from a radio set in the island oz r ?anay, which was picked up 
in the late fall of that same fa^efuj. year by a listening 
post of the War Department and tXmbmi to my headquarters. 

^ "That signal, weak and spotty a.3 it was, lifted the cur- 
tain of silence and uncertainty and disclosed the start of a 
human drama with few parallels in dlicary history* In it 
i recognized the spontaneous movement of the Filipino people 
to resist the shackles w£th wlicte Ham enemy sought to bind 
™f m % T: h P h ^ sical ly and spiritually, I saw a people in 
one oi the most tragic hours of fauman history, bereft of all 
reason for hope and without inatezrial support, endeavoring, 
aespite the stern realitites con: : rating them to hold aloft 
the flaming torch of liberty. I gave this movement all 
spiritual and material supoort t£aat snv limited resources would 
permit. 

"Through the understanding assistance of our navy, I was 
able to send in by submarines, im driblets at first, arms, 
ammunition, and medical supplies.. The news of the first ship- 
ment spread rapidly throughout t;he Philippines to electrify 
the people into full returning c Disa iousness that America 
had neither abandoned nor foxgot ten them. /-' 



1617 Massachusetts Avenue. N.W. 
Washington 6, D* C, 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

October 31, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEAS! 



General Douglas MacArthur praised the work of the 
guerrilla units in the Philippines, in his broadcast from 
Leyte to the Philippines, over the "Voice of Freedom," 
October 25* 

The broadcast, as monitored by the Federal Communications 
Commission j follows: 

*As our forces of liberation roll forward, the splendid 
aid we are receiving from guerrilla units throughout the 
immediate objective area and adjacent islands causes me at 
this time to pay public tribute to those great patriots, both 
Dilipmo and American, who have led and supported the resist- 
ance movement in the Philippines since the dark days of 1942. 

"These inadequately armed patriots have fought the enemy 
for more than two years. Most are Filipinos, but among these 
are a number of Americans who never surrendered, who escaped 
from prison camps, or who were sent in to carry out specific 
missions, . 

"Following the disaster which, in the face of overwhelm- 
ing superior enemy power, overtook our gallant forces, a deep 
and impenetrable silence engulfed the Philippines, Through 
that silence, no news concerning the fate of the Filipino 
people reached the outside world, until broken by a weak signal 
irom a radio set in the island of Panay, which was picked up 
in the late fall of that same fateful year by a listening 
post of the War Department and flashed to my headquarters. 

tQ - "J ha * si S na l, weak and spotty as it was, lifted the cur- 
iam of silence and uncertainty and disclosed the start of a 
numan drama with few parallels in military history. In it 
J- recognized the spontaneous movement of the Filipino people 
th^ eS i S ^ the shackl e s with which the enemy sought to bind 
nnf ^ ?J h P h ^ sicall y an d spiritually. I saw a people in 
uue 01 the most tragic hours of human history, bereft of all 
flfoS?? ?f hope and without material support, endeavoring, 
th! P i? e ^ he stern realitites confronting them to hold aloft 

TJ am B- n S torch of liberty. I gave this movement all 
spiritual and material support that my limited resources would 
permit, 

"Through the understanding assistance of our navy, I was 
able to send in by submarines, in driblets at first, arms, 
ammunition, and medical supplies. The news of the first ship- 
ment spread rapidly throughout the Philippines to electrify 
the people into full returning consciousness that America 
had neither abandoned nor forgotten them. 



- 2 - 



after fo^sM*?™ ^ resources increased, I was enabled, 
III inco?^ni«?tn5 hS ^ erril ±* forces by their recognition 
needeS sunS!es ° L" 1 ^ ° f 0Ur ar ^> *° send them vitally 
Sine coastal onni* *ver increasing quantity, through Philip- 

SJ uqlvPit t« ?£ ? ' by four Marines finally committed 
exclusively to that purpose. 

h.rn^^So*^ Jt this time I might name the gallant 
™^?L^L- 1 e S° Ch in ^iliPPine-American history, but 

? d ^ t JS B ° f sec ^ity for the individuals, their fam- 
p™??4??™ t C ?k S ? j re< l u ^e that I limit myself to a gen- 
achievements? W ° rk aM a stateKent of their brilliant 

H 1 ? latter > 1 nee ^ not point out that for the pur- 
P ? S ff JS this campaign, we are materially aided by a string 
r; + -tested torces in nearly every Philippine community, 

alerted to strike violent blows against the enemy's rear as 
our lines of battle move forward, and that are now providing 
countless large areas adjacent to military objectives into 
whicn our airmen may drop, with assurance of immediate 
rescue and protection. 

"We are aided by the militant loyalty of a whole people 
"7 a People who have rallied as one behind the standards of 
those stalwart patriots who, reduced to wretched material 
conditions yet sustained by an unconquerable spirit have 
formed an invincible center to a resolute over-all resistance. 

"We are aided by the fact that for many months, our plans 
of campaign have benefitted from the hazardous labors of a 
vast network of agents, numbering into the hundreds of * 
thousands, providing precise, accurate and detailed information 
on major enemy moves and installations throughout the Philip- 
pine Archipelago. We are aided by the fact that through a 
vast network of radio positions, extending into every center 
of enemy activity and concentration throughout the islands, I 
have been kept in immediate and constant communication with 
such widespread sources of information. 



"We are aided by the fact that on every major island of 
the Philippines, there are one or more completely equipped 
and staffed weather observatories which flash to my headauar- 
ters full weather data morning, afternoon and night of every 
day, and which in turn provides the basis for reliable 
weather forecasts to facilitate and secure the implementa- 
tion of our operation plan, 

'Widely disseminated to our forces throughout the Pacific 
and in China, the information from this weather system has 
materially aided our military operations over a large sec- 
tion of the world's surface 

We are aided by an air warning system affording visual 
observation of the air over nearly every square foot of 
Philippine soil 0 It was established for the mirpose of flash- 
ing immediate warning of enemy aircraft movement through that 
same vast network of radio communications. 

"We are aided by provision of all inland waterways and 
coastax areas of complete observation over enemy naval move- 
ments oo give immediate target information to our submarines 
wno patrol m and near Philippine waters. This information 
nas contributed, to the sinking of enemy shipping of enormous 
tonnage. And through the same facilities was flashed the warn- 
ing to' cur naval forces of the enemy naval concentration off 
Hq eastern Philippines during the Marianas operation, 

"finally we are aided by the close interior vigilance 
that has secured for our military use countless of enemy doc- 
uments of great value, among which were the secret defensive 



- 3 - 



plans and instructions of* th« «™> , 

combined Japanese fleet tn ! ««"maod«jv in- chief of the 
the several Pacific areas -SS^^ °! ar ? ff ensive action in 
strength and distribution^? 1 P i? te formation on the 
units. Utlon of enemy fleets and naval air 

fleets'was ^iSSS'*??^^ 1 !' ° f the ^mbinecl Japanese 
his death from injuries a ^L?L2^ guerrilla units prior to 
these vital aids to oSr milf?«5vf ln an airc ^ft. All of 
many more still unmentioSd *X °^ rati ons, and there are 
able courage of the Sili?« ii JJ responsive to the indomit- 
in the future name and tK^^S leaders whom I shall, 

and American, to the Valiant P f followers, both Filipino 
United States who hive vol It! } I*? 03 ] residents of the 
islands in succo? of thlir^^f t0 inflit ^e into the 
have infiltrate with thll $™ e ?' and Orleans who 

alty and unconquerable Siri? of t^ 7 t0 militallt 
people. spirit of the masses of the Filipino 

"The command er- in- n h •? »f of 4- v. 
publicly acknowledged his ?^i^te 1 o f ?H CeS of Iteration has 
power that has made mSim f ?S he great spiritual 

ments; achievements wnlci J?J h ? Se notable glorious achieve- 
history. The™ ?reat £a?rft?2 I7i ?°V nt erparts in military 
living and whose valian^L'oni^ ^ ierican ' b eth 

leadership and resnonsib?! °^ 1 ? ers has nested the 

in the past critical ^rt^ o' 7 S i ^ hlS lndo ^itable movement 
can be male SS^lSTi lllt?^ ll JET 
heroes who have SuffSSfl ~ 8 -, pla °f on the scrolls of 

su*o^na^ a ^ nave 

the heL h ?s r o ? a ou? ?So d66d ? Sha11 eVer hG enshrined in 

Pino people. 1UT:n - Lt ' ss ■ Diutality the enslavement of the Fili- 
"To those great patriots to whom I now nav nuhl4v> tr.4K„+ a 



♦ 



1617 Massachusetts Ave., N.W. 
Washington 6, D. C« 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF Ii-JFORMlATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

November £, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE : 

President Sergio Osmena has set up a commission to investi- 
gate cases of persons charged with disloyalty to the Philippine 
Commonwealth and to the United States during the Japanese occupa- 
tion, and to consider the legal problems and matters of public 
policy involved therein, Brigadier General- Carlos P. Romulo stated 
in his broadcast over the VOICE OF FREEDOM, November 7. 

General Romulo declared: !r It is President Osmena' s desire 
and determination that each man be given his day in court. He 
has also set up the iiachinery necessary to cover all the data 
about private and public damages caused by the war in order that 
the Filipino Rehabilitation Commission nay have all this informa- 
tion at hand." 

General Romulo' s message, as recorded by the Federal Commun- 
ications Comiaission, continues: i! The President yesterday appoint- 
ed the board, composed of Major General Basilio J'. Valdes, Chief - 
of Staff of the Philippine Army and Secretary of National Defense, 
as Chairman; Members: Colonel Mariano A. Erana-, Judge Advocate of 
the P. A., in charge of the Department of Justice, Labor and 'Wel- 
fare; Hon. Ismael Ilathay, Commissioner of Budget and Finance, and 
... in charge of local governments. The guerrillas are represented 
in this Board by (Ailone Sonadino Dimiteiz?) of the Province of 
Leyte ... . 11 

Full text of Executive Order No. 23, issued by President 
Osmena and read by General Romulo follows: 

"' WHEREAS, it has come to my attention that some persons are 
now being detained in the provincial j ails of the Province of 
Leyte on suspicion of having corjiiitted acts of disloyalty to the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines and the United States of America, 
which constitute a violation of the laws of the Commonwealth of 
the Philippines; 

"f WHEREAS, the interests of justice require that those 
persons under detention for alleged violations of the law of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines be promptly brought before the 
proper court of justice for trial; 

"'Y/HEREAS, for the unification of our people, the overwhelm- 
ing majority of whom have been perfectly loyal, for the purposes 
of restoring the normal processes of political and economic 111 e 
and firmly establishing the Republic of the Philippines upon an 
indestructible foundation to supply those national needs m 
hour of our liberation; 

"♦WHEREAS, for the purposes of strengthening nat 
the legal problems and matters of policy i nvolv J d w ^ Tt ^ le- 
gation and P ( solution? ) of the cases of P ri ^ n ^f^ h oufa be ?ho- 
. cusod of disloyalty during the Japanese occupation sn ^ bUBhed 
roughly studied, %n order that a basic policy may ^.^ ^ 

for dealing with such cases m accordance wi^nx^ prolonged 
understanding of the conditions which existed during 
period of enemy occupation^ 



. . -2- 
»'Now therefore, t fwp PT . „ 
. neS , by virtue of the ^^??J^ A | Resident of the Philip- 
* g of the Philippines, " do £2*1? ed ln m ? b ^ thG constitutional 
Led of a chairman and four i-ffn£ y ° r 2 ate 3 Boar(i of Inquiry, com- 
fit to investigate charr es of ? f S to be appointed by the Presi- 
J! d consider the legal probw, ^loyalty in the Province of Leyte 
$ T ed therein. S P^ole* and matters of public policy in- 

q ,4tain upL d wha? S aSho^? Ctl ° nS 0f this boa ^ will be (a) to 
a& Snf are now belnS What s Pecific charges certain 

9Se of Levte on L^t*^ 1 in tne Provincial jails of the Pro- 
m f, the oSSSnw^i ?2 P i iS** of havin § committed acts of disloyal- 
tyt >! whfrnn^}-? $ f the Phi lipPines and the United States of 
Africa, which constitute a violation of the laws of the Common- 
weal ^ AIL T ° ^©stigate the validity of such charges with the 
lm and facts involved. (c) To allow such persons the right 
t0 be present at such investigations, to be heard by themselves 
or by counsel, and to present witnesses on their behalf. Hearings 
0 f the board shall be open to the public. (d) Upon the termina- 
tion of its labors, to submit to the President a report and at its 
discretion, to submit current reports of its findings and conclu- 
sions, as may be deemed just and proper in each particular case 
that has been heard. 

»f2— The Board of Inquiry will prepare such rules and regula- 
tions for its operations as nay be necessary. It is hereby au- 
thorized to direct the appearance of witnesses with or without 
(dockets?), administer oaths, and toko testimony relevant to its 
investigations. It is also authorized to call upon any office, 
official or employee of the Commonwealth of the Philippines for any 
necessary assistance in carrying out its functions; and with the 
approval of the corresponding heads of departments, such assist- 
ance shall be given. 

«f 3 — The chairman and nembers of this board will receive corn- 
sensation in the form of (their time?) at the rate of 10 pesos a 
day for each day of service actually rendered, except those who 
are already employed by the Commonwealth of the Philippines, ^ who 
shall serve without additional compensation. Within the limits 
of such funds as may be set aside or appropriated for the purpose, 
the board may eiroloy the necessary personnel and make provisions 
for equipment, supplies, materials, travel and other services. 

»»4— Inasmuch as justice reouires and the C.nstitution of the 
Coi-ffiionwealth prescribes that in all criminal prosecutions the 
accused shall have a speedy trial, the board is enjoined to execute 
its functions with the greatest dispatch compatible with safeguard- 
ing the rights of the accused and the interests of the state. Ke- 
cords or proceedings will be as brief as possible, and need not 
be verbatim. In the taking of evidence only that testimony shall 
be on record which is deemed essential by the board. 

""Signed at the seat of the Government in the field this 
second day of November in the Year of Our Lord 1944, and th Com- 
monwealth of the Philippines the ninth, Sergio Osmena, President 
of the Philippines."" 

PR-129 



: ^ 



l6l7 Massachusetts Ave. N w 
Jasiiington 6, d. c. ' N ' W « 

gObart 1400 



DEPARTMENT of Tm?nm^^ 
n u v or., , T FORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 

PHILIPPINES 



November 14, 1944 



FOR B.SSDIATE PJ5 LEASE » 

The first publication to cone out of the Philippines in 
the wake of the liberation of Leyte by General Douglas IlacArthur's 
forces is a single sheet newspaper called Leyte-Samar FREE PHIL- 
IPPINES^ Volume I, No. 1 was issued at Tacloban^ Leyte \ on Oc- 
tober 29, 1944. According to the announcement on the editorial 
column, FREE PHILIPPINES is -edited by residents of Tacloban." 

The front strearaer on the four-column newspaper reads: 

WAN»S 16TH DIVISION SHATTERED" , a story by Robert Kleiman! 
one of the American war correspondents with General MacArthur's 
xorces. The item tells of the over fourteen thousand Jap soldiers 
Killed or wounded during eight days' fighting on the east coast 
of Leyte. 

Other leading stories tell about the work being done by the 
reestablished Commonwealth of the Philippines under President 
Sergio Osmena and also about the progress being made by the U.S. 
forces on Leyte in their battle against the Japanese. 

Amador T. Daguio, a school teacher and short story writer, 
describes the first meeting of President Osmena' s Cabinet in 
Tacloban, which included, among the first official acts, the 
appointment of Col. Ruperto Eangleon'as acting provincial governor 
of Leyte, the reopening of hospitals, dispensaries, and public 
schools, and the reorganization of his ;/ar Cabinet. 

Other - significant items are about the wage rate fixed for 
Army labor, which pays a -minimum of one peso plus ration for 
common (unskilled) labor, and also about the Victory Pesos the 
Honey -now in circulation in liberated areas. According to the 
Paper, i; This currency is identical with the old pre-war Philip- 
Pines Treasury Certificates, except that the word VICTORY is 
overprinted on it. Its value has been fixed at two pesos to the 
American dollar. The currency is called the Victory Series of 
Philippine Treasury Certificates." 

On the editorial column, Brigadier General Carlos P» Romulo 
writes a paragraph as the paper's guest editor. ''Let us ccle- 
•orate the restoration of freedom by giving of ourselves without 
stint to achieve final victory. This 'is no time for idle words, 
^ight or work is the order of the day," says Gen. Romulo. 

While the FREE PHILIPPINES is edited by the residents of 
iacloban, it is published under the authority of the uniooa 
States Office of War Information, P.w.3., G-5 General Headquarters, 
u< S. Army. 

PR-131 



-2- 



mriod of enpTiv nl^ ;.' kept ailV8 in Washington through the 
Snition ?? c P a £ ion > its Position advanced by the re- 

SlisLd In U 5 y tile Units(i States, is again firmly re- 
25 I have bi5,,?S ** love <* homeland. The members of my cabinet 

r is tte n f -? at government back to the Philippines to 
and our laws * Uthorxt y conferred upon it by our constitution 

Already we have reestablished the provincial government 
of Leyte ana the municipal government of Tacloban. Already 
we have reopened the public schools in the liberated areas. Al- 
ready we^have brought relief to the needy and medical supplies 
to the sick. Already* wo have taken steps for the economic re- 
habilitation of Loyto, the Philippine province in v.hich the 
American Army of liberation first" landed. 

That array is now secure in the greater part of Laytc and 
is steadily reoccupying the remainder of the island. But this 
is only the beginning. By far the greater portion of our coun- 
try still must be reclaimed. Millions of our compatriots are 
still in want, and groan under the yoke of Japanese domination, 
A powerful and treacherous foe is still entrenched upon our 
soil. But what has already been done in the liberated areas 
will soon be accomplished everywhere in the Philippines. Our 
period of anguish and trial is nearing its end. 

This ninth anniversary of the establishment of tho Common- 
wealth is a deeply significant day to every* Filipino , for } z 
boars the promise of final victory. It is a prelude to wipm** 
days. Jo shall be redeemed from salvery. As a crownin^&J- 01 / 
to Philippine -American collaboration, wo shall become- a iuii 
member of the concert of independent nations. I or all tnis, 
do not have to wait for July 4, 1946. The da to will bo Jd£Jwea, 
Independence will be recognized as soon as tho Japanese m - - 
has been expelled from our shores. 

Today tho full import of the great promise made to us 
just nine years ago has boon thrown into bold reiioi. i 
is the promise that General LacArthur end his i orc.s «rc xign 
ing gallantly to redeem. The roar of the American has 
announced to the World that America has returned and that 
our feet are again set on the road to a true and lasting 
indoponaence. No action by tho enemy can proven* its attain 
i mo nt • 

Tho ouusq of dono^aoy spa liberty, tbb rl|h t g <™i* 
people to govorn. Itself and to ho soouro ™ s hum i n 

the groat moral issues oi 3Usta.ce ana *f-|»"*7 q t nd v I am 
dignity are being fou C ht out in the ..^ili^inco tod^y. ^ 
proud of tho way the American soldior is rij^ing ox i 
I am also proud of the way Filipinos are aiding U i that b _ 
Everywhere our underground forces are i^^rf ^ d fJom the rear, 
attacking him night end day, fro; liberation in 

giving him no rest, and helping the armies oi 
ovary way. 

The complete victory of Americanos an d th *UB oration 
of the Filipino people are assured. J^/iL establishment 
nificant fact of this ninth anniversary ox CHw wbt>. 
of the Commonwealth* 

. The last 

Its first six years were blessed ty pe aoe, n ;. ther - ;e ace 
three years were torn by the strife J 1 c ^ nwea ith. m i> e ^ 
nor war has chanced the nature oi theoojw* ^ Q monU rdent to 
and in war the Philippine Commonwealth - righteousneso 
human progress. who believe m oojci t , iane nt value 

and human understanding. For if any n experiment as 

is tom -lerived from the. ? ^^^!^IneS it is that Amer- 
shown iby the : Commonweal tfe of the . Ihii a that there iB ; a 
ica a#Wi'hili -pines have demonstra ^ 
new read that loa^o^^^g^, ^ " 
road of good will, muxuaj. uuue 

PR-132 



l6l7.MarjsachusGtts Avenue n 
,/ashing-;on 6, D'.c, ' • 

HO'oart :_400 

DEPART* 2HNT Oh 1 n^rv,-- 
r n „ . . 0 w , ' IN '° " TI0N **> ^BLIC RELATIONS 

C C h I. 0 N VE A L T H OF t tr * « 

1 THE PHILIPPINES 

* 

November 16, 1944 



FOR UIEDIA_TE_ Err, L E ASE 



In commemorating tha «^+v 
of the Phili ? p ine Commonwealth Sflaime^f th ! est ^lishment 
of Finance, in char £ e of the Phili^i^ p Hernand ©z, Secretary - 
was guest speaker at the FiliS IS?2*? OTO 5 1,BBnt in '/ashington, 
Day program in the NatlonS^ss ^^^^%[ S Cpmonfoalfa 

^nc^ «*c toward in- 

accorded the Philippine Gov", nn ?? + that J 10 considerations 
sovereign nation. P ?mth ?ho S^„V^, paBto4 '« 1 * to a 
Philippine soil,- to HoxnaSdoz c™¥?2n £ irD ?Jy Established on 
anniversary of the Co-nnS ?t\ ? 0ntlnuud ' " thls oay be the last 
raont of the RSpSliS'T^^MlI^^ £°V2° «« -tablish- 
eluded his message by reading lr s?d ^ t C^' Ilcrn andoz con- 
woGlth Day broadcast from SytoT 1 LlC ° 3mona ' s ° onmon - 

nil °^. DioSc ^ do H« Ya;o, Vice President of the Council um^ 
«MlT^i Pln ° S t0 COMi ^ or -to this their national holiday 

all Filipinos for^hoir^^fng ^*^d^& 1 ?^ Bod 
and courage. » Dr. Yap urged every Mlinino in 0 7 

of lataan? 103 ' ** thct th ^ W bo worthy of SS heroes ■ 

J.lr, Bernardo do Quia, 'Chairman of the Civic and Edu C ~Mm,ni 
Committee of the Filipino Executive Council, presided at tho 
program Voluntary contributions to the Community Var Fund 
wor^ made by members and guests during the evening and it — 

ass^S ^tS Uplno W&.t. 1 ^ 



PR-134 



of an enduring peace, we should lift up our hearts in thanks- 
giving. 

w, For the harvest that has sustained us and, in its fullness, 
brought succor to other peoples; for the bounty of our soil, 
which has produced the sinews of war for the protection of our 
liberties; and for a multitude of private blessings, known only 
in our hearts, wo should give united thanks to Cod. 

n To the end that wo may bear more earnest witness to our 
gratitude to Almighty God, I suggest a nationwide reading of 
the Holy Scriptures during the period from Thanksgiving Day _ to 
Christmas. Let every man of every creed go to his own version 
of the Scriptures for a renewed and strengthening contact with 
those etrnal truths and majestic ? rinciplos^,hich haye inspired 
such measure of true greatness as this nation has achieved. 



1617 Lassachusetts Avenue N w 
Washington 6, D. C. * 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTi ISN'T OF :C*FORiATICN AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 it M 0 N ;7 EUTH OF THE PHILIP?! * E S 

November 17, 1944 



FOR III E PLA TE RELEASE: 



President Sergio Osmena, in his proclamation designating 
Thursday, November 23, as the day of national thanksgiving in 
the Philippines, enjoined "the inhabitants of the nation to 
offer thanks to Almighty God for the strength and fortitude 
with- which He blessed the Filipino people during their darkest 
days, and for the arrival of the forces of liberation on Phil- 
ippine soil to free the country. :? 

President Osmena's proclamation, issued from the seat of 
the Government in Leyte, followed the proclamation by President 
Roosevelt . 

Brigadier General Carlos P. Romulo read the proclamation over 
the VOICE OF FRE. A)M« Full text, as monitored by the Federal 
Communications Commission, follows: 

•Tor the information of the people of the Philippines I 
hereby publish the following proclamation of the President ' of 
the United States, setting aside in accordance with custom, 
Thursday, November 23, 1944, as a day of general Thanksgiving. 

'"PROCLAMATION 
'•'•BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES 

••♦OF Al ERICA 

; "In this year of liberation, which has seen so many millions 
freed from tyrannical rule, it is fitting that we give thanks 
With special fervor to our Heavenly Father for the mercies we 
have received individually and as a nation and for the blessings 
He has restored, through the victories of our arms and those of 
our Allies, to His children in other lands. 

;!, For the preservation of our way of life from the threat of 
destruction; for the unity of spirit which has kept our. Nation 
. strone; for our abiding faith in freedom; and for the promise 
of an enduring peace, we should lift up our hearts in thanks- 
giving. 

•' T For the harvest that has sustained us and, in its fullness, 
brought succor to other peoples; for the bounty of our sol 1 * 
which has produced the sinews of war for the protection 01 our 
liberties;' and for a multitude of private blessings, Known omy 
in our hearts, wo should give united thanks to Cod. 

•-'To the end that wo may boar more earnest witness to our 
gratitude to Almighty God, I suggest ^ natiowido r aaiij 01 
the Holy Scriptures during the period m| owfa VorsioS 

Christmas. Let every man of *^J%^£ 3 ^^fvith 

of the Scriptures for a renewed and rtrons *» inspired 
those eternal truths and majescic principl^ .nic » £ ~ 
such measure of true groaoness as tms nation 



««ri SLlS^i ?» FR ^'^IN D. ROOSEVELT, Prosidont of 
l^n?nt?^ ^ a S S f ^ Q ^a, in consonance with tho joint 
E?5SkS i2S f.^Congross approved December 26, 1941, do 
hereby proclaim Thursday tho twenty-third day of Novombor 1944 
a day oi national thanksgiving; and I call upon tho people of 
the united States to observe it by bonding every effort to 
hasten t no day of final victory and by offering to God our 
devout gratitude for His goodness to us and to 'our fellow men. 

i;t IN WITNESS WHEHSOF, I have hereunto set ay hand and 
caused the seal of the United States of America to bo affixed. 

;!, D0NE at the city of Washington this first day of 
Novombor in the year of our Lord nineteen hundred and forty- 
four and of the Independence of tho United States of America 
the one hundred and sixty-ninth. 



: < 1 FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT 



"'By the ""resident 

" r E »R . ST2TTINTUS, JR 

"'Acting Secretary of State. *« 



i! In line with- the proclamation above quoted, I do hereby 
proclaim firstly, November 23, 1944, as a day of Thanksgiving 
in the Philippines and enjoin the inhabitants of the nation to 
offer thanks to Almighty God on that day for the strength and 
fortitude with which He blessed the Filipino people during 
their darkest days, and for the arrival of the forces of 
liberation on Philippine soil to free the country. 

"And I call on the people of the Philippines to observe 
the day and renew their pledge to continue their unrelenting 
fight against the forces of evil until victory is won, so 
that this spirit of justice, righteousness and charity may 
again reign supremo for all men. 

"IN WITNESS TKER20F, I hereon set my hand and cause the 
seal of the Commonwealth of the Philippines to be affixed. 

"DONE at the seat of Government in thj field on this 
eighth day of November in the Year of Our Lord, 1944, and 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines the Ninth. 



SERGIO 03KENA 
President of the Philippines." 



PR-133 



1617 Massachusetts Ave. w.nr 
Washington 6, d. c . ' 
KObart 1400 

memmm of mtmvnw tm public saoioro 

COMHONWE ALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

November 29, 1944 



FOR IM.EDIATE RELEASE 



97 from Jhe S + h Sm p na 13SUed thc following Executive Order No, 

& ?p S! seat of the Government in Leyte , fixing the salaries of 
the officers and enlisted men of the Philippine Army: 

* oo P a!? U o^ *S I 0 ? 6 P rovision s Of Section No. 90 of the National De- 
fense Act and of the Emergency-Powers Law, I SERGIO OSKENA. Presi- 
dent of -che Philippines, do hereby prescribe the following schedule 
°l f? la ^.?? te ? and garters allowance for officers and enlisted men 
of the Philippine Army, effective on dates as indicated herein, and 
extending for the duration of the war and for six months thereafter 
unless sooner terminated by competent authority. 



Rank 
Major General 
Brigadier General 
Colonel 

Lieutenant Colonel 

Major 

Captain 

First Lieutenant 
Second Lieutenant 
Third Lieutenant 



Grade 
Master Sergeant 
First Sergeant 
Technical Sergeant 
Staff Sergeant 
Sergeant 
Corporal 

Private First Class 
Private 



OFFICERS 



Annual "p* 



"pIF,ooo 

12; 000 
3,000 
7,000 
6,000 
4,300 

4,000 

3,000 
2,400 

ENLISTED MEN 



Monthly 
Quarters All owan ce 
P200 
200 
200 
200 
160 
140 
100 
30 
60 



Monthly Pay 
P27S~ 
276 
228 
192 
156 
132 
103 
100 



The rates of pay and allowances prescribed herein shall become 
effective for officers and enlisted men of any unit upon the date on 
which the Unit is returned to or constituted under organized military 
control, and for any individual officer or enlisted man upon the date 
on which he reports to a unit under organized military control after 
having been called or recalled to active duty or after having been 
enlisted for such a unit, A unit shall be considered as being re- 
turned to or constituted under organized military control on the date 
of announceraent thereof is made by the Commander -in-Chief, Southwest 
Pacific Area. No increase of pay or allowances shall accrue because 
of foreign service. 

During the period that the rates of pay herein prescribed are 
effective, there shall not be paid to any person an increase of pay 



or allowances by reason of length of service. 

During the period that the rates of pay herein prescribed ^are 
effective, there shall not be paid to any person an increase ox pay 
for duty requiring regular and frequent aerial flights. 

Any provisions of existing Executive Orders in conflict herewith 
&rc hereby superseded. 

Done at the seat of Government in the J^W^'tWa 28th daf of 
October, in the year of Our Lord, Nineteen- Hundred and Forty-Four, 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the Mntn. 

B y the President: 

i s ^D.) ARTUR0 B. ROTOR 
°o crest » -n-"- Pro side 



Presi 



( sgd , ) ssRCio om&m 

ident of the Philippine: 



nt 



PR-137 



J.617 Massachusetts Ave. w 7 
Washington 6, D. C. ' 1 
HObart 14OO 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

November 29 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE : 

In an exclusive interview to the Unite \ Press, President 

Sergio Osmena gave the following report on conditions in the 

Philippines, two weeks after landing in Leyto: 

"I have now been in Loyte two weeks* My contact with the 
different elements of the people I have seen these days, enables 
me to surmise not only the physical destruction but also the 
moral breakdown caused by years of privations and sufferings. 
The task that lies ahead for the physical and moral rehabilita- 
tion of the Filipino people is far-reaching. 

In the two weeks since we resumed the Government of the 
Commonwealth in Tacloban, my Cabinet and I have been engaged in 
the work of bringing back normalcy to the people of this pro- 
vince. First concern of the Commonwealth is peace and order and 
to this end I appointed Colonel Rupert o ICangleon, guerrilla 
leader, Acting Governor of Leyte as a public recognition of the 
courage and determination of his men and of the civil population 
that supported them in their opposition against the invader. 

The -municipal government of Tacloban, the capital of this 
province has been reestablished and other municipalities will 
be rehabilitated as soon as they are frc^d from enemy occupa- 
tion and control. The damage and destruction that the war will 
necessarily leave in its wake in the towns will be repaired 
and it is the purpose of the Commonwealth to assist them not 
only so that they can be improved and beautified in accordance 
witn a progressive city planning. The health and welfare ac- 
tivities of the government are being tackledand a hospital, 
a maternity house and several free dispensaries will soon be 
opened. 

- Following closely military operations that are rapidly 
destroying the Japanese military power, the Government of the 
Commonwealth will restore to the people all * Q °£*" 
ties obtaining before the war. Special emphasis wi 11 be given 
in the school! to instill in the mind of the youth the Prin- 
ciples of democracy, liberty and human dignity. As soon as the 
central office of the 'Department of Public Instruction is re- 
established in Manila, a complete educational Bwror ^ *J un 
dertaken by experts that I will bring *^ c U ^^Jtlon 
with the purpose of making our system of PUjU« n ^ s ^^onsibil- 
to-date and enable the people to cope with the JgJ^gf^J 
ities that will be ours m the new world of Woaom t@ 
be established after the war. Every o f fort wii id - 
extend our established cultural relations with the un» 
States and Latin America. 

The problems of currency and the questions affecting^ 
economic life of the people we ro next in o ^ f fibpr £ s c vital 
prices was approved and promulgated, as d T ^ taking 

war material and abace. flourishes in this 




Since I landed on Lovto t u 
pic and enjoined them to l±lX L ha I° ^dressed myself to the noo- 
cooporation that they no J 7? ?° forc °s of liberation °ii th 
the response to this a^f lnclu dine labor. I g ctisfi od • 

I novo issued an executive ftSSil* ?• r - n( icred by the euerrillnq 
an the guorrilic foroo^eognLM^ in **» ViE^' 

agnize a oy C-oneral LacArthur. 



A Commission of Ikmii-m, 
cases of those whose loyclll tS^h^Ph??.^ m ° to look the 
Tt°^ n ^°^ S ^ :t0S during S lapano S o h in 1PPi ?? Co ^onweelth and 
It is my desire that each man 2? ~?f °°? u PaWon is under Question 
sot up the machinery nooossarv J* 8 * 7 ?? his d °3T in c °urt. I also 
and public damages ccusSd b? th^° eQt * or a11 th - data about private 
Rehabilitation Commission, croaloH^LS^ 01 thct thc 
information at hand. ' oroato<3 b ^ Congress, may hevo all this 

I am hapr>y to sev th^+ +k 
wealth unreservedly and Gene r ^ SSS?*. 0 * 0 su --'P°^ing the Common- 
man have been most ooopo rati vg* ^^!£ UP .? ad ilis ^cors and 
more shown that he is as good a fSfff rX °P SolcUor h - s onco 
citizen who believes in freedom ™- ™? °l ho is Q democratic 
people as well." ir„odom noo only for himself but for other 



PR-139 



o»u jj^xuu iruu jjooontxir 7, 1941 to June 15, 1942, This ribbon 
is the same size as the one described above. The background is 
red with two small vertical white stripes at one fourth the 
length from each end and three snail whito stars arranged in a 
triangular form at tho center of the ribbon. 



PR-133 



^ tf share? P ° n *** Pe ° Ple ° f the PMli PP*nes to unite, to labor, 
Long live our beloved Philippines. 



PR -140 



/ 



1617 Massachusetts Ave, n.W 
Washington 6, D . C. 
Hobart 1400 

C 0 K K 0 N If E A L T E 0- F THE P E I L I P P IN L 

November 30, 1944 



FOR B>2EDIATS RELEASE ; 

President Sergio Osmcha has announced from the scat of 
the Philippine Government in Leyte that two military service 
ribbons have been authorized to be awarded by the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines. 

The Philippine Liberation Campaign Ribbon is the same size 
as the Service Ribbon for the Southwest Pacific Area. There are 
two small blue and white vertical stripes at the center on a 
background of red. This ribbon \;ill be awarded to all members 
of the armed forces of the United States and of the Philippines 
who participate for a period of not less then 30 days in the 
present Philippine Liberation Campaign. 

The Philippine Defense Ribbon will be awarded to members 
of the armed forces of the United States and of the Philippines 
who resisted the enemy invasion for not less th^n 30 days within 
the period from December 7, 1941 to June 15, 1942, This ribbon 
is the same size as the one described above. The background is 
red with two small vertical white stripes at one fourth the 
length from each end and three small \ hite stars arranged in a 
triangular form at the center of the ribbon. 



PR- 133 



anrt + 1 C u U upon thG P e °P le of the Philippines to unite, to labor, 
to share. ' 

Long live our beloved Philippines. 



l «3 



PR -140 



3.617 Massachusetts Ave w -r 
..ashington 6, d. C, *' 
EObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OT IW£M H MD P« I0 GELATIONS 
0 N V f E A L T H 0 F THE P HIUPPISE3 

November 30, 1944 



IFOR IMMED IATE HE LEA pre . 

President Sergio 0sffle na issue, the following preoption to 
WU people of the Philippines, on landing in Leyte : 
J: How Countrymen: 

^be?ng L°st C ro S y e h dT * ^ f ™' The 

ilMaders. SaCred PMli ^ ine soil wlU soon be cleared of the hated 

^J T T thi f isla^ determined air, land, and sea forces will 
ccS?y!° rV/ard f ° r thG libe ^ tion of 'every'foct of ou? oeloved 

Each of you can lend material assistance in this great crusade. 

. r+ , Laloor i s urgently required at the clocks, on the air-fields 

"?M?L SU 5 ply dUnps ' Xt 18 of utmost ^Portance that we give our 
.--i-itary forces- every possible support by volunteering to work. I 

3? in ? ver X? ne > therefore, to offer his services now at the nearest 
Philippinv Civil Affairs .unit. 

V/ork in the fields must proceed, Food production must be in- 
- i:ased. Men, women, and children - those who cannot help at docks 
airdromes - toil in the field. Grow rice and other foods for 
-..rseives and for your brothers in the provinces that will socn 
- •- liberated. 

™«JL?! 5?y, of y° u have f °od supplies, make them available to the 

, ? ilipplne Civil Affairs Unit which will buy and distribute 
j ™^gg ly 31110116 the People. Persuade your neighbours to do 

No one will starve. Your Commonwealth Government and the Uni- 
*«« btates Forces will provide you with relief supplies. 

SWIMS**, * , ■ • rflppfvi 

m cal1 upon the People of the Philippines to unite, to labor, 
to share. 

Long live our beloved Philippines. 



\ ^0 / 



y 



PR-140 



1617 Massachusetts Ave n w 
Washington 6, D. c. ' 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION » PUBLI c RELATI ONS 

COMMONWEALTH OF T H T 

1 1 H E PHILIPPINES 

* 

December 14, 1944 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: 



ADDRESS DELIVERED BEFORE THE NATIONAL -PRTPqfi ptttr 
BY BRIGADIER GENERAL CARLOS P R ffi,*^^ 

14, 1944. ' ' 



Gentlemen of the Press: 

1Q , ' ^ wo ? nd one lia1 ^ years have passed since the day in July, 
1942, when I gave yon my first of f-the-record account of condi- 
tio i« f Pac i f f c > directly after my escape from Bataan. Since 
then, hoy; changed is that picture, and how different my state of 
mind I At that time I was afraid to speak to you, although I have 
been a newspaperman all my life and feel most at home among the 
people of the press. Yet I dreaded speaking, for fear that -you 
might sense my bitterness and misunderstand that bitterness, for 
I can tell you now how deep was my despair when I spoke to you 

bllGIl o 



My talk was off the record, and even then I was afraid you 
would think my report exaggerated. I could not have exaggerated 
conditions as they were then. We were beaten in the Pacific. We 
had no defenses there. And I was fresh from the sight of Japanese 
brutalities and depredation that might well, at that time, have 
been as shadows of things to come to this country — to this verv 
city. 

Now I have a different report to make, and this is -on the 
record. Leyte is Bataan for the Japanese, written in red, white 
and blue. I came back from the front lines to report certain 
phases of that victory to the American Congress arid the American 
people, and it is only justice that I complete that report by this 
to. you, the American press, because you were the people who first 
listened to me, and knew what I told was the truth when I spoke 
of Bataan. 

I have reason to remember that of f-the-record talk before 
you beyond all other talks and with mixed emotions, for it was 
that which set me forth as a lecturer, the voice of Bataan in the 
United States, speaking from coast to coast and in 466 American 
cities. Quite a few of your group came' to me after that speech and 
said: "You should tell the story of the Philippines to all 
America," And because newspaper people usually finish things they 
start, I found myself overnight a traveling spokesman for Bataanj 

So that talk I made before you directly on my return to 
America changed my plans and my nationality; from being a Filipino 
soldier I became a sort of talking Flying Dutchman, racing all 
°ver America, telling of 'our fight to hold the ramparts of 
democracy in the Pacific, until called back to rejoin MacArthur 
°n the return march to the Philippines. 

During these past two and one half years, do not think a 
Filipino, even in America, could forget what had been done to the 
Fil-American forces on Bataan. No Filipino and no American who 



fought for democracy i n the- p« i <m 

or forgive what the Janani ? C , wil1 ever be able to forget 
years my memories deadened SJJSS ?° ne thGre « But during these 
that bloodied -surf onto Lev? p? S0 tnat when we waded through 
country again, and I was not nt«IS S looking forward to seeing my 
there by the invaders . -rfiS «S J*5 e ? for what iiad been donc 
horrors of Bataan and Correal rtn years had dea ^ e ^Gd the 

ugly terror we had lived unSJ I^-?^ 1 ? ad for e°tten much of the 
race which was not filhtinS „L le tr y in S to hold against a 
of the world. Time had dnl ? r a Code a °ceptable to the rest 
to back and stabbed to death m S ^ he mem °ries of men tied back 

turned over to shame and to dea?h pa ^ 10 , bs °*uoified, and women 
America it did not seem tw «^?*+uf had not forgotten. But in 
not seem so to anyone who is sa?e i^f -° Uld £ G ' Qnd ** d06S 
never be real to those who are fafe^ Am6rica - Sucn thhl ^ can 

were the^oSors^o? Balaan/' r6tUrned to a ^ ain - Here again 

sunfire^o ^ouch^on^^ 0 ^ countr ^ c " n oame to us, braving the 

r^^.^J*^^ 6 ^.^ naif -believing we 

1imn ,. ^ . 1 • Xli ^y were nail -naked skeletons, vounp 1 ^irlq 

beaten bark CeS LPvt? ar ?^ tS ' , ? Mldren dressed in cIotHldf of 
bv the fnii 6 ^' llke a11 the Philippines, has been stripped 

v m{5?! 8 ® ?? cv « Ty Scrap of f00d and Serial that might 
vmZ l 1 ^ strength, or comfort, or -shelter to my people. 

Japan from the beginning has been certain of defeat. 

n u Xt thQ Ja P anese nad felt their residence in the Philinpines 
would be permanent, they would not have despoiled the land and 
weakened^the people. The land was too rich a source and the 
people might have been too useful. They would have behoved 
differently toward a country in which they intended to remain and 
develop m resources. 

But the Japanese knew almost at once their stay would be 
short in the Philippines. America and the Filipinos themselves were 
determined to shorten their stay there. In that short time they 
aid the best they could ta ruin the one country that represented 
American democracy in the Far East. It was the' democratic - 
tradition of the. Filipino that the- Japanese feared and -hated, and 
tried to drain from him with the blood from his veins. Again I 
am not exaggerating. There are trees that were living crucifixes 
in the Philippines where men died for believing in the American 
form of government. I am not talking in scareheads. These are 
plain^news facts. They are in the reports that have been sent to 
us this past year by the loyal Filipinos who worked from within, 
on our side. Let us not forget, on that peace table that is loom- 
ing nearer and larger, to lay open the records of the Japanese 
who behaved like beasts in the Philippines. 

His behavior there is testimony to his stupidity* He 
evened his score with America on its ravaged earth, and it is 
there that America is evening up the score. 

We saw our first victims of Japanese coercion on Leyte. 
Young boys with arms scarred had been given the "sun treatment" — 
tied all day face up under the blazing skies because they would 
not collaborate. And in the suburbs of Tacloban, the capital, 
our first recaptured town, we were shown a. rise of earth on a 
little hill, no gravestones, no markers there to point to the. 
presence of two hundred dead, shot there together for refusing 
to collaborate with Japan. How ably the Japanese disposed of 
everything, even these poor bodies in one unmarked gravej We 
heard on Leyte of their actions everywhere, how their army trucks 
came to every door, and soldiers entered the houses taking every- 
thing that might be of use, and throwing all else out of the win- 
dows or firing it there. All their loot was taken on ships to 
Ja Pan, leaving the Philippines stripped to its scorched earth; and 
you know how the Filipinos brought on famine by .refusing to. 
re Plant that earth, to feed Japanese mouths 0 



-3- 



* T«nStL lfnn!A°, the household goods was done to everything 
T he Japanese stripped the earth of its green and the souls of men ' 

°i-K P t: h!J L!n Q Nl PP° n °ne Jurisdiction -upon the schools of 
ilC n , n ! S ° f? Ud ' schools, paid for by our 

own taxes and by so doing they set literacy in the Islands back 
by at least rive years. 

As newspapermen you will be glad to know of America's 
first act in Tacloban. It went to press. 

As soon as we took the capital, the boys from the Office of 
rar Information scurried around and uncovered a press the Japanese 
had overlooked. They set it up and went on a door-to-door paper 
hunt. The municipal building contributed some paper, and the" 
convent some more, and a store some more, and so enough paper 
was collected to bring out the one-sheet edition of the Leyte- 
Samar Free Philippines, printed 'in English for the Filipinos. 
In that first edition of Sunday, October 29, 19Uk, we announced 
the reopening of the schools. 

As Americans you will be glad to know that the first things 
the Commonwealth Government did upon resuming the reins of govern- 
ment was to reopen the s.chools and churches; God and knowledge 
and the press returned together to the Philippines. The churches 
had not been closed but were under the surveillance of the police 
and all sermons were under Japanese censorship. 

The next morning v/e opened the first school in Tacloban, 
and if we had needed proof of the physical and spiritual blows 
the Filipinos had suffered, it was revealed then in the appearance 
of the children. They marched in, not like youngsters,- but like 
little robots. Then they saw us, President Osmena and his cabinet, 
General Fellers and former Vice-Governor Hayden, and they saw their 
teachers smiling and wet-eyed too. And what did those children 
do but burst out singing "God Bless America." Two and a half 
years arc a long time in children's lives, but they had not for- 
gotten the words. 

The Japanese had stressed the point that their curriculum 
must be taught in Japanese, and yet they had to use English to 
teach these children. 

I shall never forget the words one teacher, Amador Daguio, 
spoke that day. 

"Before us were the Japanese bayonets - behind us our 
Filipino traditions - and with us our unwavering loyalty to America, 
The' Japanese frightened us and under duress we were compelled to 
do certain things, but what was with us and within us they 
could not take away." 

The school teachers brought out of the earth the American 
school books they had buried there in tin cans. The Japanese- 
had ordered tbes'e democratic textbooks burned j and had watched 
auto-de-fes of what the Filivino teachers had let them believe were 
"Ehe books. But 'the books had stayed buried two and a half years, 
Needless to say, their odor was terrible. 

But the words in those books had kept their strength below 
the 4 captive earth, for they were'the words that had held tne 
source of freedom and of loyalty, first to America and then to 
t\* Philippines. The Japanese could not put those words behind^ 
barbed wire nor 'make them die. They l^ed and are »tl l a ^ 
on Leyte, Luzon, Mindanao -* with the ideals they made live in^ 
these places that held them, along with all the other pnixipp 
Islands, to America. 

The pictures of Lincoln and Washington that og£ hung_on 
our schoolroom walls beside the picture ox !£" e * T he pictures 
Hizal, had all been burned by order of tne d ^ rds these . xae n left 
^ these men were too big to hide, But the 
*e*e in the books and in the hearts ox the wxx p 



had been presepved^an^hi^ 8 J hat ilad hun & beside these- pictures 
Filipino hands* The thn 5 ? et ° n the beGch at Leyte, waved by 
by the Japanese were 1o™»«??,\° f R i Sing Sun tlQ & 8 distributed 
American forces werl Zr^/ by thc while the 

aggregate of blazing hp?i ?! ?2 wn 0Ver Leybe tlle latest 
destruction was a bitter A&n**.*?* 1 * 6 Mstory of war > tlieir 
who came hunting them latfJ »? P ° lmtme ? t to the American soldiers 
it difficult to unde?stSnd ,.hv ,T n rS{ , The »**lpinos found 
things, but when thev fonnfl ?? ^eij *lm W loan friends wanted such 
burned the hated flagsf hey dld ' they felt bad1 ^ ^ver having 

patt ern T f orthTl uSu? fl b0y « f T Urs 011 Le ^ te h «™ ^ Human- 
the Philipninel « I 1 of^ 6 sets thG pattcrn for **«*e of 
meeting on Levtc' 1° *nnot stress enough the importance • of this 

thfnfipinos^na ?Se ^iTcTV? 11 ^ islcnd ' between 

It w?s a splendid bif S 1 -?- tho Ps y c ^logical Warfare Bureau. 
American soldiers what ^h^i? S l P^P*^ angled to show these 

don't look down on him, because he got that way f ightinfi for Joal 
One of the highlights of that pamphlet is: "It is of She XosT 

i^Witi^LW^frf^^^ y ° Ur ^ to main^Huf 
nigh position in the Filipino's regard — the position that took 

so many years to develop. Every American soldier ca??ips a ler 

sonal responsibility for any rough or rude SreatLni? Seating" 

e /3^ in ?u X l kG a , l0Wly native v;ould inevitably cause a revulsion 
ox feeling that would take years to overcome, if it were possible 
to overcome such a feeling at ell. In addition to loyal friend- 
SSlfow 7 n Vat? Filipinos have had a brotherhood of arms since 
December 7, 1941. It must be preserved." 

That was the purport of the pamphlet, and it was a perfect 
introduction for the Filipino on Leyte and the boy who landed 
there on a barge under fire. 

» 

. Then, the American fighters knew how General M.-cArthur 
feels toward the Filipino and the Philippines, and his faith in 
the country and its people had permeated the forces that took 
Ley t e . 

Also on Leyte we met the first American guerrillas, soldiers 
ana civilians who had escaped the Japanese, end who had fought 
beside, and been shielded by, the Filipino fighters for two and a 
nail years. The Americans in the Philippines could not have sur- 
vived for two hours without the protection thrown over them by 
the entire country, ^e heard stories that resemble the under- 
ground railway accounts of the Civil War days, of Americans being 
passed from house to house, always ahead of the Japanese hunters, 
while even the little Filipino children risked their lives lying 
hnrfrtrio iu thcm : Fili P inos were flogged to death by the Japanese 
Decease they refused to tell of the hiding places of the many 
i_u.ierica.ns who have been hunted from place to place, like rabbits, 
uy pacics of Nipponese soldiers. Some of these Americans are now 
nere, and some of thygm will soon arrive, and you will hear their 
stories. You will/hear these Americans say "East is East, and 
west is v r est»M There can be no East and no West where the blood' 
oi two races has been drunk together by a community earth. 

President Osmena, accepting the rights of civil government 
from the military hands of General Mac Arthur , in Taolopan, appointed 
the guerrilla leader, Colonel RuDerto Kangleon, acting governor of 
Leyte, not only as a tribute to this daring leader who fought the • 
American fight from within a conquered country, but as a tribute to 
fell who resisted — the guerrilla movement that was only mace 
Rossiblc by the united understanding and confidence in America of - 
Eighteen million Filipinos. President Osmena «s proclamation, calm, 



confident, urged unison of pff., f 

announced the formation of thl I °5 temperance in action. He 
who aided the Japanese w It 7°* of In( l ui;r y to punish those 
this investigation the 'word ™i ?f, estin S to note that in 

term "those whose loyaltv tn • rtlon is not use d, but the 
under suspicion." y America and the Commonwealth has come 

for the future! Prtsfdent d o^mi^ rm * he Pattern of Loyte, a pattern 
there, while the ImerloS 0? 3 f? d 2 enercl MacArthur work together 
flag walk through the mudflv I ■ l 11;L P ino who fought under his 
experiences and tai g" the ttLf Tac J obQn together, sharing 
The Filipino has opened hU InlJt^h past > P^ent and future, 
as that home is, hi f B t0 the Wican on Leyte, and poor 

the American Gl'has turned hi* he ? as lQtt * ^ turn 

his valued towels to the «i? if ? k lnside out > he h - s donated 
the-kids and grownuns nlftS £?« ? r as saron g s > and shared with 
gum, and even his ciLSettL iS tr f' sure of ^mdy and chewing 
no man, in the Pacific! ~" ^ Grenter lovo th ™ that hath 

together^ ^t^/^ 0 ^ Mi 0 ? 'sSl^f e^ in6S ' T* 
example for all the world. Leyte «- - - * treasures, is an 




^ t I f wrong to point out how different this Dattern on Trvt/ 
ll°*l hC l h ln Grec ° G and Italy? I am not here to assauISc polity ' 

^eSJoSSSJlSS^hJi bU V^ re Ql1 GWare or the danger In these 7 
niiSLS !£ ™ where rebellion and disatisf action cannot be 
allayed by pamphlets and the courtesies between the freed end - 
their rescuers cannot be maintained. How different from Leytc 

the Lt? & Zt°tL»tT tQ l il ??> the Phili PP^s, lets its people decide 
the sort of government they want from now on, and where all diffi- 
culties are being ironed out smoothly and with satisfaction, end 
with courtesy shown to all. Does it not all come down to this, 
the common civilities? Is it not this that will keep our sons 
irom 'another war? 

The Japanese turned back the clock in the Philippines on 
everything that had meant decent human progress. Physically 
they pushed my people back and down. Their every effort was to 
weaken the Filipinos as a race. Our youngsters hr.d delighted in 
the ^ American sports learned in American schools. Now they pre 
devitalized, their strength sapped by hunger, and the little chil- 
dren are enfeebled so that a new generation must be built again. 

Spiritually, the Japanese tried to break them. They could 
not, Tne Christian religion held the Filipino to his church .-is 
his political faith held him to America. They could not resist 
hunger, but poverty of the soul they could and did resist. 

Resistance has made the Philippines a new nation.- 

T ' r eak, impoverished, physically drained, they arc now 
possessed of -a new genius. Before, theirs was adapted, 'a symoosium 
01 standards, of one religion superimposed upon another, an 
American culture built over the old European culture brought from 
^pom. During these lost years under the Japanese they heve 
learned to stand alone; in chains, in poverty, in beggary, but they 
-tood united, and with loyalty to but one other nation - ijnericaj 

One thing more. 

Four of our American newspapermen died in the attack on Leyte. 
They were: Asohel Bush of the Associated Press; Stanley Gunn of 
the Forth Worth Star-Telegram, John Terry of the Chicago Daily News, 
c -nd Frank Prist, Jr. of .'.cms Ncwspictures .• They died trying to 
present to the world their version of something America was com- 
pleting at last in the Philippines. Their words came back to 
America from the ramparts of democracy in the Pacific. As newspaper- 
men, and in tribute to their memories, it should be our pert to see 
t&is story, the last great story these men covered, disseminated 
^ong all the peoples of the earth, • . 

PR— JL/|,q, 



1617 Massachusetts Ave. n w 
Washington 6, D. c . 
HObart 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF BUORUAMOM AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
CO MM ON WEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

January 10, 1945 



FOR IMMEDIATE R?l LEASE j 



From Tacloban, Leyte, the seat of the Commonwealth Govern- 
ment of the Philippines, President Sergio Osmena issued the 

4 

following proclamation to the Filipino people, at the time of 

the landings in Luzon: 

"My beloved people: 

The American forces of liberation under the brilliant 
leadership of General MacArthur have destroyed the enemy army 
defending Leyte, established control of Mind or o, and now stand 
firmly on the soil of Luzon within a striking distance of our 
capital city 0 This is the answer to our prayers of many long 
months. The decisive hour in the Battle of the Philippines 
has arrived* 

General MacArthur has called upon us to rally behind him 
and' I know that every patriot, guerrilla and civilian, will 
heed that call so that the enemy may feel the full strength 
of our outraged people. Rally to his forces with your utmost 
so- that his burden of battle may be lightened* Rise to noble 
heights as a liberty-loving people. Acquit yourselves with 
courage and honor worthy of the sacred memory of our departed 
heroes. 

God defend our cause! God strengthen our arms! God 
speed the day of our deliverance! 



SERGIO OSMENA", 



PR-149 



1617 Massachusetts Ave m w 
f ashingt on 6 } d . a .. * ' * 
HObart 1400 



IBiBm OF INFORMATION ^ PU3LI0 fflSLATIOf5s 
W E A L T H o. I HI PHILIPPinj 



February 1, 1945 



FOR E.S.ED IATE RELEASE : 

Postmaster General Frank C. Walker announced that res- 
tricted- nail service to Leyte, Samar and Mindoro in the Phil- 
ippines was resumed on January 12, 1945.. 

Registry service will be available at once.- Only first- 
class mail for dispatch by surface means will be accepted, 
according to the Post Office Department. 

The announcement further states that the domestic first- 
class rate of postage ,.. three cents an ounce, and the domestic 
registry fees, registry surcharges and limits of indemnity 
when the matter is registered, will apply. The indemnity con- 
ditions which will govern will be those in force prior to the 
suspension of registry service with the Philippine Islands. . 

.No letter packet may be sent which exceeds 11 pounds in 
.weight, or IS inches in length, .or 42 inches in length and 
girth combined. For the present, not ifloro than one letter ... 
packet per week from the game sender to the same addressee will 
be accepted, according to the Post Office Department . 

PR-153 



1617 Massachusetts Ave w w 
Washington 6, D.C. ' ' * m ' 
HObart 1400 

mvMTmm of mommxm m> public rations 

C C M M 0 N W EALTB OF m w tp „ 

THE PHILIPPINES 

"February 5, 1945 



FOR B1MEDIATE RELEASE ; 

With the news of General MacArthur* s forces in Manila, Hon. 
Jaime Hernandez, Secretary of Finance , In charge of the Philip- 
pine Government In Washington, issued the following statement: 

"The - arrival 'of .General MacArthur and his forces in Manila 
makes this day one that will forever remain memorable in the 
annals of our country. Only those whose homeland has been 
overrun and occupied by the enemy can fully understand and 
appreciate the inexpressible joy that all Filipinos everywhere 
feel today. 

"Our beloved President Osmena and our other officials have 
returned to Manila, the rightful seat of our national govern- 
ment. President Osmena has brought back to the Filipino people 
the liberty and democracy for which they have fought during 
three long years of the despotic rule of the Japanese. 

"To President Roosevelt and to General MacArthur go our 
heartfelt thanks and gratitude for the fulfillment of their 
solemn pledge to redeem our country. To. the great American 
people whose gallant sons are fighting in the Philippines 
on land, on sea and in the air, we offer our fervent prayers 
for a speedy victory. 

''Yet, amidst, our joy over, the return to Manila we know 
that the fighting in the Philippines is not yet over. Many 
Japanese are' still in our country. Much bloody fighting still 
lies ahead. Many more precious lives both American and Filipi- 
no will be sacrificed. But the Filipino people will fight on 
shoulder to shoulder with their American comrades until everyone 
of the invaders shall have been driven from our shore..;. We 
shall keep faith with America as America has kept faith with 
us." 



PR-154 



1617 Massachusetts Ave if w 
Washington 6, d.C. * ■** 

HObart 1400 

IEPAMI23NT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC REI, .TI0N8 
COMMONWEALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

February 15, 1945 



WkMgmm- RELEASE. : 

Hon. Jaime Hernandez, Seorata™ ™ 

' OGCr -td.iy ox finance and Chairman 
of the Filipino Group of the hh^ 

up 01 tne Filipino Rehabilitation Com- 

Mission announce today ( ThursdtlyJ ; \ the prope8al Qf ^ ' 
HUpino of the miplno Rehabilitation Cession for 

continuation for a period of twenty years of the existing trade 
relations between the United states and the Philippines. The 
proposal, supported by a comprehensive report, was submitted ' 
to Senator Millard E. lydings, Chairman of the imc for consider- 
ation of the Commission at its forthcoming meting February 21. 

oi our industries destroyed or damaged. y 

"Under our proposal,". Mr 4 Hernandez continued "the exist 
ing trade relations as in force in 1940 will be continued du^iL 
date C J— ^ alt ^ P^iod and for twenty years thereafter from tnt 
date tne independence of the Philippines is proclaimed The 
basic quotas established by the provisions or the Independence - 
SttCS SFtSS b ^ he Act of M ^ st 7, 1939, will be JSSblSSd 
Visions rela^nf J^ffi and colle ? tion cf export tax and the pro! 
rw ° relating to the progressive reduction of the quotas 

the ^T Sa \ a ^° that after the twenty-year period 

ernmen? It tlf SSS? wil L remain in force unIess eit ^r tlAov- 
deS??o t ^ U ? S; ^„ the Gove rnment of the Philippines will 
which case f f?^° dlfy> ?I ^minute said trade relations, in 
fStoaSS 1*1* I ve " y ?^ r P ri6r notice shall be given after the 
iidepeSdencI?" ' m of the Proclamation of Philippine 

rf i-u^ 0 + ching upo r the benefits of the free-trade relationship, 
hL ? 0 ? oun ' cnes > Hernandez further said: "Free trade 

v?L!rS? a ,22 n t0 the People of the Philippines and has pro- 
ves them the opportunity to grow in the accumulation of pro- 
perty and^ the diffusion of wealth, lying at the foundation of 
civilization.' It made possible the development of our -prin- 
cipal industries of today — sugar, coconut oil, cigars, em- 
broideries, and others, dependent" upon the American market. Our 
standards of living increased to a level higher than that -of any 
y 1 our neighboring countries. The nr ogress and the evident con- 
tentment of the Filipino people before the enemy invaded their . 
, country are obvious proofs of the beneficial effects of American- 
Phi,iippine economic relationship. In brief, the benefits of 
iree trade are evident in every walk of PhiliPPi ne life. 



-2- 



a relat 
reel pre 

business men and invest o^ VU i?+PI? to Amorioan exporters, 
war the r-.hi.lipnines was 55l with c he result that before the 
United States 'the saTeat 5 best custo ^r of the - 
the only nlacc' in the w«^5 i lor Amorloen investment, and 
rights end privUegel E§ d ^ere Americans enjoy equal' 
Filipino people will oX2S« 5S nat J V0 Population. The 
part calls for! in ordi vtLt e A rea ^ to do whatever their 
-no flnav* will tfjt Amorioan industry, business 

velo^nt J of oin r ° ii nue thoir Participation in the do- 
ll l t V rT a ^l e y}L G ?^ V *< * s President Osmena has repoatod- 
the Phiiip^nes!" 00ntinue to a loyal partner in 

ful XL ^° Z s * rossed th ~ necessity of Congress con- 
sidering the future trade relationship between the two 

at bhe e ^l^st time possible, for the following 

(1) To obviate any difficulties or complications arising 
from the so-called most favored nation rights of nations hav- 
ing treaties with the United States; 

(2) To accelerate the rehabilitation of the Philippines 
by giving incentive and encouragement needed by industry; 

(3) To adjust the existing provisions of law which im- 
pose 15% expert taxes and 15$ decreasing quotas upon Phil- 
ippine exports; and 

[k) To reassure the Filipino people, in the midst of 
their suffering and hardships as a result of more than three 
years under Japanese occupation, that their pre-war eoonomy 
will be reestablished and protected even after the inde- 
pendence u 

"Unless some arrangement is arrived at for the adjust- 
ment or the continuation in some form of the existing trade 
relationship between the United Stc.tes and the Philippines . 
before we become completely independent", Mr, Hernandez 
eontinued, "our principal industries will soon be suddenly 
out off from' the American market and face complete liquidation 
Uhoer the orovisions of existing lews, In that event, our . 
economic stri'.cturc , destroyed by the ravages of war and by 
more than three -rears of enemy occupation, will remain pros- 
trate one! will do unable go face the tremendous problems of 
reiirC rehabilitation end reconstruction. The chaotic and 

appalling conditions now existing can be endured only if a 

semi economy for the future is provided. The goal sot by 
•President Roosevelt and the Congress of the United States for 

the future Philippine nation cannot be reached if the whole 

basis of cur economy is withdrawn,," 

Mr, Hernandez than went on to say that in submitting 
this proposal -"or continuation of the present trade relation- 
ship twenty years 3 the Filipino Members of the Commission 
•iv.: ] t-->at with v'/rvo^sbj e sentiment now prevailing in 
American and Filipino circles for continued American-Filipino 
amity,, the aronicious occasion has now arrived for the con- 
st irsm'Xtion oi an ^morionix- Philippine trade relationship tnac 
will be durable and mutually beneficial to the peoples ol tue 
Philippines and the " Tn.it ?c> States, 

• The Filipino RebaMlltatlon Crr.mission composed of nine, 
«.5.ipino ana nine Tricon Members, ^ created 
gress io o f2^^^M d SoS52«nj -assist , 

feing Zto&MiwVnn independent nation, econom- . 
ically secure wherever possible." 

PR-156 ! 



1617 Massachusetts Ave. jj 
Washington 6, D,C . 
HObart 1AOO 

DLPART1.3NT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
COMMONWEALTH 0 I THE P H I L I P P I N E S 

February 19, 1945 



FOR PILE PLATE RELEASE ; 

At: a solemn Mass of thanksgiving for the liberation of 
the Philippines, which was hold at St. -Patrick's Cathedral in 
New York City on Sunday, February 11th, with His Excellency, ' 
the Most Reverend Archbishop Francis Joseph Spellman presiding, 
President Sergio Osmefla of the Philippines sent the following 
statement frora Luzon- through the facilities cf the Columbia 
Broadcasting Station; 

! 'As the capital city of the Philippines comes out of the 
darkness into the light of freedom and democracy, I lift my 
eyes to the Almighty and thank Him on behalf of my people for 
the advent of the hour of our liberation. In the grim days 
of our captivity, hope and courage never failed us because 
faith is invincible and we were sure that a Christian people 
like ours cannot be abandoned by a merciful God. The libera- 
tion of Manila is the triumph of the Cross of Christ and o 
the principles of Justice and Righteousness, that it represents, 
TO the great American people who made possible our deliverance 
I want to give assurance of our continued loyalty and gratitude. 

President Osmena's message was read by the Reverend 
William F. Master son, S.J. who gave the sermon. The Filipino 
com unity, in New York City was well represented as well as 
the Philippine Government in Washington. 

At the termination cf the solemn Lass at which Fat her 
a v Snntero Filipino priest in New York participated, the 
Star Spangled Banner ana the Philippine National Anthem were 
played. 

The text of Father Kasterson's sermon follows: 

. -If the Lord had not been with ™>j£™™*J™^%lt 
us, they would ^^^^S* fave S¥tT«W 

?frhfir U t S eeth: ^M^^^'^S See. 
snare of the fowler. Broken was the f^e, and *e^we^ and 
Our help is in the name of the Lord, the lAakoi ot 
earth.' (Psalm 123) 

' history has its way or torturing sincere ^ 
earnest endeavors to alter for better it o ^pparen xy 
evitable unfoldings. It is tantalizing, for ^tanc^,^ 
lize how progressively axiomatic seems to nave & prey to 

.position that smaller nations must ^oapa y ^ ?le 
rapacious neighbors. For such periodically I the 
the world has a profuse pity the while it 
soering cure. 

rt „i p a to be wholly 
-■Yet, we wonder, are these small peopx epochs discloses 
pitied. Even a mild acquaintance with leaa ^ ^ hQ Qb _ 
a parallel truth that most smaller nation - x witness 
lecfof God*s special affection. liberation we thank 

Ireland: witness the Philippines for vm . . . . 



-2* 

God today. God has apportioned 



wh ich has moulded and will S*! °l a distinctive destiny 
turies. More than that He h*Z 5?! to mould a11 ensuing cen- 
lishment of that destinv a ft^, ! ned to neasure "the accomp- 
a nd for all who would remain r 6 £ asn ion set for His own Son 
ufiering. Can it be ?SS ?he Kir*?, . \ the ? ure path of 

pression - their size - also int?5 t ^ lng wMch invites op- 
Gcd and practical adherence to His law? & Sreater reliance on 

"We couch our exT>re <*<H 4-u . . 
hymn of Israel we used at tho o!^? a ? kS8lvin S in the 
Ssition of the PMi ?rL?5 . start be cause the present day 
S^aole° f m^ ffl* uniquely and wit| 

to Tsrael anri I God's first chosen people. For 

If the world and Sfil l ? pln ?; ■ and onlv t0 ther * in their sectors 
£m» nuESuS S™? y ° U they Were sria11 naticns amidst far 

Fai?r?n lhJ%2 % ' was , ent ^sted 'the pearl of great price' 
l M w» q ?» lot^f Tl 7 -°-%k A glorious, divine destiny quite 
S5?t™?r,2i ISrael t0 ^ ive ihrist t0 the world; the 

I I S}S? ^ i • h ? + word ? 0f Pope Pius XI, 'to become- a center 
from- which the light of truth will radiate, and to be: as it 
were, an advance guard of Catholicism in the Far Hast, a great 
part of which is so disquited and still plunged in the darkness 
of religious error 1 . Their neighbors becoming their enemies 
ravaged- these peoples - trampled their fields, despoiled their 
temples, enslaved their bodies - yet failed utterly not compre- 
hending that the help of these people was 'in the name of the 
Lord', as the words of President Osmena have emphasized. 

•We want to echo the prayers of thanks for the friendship 
of the Filipino people voiced time and again by the prisoners 
released through our avenging armies these last several days. 
That such devotion as the prisoners attest did endure after our 
humilitating defeat in those Islands and through three years of 
puzzled waiting magnifies the wonder as to what could have en- 
gendered a friendship between America and the Philippines - be- 
tween a dominating power and a dependent people - a friendship 
unmatched anywhere in the Orient - a friendship so gloriously 
sealed on Bataan, Corregidor and after. The answer is simple 
but far -reaching. It was not long after our initial occupation 
of the Philippines almost fifty years ago that Filipinos and. 
Americans alike realized that both shared a community of basic 
Christian truths. It must have jolted the Filipino - justly 
proud of his precious heritage of mere than three and a half 
centuries of Catholicism - to learn that this unwanted Colossus 
of the v/est traced its greatness to the Christian truth cn which 
it was founded: 'That all men (irrespective of color) are created 
eoual, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain in- 
alienable rights'. Still mere amazing must they have found it 




ippines which, while admittedly delaying their - economic develop- 
ment, safe guarded their persons and their fields, because they 
were scrupulously observed. The blame was no one's that they 
we*e slow to catch the vision of America's destiny. For too 
many Americans hemming in their vision by the material have 
also missed it. 

"For America too, with its definitely Christian way of ^ > 
life, has a unique destiny here and now. The cataclysmic crisis 
confronting the world makes it imperative that we recognize this 
destiny for the saying contribution it can and must make towards 
the peace for which mankind yearns. It seems to me all our 
American history at home, any successful American dealings . 
abroad, as in the Philippines make crystal clear ttet there, is 
no begetting or preserving peace unless its 1 Se™-Ste all 

chored to Christian truths. Their influence must permeat|aix ^ 
Political and civil society. If we may count on sucn, no country 
the surface causes of war will be dispelled. Look^at our co y, 
or better still, your neighborhood; See how ^ ^mo^oan ^ 
taken into it peoples of every nation m ^ Mutually inimical, 
their normal surroundings in their old worw Because they 
Peoples bred on inherited hatreds or Q lS ^ ru aS # sons 0 f a common 
have been accented as fellow human beings, 



-3- 

cedents" ^mar^eT™?*? Sa °J ed no ma tter what their ante- 
within out borlers ^ nSf ° mation i3 affected. Peace 
on what insures it vf? col)m onplace that we • rt . ,ely reflect 
guarantees revert to ?h!' unde ^ably its beginnings, its 
common Christian be ?i ? acceptance _ and profession of our 
see that « ■ w viS? i * America is challenged today to 
It allow thpqp h???- ed ^'° rld ^Ofits by our experience; that 
inte^ationlilyf ll0W6d tPUtllS their beneficent sway 



misslonSef f ^l??? 6 t0 sena sti11 ^an3r, ^ny more 
SoiSS? iSLj? J he ^^PPines. It has been a cause of 
aboS 6 S t ? J rea lize how their work over there - just 

serous?? S? wJ* °Sr hUndred fold - has bQen Hampered and 
most 2? thttt aCk t The war while artirially cloistering 
oSnortun1??P? K?*! S ° Ul ^ lroni °ally offered precious 
S e^P -S 1Ch tl ? Q al0113 C£n reveal for th * m to e * dear 
JidS iTSf . Stil J nS Pe t0 the Sallant Filipino people, The 
wider mission of Christian America is awakening our stunned 
^ +5L tQ a n . a PP rec iation and acceptance of Christian truths 
J he f °untairi-head of its councils and deliberations will 

?nfwr° n -?r^ lly ? om P lete °ur contribution to the Philippines. 
*or we will have done far more than liberate her - we will 
have crovmed our achievements by really having hel-oed to 
maKe it possible for even a small people to sincerely look 
forward to enduring security. 

"The'choioe by his Excellency, our Host Reverend Arch- 
bishop, of this day - the beaiitiful feast of Our Lady of 
Lourdes - on which to publicly express our gratitude to 
God for the liberation of the Philippines is most felici- 
tous. For, it will be remembered that these good people 1 
were first barbarously attacked an another glorious feast 
of Our Lady, that of the Immaculate Conception. ' /onderf ully 
also, Our Blessed Mother is the heavenly Patroness of both 
our countries. How more fittingly conclude than by commend- 
ing America and the Philippines to her special charge. May she 
see both of us safely and surely to the accomplishments of 
our destinies as she did her own Son. And, Mary, because 
your heart was agonized at seeing innocent lives snuffed- 
out in saving Christ for the world, comfort, we pray you, 
through God's grace, those m, urning their loved ones who 
died that Christ might still find the Philippines a pulpit 
for the Orient." 



PR-157 



& hi 

p 

4 O 

CD 

M 

i P 
^ P CQ 
> U. P 



ct 

CD 
3 



hi 

o 
ct 
C 
4 ct 

OQ p 

CD 



0 



H> 03 
P ^ 
O 

ct O 

p 4 
P 

«<i oq 

H-^d 
0 CQ 

C ct 

H> hi 
P 

<« h- 
P P 
H CD 
P* 
O 

ct 

O 
*--< 

o 

CT" 
H* 

H 

CD 
03 



CO 
00 



p 
o 

p 4 

00 



o 
p 

ct 
ct 

CD ^ 
H 

P 

0 OQ 
Qi p 

O 

P c+ 

P CD 

cr 3 

P ■ 
o hi 
oq o 
a* 

ct 

o o 
P 

hj 

CD 

0 O 
Pi 4 

c 

P^d 
CD 

4 ^ 

O OQ 

o H 

O p 

C p 

►d GO 
P tr 

ct cr 
H- C 
O 4 

p 

o 



4 

• 



o 

p- 

O 
CD 
CO 



•d 

00 
CQ 



P 
P 
Pj 

>d 

H H 
H 

P CQ 
CO P 
CD ^ 

ct ct 

^ p- 

O CD 

3 



o 
o 



Pi 

CD 
CQ 



ct 0 
O 



I 

CQ 
H* 
Pi 
CD 
CQ 



4 
P 
ct 

0 

O 
B 
4 

& 
O 

g 

CQ 



Cf 

o 
p 

H 
C* 

O 



CQ 

P 
P 
P 

o 

Ci- 
p- 
ro 

CQ 



4 zr 

CO CO 
CQ 

w H 

H» ^ 

00 M 
H> £T 
4 ct 0Q 
0 CQ P 

O 

M> ct 



0 
pi 
O 
9 



c 



H> 0 

hi 3 
*-b 0 

0 H* 
P ^ p 
CQ O CQ 
3 



CD 
| 



ct 
H- 

ct 

p 

H ct 

^ H) 0 

p 0 p 
0 0 
p. pi 4 
O 0 
0 3 H* 
< 00 
0 O P 
^ H> 

O 

H> CQ H> 
4 hd 
0 0 
CD CD 
O 
O , 
l=N 

4 

ct H>~ 
O 4 

0 P 

ct 0 P 

P - P^ CL 

H- O 
P 3 CT" 
\K H 
•OP 

H> o 
ft- 

ct 

P J O 
0 p 
ct 



ct 

0 

O 



0 

O ct 
H- 4 2 
<l H'|> 
H- 0 H 

H» 0 

N Pi 4 

p 0 
ct CQ c+ 

O 0 0 
0 4 

p H) 
^ ct p 
0 0 M 

H M 

P o 

Pj ct 

• °r 

P 
^ 

H 
P 

O 

C o 

ct 0 



0 
<! 

0 

4 



p 



^ p 

4 

0 

cq ro 

Ctv 

m w 

0 vO 

o ro 

I ^ 

hd ct 
4 J3* 
O 0 
CO 

4 °H 
0 p 
CQ 

CQ P 
I 



o o cy 
Hb 4 0 

ct 0 
J3* ^ 00 
0 ct 

O 

00 P 2 



o 
cf 

0 



bB 

0 

0 H-b 
o 

4 



O 



O 

CD H) CD 
P 

ct ^ 
{=T 0 
0 p 
0 4 
Pi pi H 
O 

ct cq ta 

tr ct p 

0 

^d 
4 O 
H-O 4 

00 00 

\y 4 

CD 0 
CQ CQ CD 
ct CQ 
H 

CQ <J 
ct 0 

P 

£ p H- 

Pi ^ >d 

P Pi>d 

4 H» 

C 0 
O Pj 01 
Hj 0 

4 ! d 
M ^ 4 

O Qj 



4 

a* 



ct 

t3* 



<i 
H 

CO 



O 0 
.C Pi 



ct H« 
4 ct 
H- CQ 
0 0 
ct CQ H 

ir t-b 
p p. 

ct 0 h» 
»d ct 

p i=r 

4 0 
ct 



CT* O O 
P hj H* 
O f! <J 

H H 
c+d-H- 
O «<J P 

ct 

& Mhd 
0 O O ^ 

M o P 

H ct CJ & 
0 H* H- 1 ci 



0 



Pi 0 
H*00 
0 

<{ p 

P P 
H Pi' 



P O 
ct 0 



O 



p 



p. 

0 
CQ 
ct 

<J o 4 
CO p £ p 
0 0 M O 
CQ Pi 3 ct 
© p h» H« 
H 2 O 
H- p 0 
CQ ct 
3 CD O 
CQ H> 

ct 

P* ct 

P tr 
ct 4 

0 

l^ 1 0 h» 
P p 
<J 

0 0 

P 

*v3 4 
H CQ 

^ o . 
GO H> 0 
0 

P» °H 3 

p p 

Ch^d 0Q 
& 0Q 
0 p p 
.MO 
H 4 
H- I 0 
V— 1 O 
H- £ o 

P H- 

O ct 
CQ CQ 



82* 

P 
P 



P 
P 
P» 

ct 
P- 



P 
ct 
H« 
<J 
0 

t-« 
O 

0 
N 

Pi 

0 
O 

'H 
P 
4 
0 
Pi 



O 
O 

1 
s 

p 

ct 
H« 

P 
00 

o 
p 

ct 

p- 

0 

: d 
4 
0 
CQ 
0 
P 
Ct 

P 
ct 
4 
O 
O 
H- 
ct 
H- 
0 
CQ 

H« 
P 



P 
H» 

H 
P 

fed 

0 

hd 
4 

0 
CQ 

0 

P 
ct 
I 



P 
P 
Pi 

P- 
P 

4 
P 

CQ 
CQ 
H» 
P 

00 

ct 

pr 
0 

0 

P 

0 



O 


! — 1 


^ 


H> 


0 


H* 




P 


H> 


O 


4 


0 


0 


£ 




c 


0 


P 




Qj 


p 


• 


ct 


Pi 




P" 


o 




b 


" & 


4 




O 




H 


3 




pj 




p 


4 


ct 




0 




jd 


0 






P 


0 


ct 




CQ 


o 


O 


0 




P 










o 


P" 


CD 






4 


|IJ 


CQ 


0 


ct 


ct 




P^ 




j — i 


0 


fc < 


P 




0 


M 

i— 1 


re 






CQ 




M 
i — 1 


H- 


Oj 


CO 


CQ 
ct 




CT 


P 






P 


CD 




O 


N 
M 


L"1 
P> 


0 


r+ 

V. « 


Oft 








£3 
P» 


l-J. 


0 


O 






<j 




H-i 


0 


ct 




3 


*"V 

»-> 




0 


0 




P 




►d 


ct 


He 
h- i 


P 


• 


!—'• 


^d 




] i 


»d 




l i 

to 


Q 4- 

6 U 


He 


^5 






0 


ao 


p- 




o 


p 


pa 


< 


pi 


CQ 


0 




ct 


4 




H- 


P 




P 


o 




00 


4 





o 




H> 


P 


o 




0 


H" 


rr* 




rj 

r- 1 






* 4 




on 


tr 


0 


i-j. 


h-i 
VJ 


<-< 






0 




CQ 


U 


0 


hr 
f-j 


H 




ct 


i 




i 

r^* 


ct 




H* 


bH 


<^ 


H- 


0 


P 




0 


tr l 


CQ 


O 


• 



Kd 



p 

4 
4 

<i 
0 
pj 

P 



P 

CQ 

P i 

H« 

P 

00 

ct 

o 
p 

H 
P 
CQ 
ct 



0 






N 




0 




H) 


0 


0 


ct 


Hi 

r i 


CQ 


0 




O 


4 


P 


P 




H) 


►d 


ct 


ct 


0 


p- 


0 


P; 


0 


4 


ct 


^ 


ct 


O 


P 


pr 




*d 


4 


Ct 


P 


0 


p- 


P 


0 


0 


0 






CQ 




P- 


0 


0 


H» 




P 


H J 


O 


4 


H 


o 


CQ 


CQ 


a 






P 


P 


«e 


^d 


03 


H- 


H- 




ct 


0 


P 


P 4 


P. 








00 


P" 


ct 


p 


H- 


H-i 


0 


CQ 


0 


4 






4 




o 


H« 






H 




ct 


H 






P 



3 


o 




H* 


O 




UJ 


P 




UJ 








4 




o 


0 


hi 

VJ 




CQ 


0 




03 


n, 






• H 
■ j 






/-^ 

w 


hi 




H 

L 


4 


o 


o 


0 


CQ 


^d 


CQ 


0 


G 


H* 




N 


p. 


fn 




0 


h— ! 




• — * 




0 


ct 


o 






1 




Lft 


P 


0 


0 


rt 


CQ 


H 


P 


0 


Us 




P 




1 — ' 


Ct 


O 


1 

ct 


at 


O 


ct 




UJ 


o 


<J 


t— > 




0 


0 


CT 




4 • 


J— ' 


Hj 


CD 


w 




£r 

M 




3 




• j. 




CQ 


H 


o 






0 


C_j. 


^d 




P 




p 


Til 

UJ 


I— V 

p 




ct 


O 


to 
u u 




W 




0 


0 


ct 


0 


P* 


P- 


p 


P 

cr 


o 



p 
p 
p 
o 
p 
p 

O 

0 
Pi 



ct 

p 

ct 
H* 

O 
P 

O 

§ 

I 



P- 

}-» 

^d 
^d 



o 



B 

I 

O 



I 

> 

I 

S3 

M 

bo 



ro 



0 
4 

p 
p 

4 

o 



H 



o 




o 








o 










J — J 












□n 
















H3 




o 






H 



o 



hj 



H 



H 
'hj 

H 



£3 ^ M 
o p 4 on 

CT 1 CQ H 4 
P P^ 
4 H« 

ct p 

00 
M ct 

O P 
O o 

ONp* 

- p 

CQ 

CJ 0 
• ct 

ct 
OQ 



g 
P 
CQ 
CQ 
P 



nat 



ionl yellow belies suck the life-blood of our 



,hnot"L? a L^ h6m Slap * beat P# torture, bayonet, behead and 
shoot our men, women and children. 

Torouemada^ ^i > .^ r J ure . ^ambers that would horrify even old 
lorqu^madas of the Spanish inquisition." 

p^fuSSfSf! arrival of General MacArthur' s forces in the 
B«i«i P ?S t L °P e 5' was officially commissioned a Major in the 
? , m J r °™ d) ' a guerrilla unit ably headed by Major 
lsiaaei Jt% lngenie.ro, with whom he had been serving. This is 
SLSiv,? f liip 3-?° guerrilla units, duly recognized by General 
kacAr^nur, tormally incorporated into the Philippine Army by 
executive order of President Sergio Osmeha. 

Representative Lopez 1 early background as a crusading 
newspaperman was helpful to him and to- the resistance forces 
in publishing the guerrilla news-sheet, "The True War News", 
with the masthead "Published by the Truth Publishing Company." 
Lopez laboriously typed out the news as nicked up from his 
short-wave radio, on the backs of abandoned school pads, and 
whatever paper he could manage to get. News for the paper 
came from the five o'clock KGEI dictation-speed news and the 
commentaries of William Winter, broadcast through the OV/I 
facilities in San Francisco* 

"Asia for the Asiatics..,. Down with the Whites... Greater 
Asiatic Co^prosperity sjphere , These fell on deaf ears of the 
Filipinos", said Representative Lopez.. 

"But why have the Japs been so cruel, so bitter and so 
mean to the Filipinos. Simply said Representative Lopez, 
"because it burned them up to find the Filipinos heart and 
soul fighting for and loving the Americans and the democratic 
way of life, before and after Bataan. 

"Let there be no illusion that the liberation of Manila 
by the gallant forces under General MacArthur - will mean the 
end of the misery and suffering of our people," declared 
Representative Lopez, 

"Northern and southern Luzon, the -greater part of the 
Visayas and the big island of Mindanao, peopled by more than 
10,000,000 Filipinos, are still under the heels of the enemy. 

"By-passing and leap-frogging- are undoubtedly sound 
strategy" and a military necessity, but it has been hell on the 
Filipinos by-passed J?, said Representative Lopez. 

Representative Lopez 1 experiences as a guerrilla included 
blockade-running through Japanese patrol-infested seas in 
small sailboats, smuggling arms and ammunition, r'adi'o trans- 
mitters, hand grenades, automatic rifles, Tommy guns brought 
in by submarine from General MacArthur -in Australia, Up in 
the hills, with the Jans hounding them, he assisted his wife 
deliver her baby without benefit of physician but with only 
the advice of the book ''The Family Physician" as guide-. 

Representative Lopez made his way through Japanese lines 
to report to President Osmeha. when he arrived in Leyte. His 
family is in safe hands in the hills. 



"The Japanese are desperate because they know ^ey>i«*p- 
surely going to lose the war", said Representative Lopoz «™ 
infuriated, because the Filipinos openly re 30100 over the iising 
Am.e r i can victories . They have become much more oiucl, more 
barbarous than ever before. 

"Last November they butchered over a thou sand in nocent 
civilians in the northern part of my Pr^ol'to ^ o as* the 
ironically enough 50 miles across the onaim d a<p^g^ shitQ t s 
American sixth army was mopping up the snax, / 



BOn C ° rner0d ln <*» 0«»oc corridor." 

To those few Filial 
enemy; the Filipinos f6eHoS5°p?|fSl^— ^ 0:?a ^ Witil th6 



tment and hatred. 




o.:c r ,u,xt^-orj.Ly after a fan n r . nanas but Punish 

democratic, orderly processes? trial, following our 



the Philippines, PrcaidSnt Jw 1 * 6 ?* 0l> tllG Commonwealth of 
and becking of cur ^oplo Ha ?? ' haa < tho ^ole-heartod support 
to his government and shrim d,;t suoh Q hl £ h moral tone 

stains of the ne^ds 0 ?mJ ? e ° r £Q ^ thorough under- 
pin in his program for unit v ^ P ~'~ n f? ? hey Iiave allied to 
tiou of our broken iiearis and homes S 1D th ° ^ cons ^uc- 



PR-159 



Gommonweaiun uovuni^i^ uy on« .u^w vw * ttww 

peacetime elections in 1941, Senator Garcia and Represent- 
ative Lopez became leaders in the resistance movements in 
the Philippines. Senator Garcia inspired the guerrilla 
forces in Bohol. Representative Lopez was actively engaged 
in guerrilla v/arfare with the rank of Major in the guerrilla 
unit of the Bohol area command. They made the hazardous trip 
through Japanese lines to report to President Osmena when he 
landed in Leyto . 

President Osmena designated them to serve the Philippines 
in matters of relief as Members of the Filipino Rehabil- 
itation Commission in Washington. Senator Garcia arrived 
January 14. Representative Lopez arrived last week. They 
will attend the meeting of the PRC on February 21, and re- 
Port to the Commission from their first-hand experiences the 
needs and requirements for relief and rehabilitation of the 
Philippines. 

PR-158 



1617 Massachusetts Ave n w 
Washington 6, d. c ' * W * 

HObart 1400 

EEPAMMENT OF IWpEMATXON AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C 0 M M 0 N W E A L T T-T n * 

OF THE PHILIPPINES 

February 20, 1945 



FOR IMMEDIATE RF.TiR APfl? » 

Hon. Jaime Hernandez, Secretary of Finance, in charge 
of the Philippine Government in Washington, announced today 
(Tuesday) the appointments to the Filipino Rehabilitation 
Commission, by President Sergio Osmeha, of Carlos P. Garcia^ 
Senator from Bohol, and Pedro Lopez, Congressman from Cebu. 

Elected Members of the Philippine Congress in the 
Commonwealth Government by the Filipino people in the last 
peacetime elections in 1941, Senator Garcia and Represent- 
ative Lopez became leaders in the resistance movements in 
the Philippines. Senator Garcia inspired the guerrilla 
forces in Bohol. Representative Lopez was actively engaged 
in guerrilla warfare with the rank of Major in the guerrilla 
unit of the Bohol area command. They made the hazardous trip 
through Japanese lines to report to President Osmena when he 
landed in Leyte . 

President Osmena designated them to serve the Philippines 
in matters of relief as Members of the Filipino Rehabil- 
itation' Commission in Washington. Senator Garcia arrived 
January 14. Representative Lopez arrived last week. They 
ill attend the meeting of the FRC on February 21, and re- 
port to the Commission from their first-hand experiences the 
needs and requirements for relief and rehabilitation of the 
Philippines. 

PR-158 



w 



X617 Massachusetts Ave, n W 
Washington 6, D.C, ' 
HOb art 1400 

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 
C C M MONOALTH OF THE PHILIPPINES 

February 27, 1945 



FOR D-H-2BDIATE RELEASE : 

SPEECH DELIVERED BY PRESIDENT SERGIO OSMENA 
ON TPIE OCCASION OF THE R EESTABLISH^ NT Off THE 
COMMONWEALTH GOWRNMENT IN MANILA 

MY" FELLOW COUNTRYMEN: 

In sharing with you today the exultation over the triumph 
of American, arms, let us bow our heads in reverent memory of our 
sacred dead and the dead of our Allies, whose lives are the 
forfeit that these, our liberties, might be restored* We mourn 
the destruction of our once beautiful capital city of Manila 
and the murder of thousands of innocent people by the Japanese 
vandals. Let us pledge ourselves, and all that is within us, 
to the firm resolve to continue the fight with every ounce of 
our strength until the enemy shall have been completely van- 
quished. 

To President Roosevelt who i4 our grim days in Corregidor 
and Bataan, solemnly pledged to us in the name of the American 
people, the men and resources of the United States for our 
liberation, this day must be also a day of happiness over a 
pledge fulfilled. We shall be eternally grateful to him and 
to the great American people. 

To General Mac Arthur, this campaign has been a crusade. 
Friend and defender of our race, he never lost faith in the 
spiritual strength of our people. In this crusade, he 

^ «. la in nitrous father, General 
finishing the noble work begun by his tUusWOW 

^ n' irtQS successfully led another 
Arthur MacArthur who, on August 13, 

r T?,,T.noean power. General 
American Army to free Manila from a Europe 



-2- 

Douglas MacArthur will » n * 

ml military successes but ShL l 2 hist ^y not only for his sig- 
demoera.n.c methods in dealing ^Pf^^tly following truly 
areas retaken from the enemy? ^ilippino civil affairs in 

General MaaArthur* „ 
of the forces of freedom und-°r f na to a11 the gallant members 
aflection and gratitude your C0Iim ^d, our admiration, 



restoration of the 



That no time may be la<** fv, + u 
Commonwealth of the Phil t ?f opiate 

branches will be reestablish^ 8 ^ ^ e ! Xocutive and Judicial 
and x now call upon all tha ? U J raost vi ^ 0T and dispatch 

who have remained steadfast In?*! 4*?? m f mbers of our Congress 
ment auring the period of r alj -°Gicmce to cur Govern- 

to meet in Manila as soon as oL2??P ation ' to be in readiness 
establishment of the 1 w ° ^jWcms permit for the re- 

uue legislative branch. 




and trust of the zoo-pie'.'" — — uu » OABO ™ e con " 

consistenfst^^fr ^ & SGttled c ^ est ion, Our five decades of 
consistent struggles, have come to a definite shoppsc,™ 1 a 

?L IV !5 X ?' 1 ? 45 > tilc ^or-cy-seventh anniversary of the land- 

becW ^Mi^ 10a ? ^ orce ! in Manila - Thus Occupation Day will 
oecome Philippine Independence Day, 

• '^ gravity of our new problems demands the collective effort 
01 ail the people. The government cannot undertake to sclve 
people 6 * It needs the su PPort of the people — a united 

«^A S J he head of ^ our dul ^ constituted government, I therefore 
appeal to you, my people, to remain united, I urge you to for- 
ge* petty political differences, to bury the hatreds and animos- 
ities engendered, by the struggle, to obey the rule of law 
justice and reason, and to remember that we all belong to one 
common country, our beloved Philippines. United we will con- 
tinue assisting effectively in the successful prosecution of 
tne war and in the rehabilitation of our country United we 
can speedily achieve the full restoration of the constitutional 
Processes of • our Government, disrupted by the enemy. United 
J na 111 close cooperation with the United States, we can win • 
iob ourselves and our children all the blessings of democracy, 
^eedom and security for which we have sacrificed so much in 
tnis titanic struggle against the brutal forces of tyranny and 
oppression o 



PR-159 



'Kington 6, B.C. 



B 0 H » 0 K W E A L ^^ ttD PUBLIC RELATIONS 



* PHILIPPINES 




President Manuel T q„ ob „ 

L. Quezon, on the occasion or the presentation 
of a bust of Gen. Douglas u fin i«n 

° S MacArthur to University of Tennessee at 

Enoxville, called the coriander -in-chief nf aih 

oniei oi Allied forces in the 

Southwest Pacific ; 'the nan of faith,'' 

"General MacArthur is the one nan today who stands like a tower- 
ing wall between the Japanese and total victory in the Southwest 
Pacific," said President Quezon, "He is standing in their- way and 
blocking then, exactly as he stood in their way and played havoc with 
their time-table in the Philippines. He has won spectacular vic- 
tories, one after another, with the United means at his command, 
But there is only one victory that Douglas MacArthur, the nan of 
faith, wants to achieve. He wants to redeem his pledge made upon 

arrival in Australia from the Philippines more than one year 
a §o: '.'I broke through and I shall return.' 

''For to him Bataan is more than a symbol. Bataan is a fact — 
as large as life, as bitter as death. Bataan is a grin story of 
br ave men fighting against terrible odds, .of men who believed 
ier&|i y in the cause for which, they were fighting, and in that 
^ith, were not afraid to die. f"Bataan is the story of men who gave 
of themselves in the fullest' measure , and Douglas MacArthur is not 
getting then. 1 ' 



'4 



President Quezon T s addrjfcss was read by Ilaj. Gen. Basilio J.. 

' al( les, veteran of Bataan and* Corregidor , Chief of Staff of the 

Phil • 

il;i -Ppine Army and Secretary :.of National Defense in President 
^zon'ston. Cabinet. 

^presenting $he Philippines at tlijlfeac Arthur bust presentation 
Monies, besides General Valdes, werWlrs. Manuel L. Quezon, wife 
° f the President fcf the Philippines; Miss Zeneida Quezon, daughter 
the President; and Lt. Antonio Madrigal, aide to the President.. 
Uh Philippine party was Mrs, Arthur MacArthur, widow of the" 



Of 



J bington 6, D.C , 
Obart 1400 



c 0 II H OKwTu T F H lN3? n RI ? A - TI S K MD PUBL IC RELATIONS 

U 1 T IT K P II I L I P P I K 3 




President Manuel L. Quezon, on the occasion of the presentation 
of a bust of Gen. Douglas MacArthur to the University of Tennessee at 
Knoxville, called the comnander-in-chief of Allied forces in the 
Southwest Pacific "the man of faith." 

"General MacArthur is the one nan today who stands like a tower- 
ing wall between the Japanese and total victory in the Southwest 
Pacific, 5 ' said President Quezon, "He is standing in their- way and 
blocking then, exactly as he stood in their way and played havoc with 
their time-table in the Philippines. He has won spectacular vic- 
tories, one after another, with the United means at his command, 
But there is only one victory that Douglas MacArthur, the nan of 
faith, wants to achieve. He wants to redeem his pledge made upon 
his arrival in Australia from the Philippines more than one year 
a go: '.'I broke through and I shall return. 1 

"For to hin Bataan is more than a symbol. Bataan is a fact — 
as large as life, as bitter as death. Bataan is a grim story of 
brave men fighting against terrible odds, .of men who believed 
fiercely in the cause for which; they were fighting, and in that 
fa ith, were not afraid to die. jf Bataan is the story of men who gave 
of themselves in the fullest measure, and Douglas MacArthur is not 
getting them.'" ,jr- 

President Quezon's addr'fes was read by Maj. Gen. Basilio J.. 



'kldes, veteran of Bataan and* Corregidor , Chief of Staff of the 
Phi lippine Army and Secretary :.of National Defense in President 
^ezon's&Tar Cabinet. • W k 

Representing l^e Philippines at ti^ac Arthur bust presentation 

1 



Monies, besictef General Valdes , werWlrs. Manuel L. Quezon, wife 



Of tu„ * . • ,, r . „_ 7flrlP i(ia Quezon , daughter 

President %>f the Philippines; Miss Zeneiaa t u 

° f ^ President; and Lt. Antonio Madrigal, ^ to the President. 

" Uh Philippine party was Mrs, Arthur MacArthur, widow of the' 



br other of General MacArthur. 

Evident Quezon^ aaaress „ ln — f ^ 

"Nothing affords me greater m Q 
oUb lic tribute to one of the world 'S^iS th P t0 Participate in this 
^neral Douglas UacArthur, That hi I ? J outstanding soldiers - 
ersity of Tennessee by the people who X? 18 P rese nted to the Univ- 
t0 make it possible is a token of ? n?*i • 6 s P° nt aneously contributed 
qualities of leadership tested in xn n an Ajnerioan whose sterling 

under the most trying circumstance- pn?^?° r ^ gidor ' an * Australia 
and gratitude of his nation. ' entltle hlii to the admiration 

"It is indeed most annronHafn ■ 
dered to one whose vision and ooSLa^J S ^ Ch a token ^ould be ten- 
unwavering faith. For it is his fflfJ^- 6 * lle offs P*ings of his own 
shoulder tasks under which others i 1 ? A::ierica th *t has made him 
faltering faith in the Pili^no neon^ jailed. " was his un- 

behest the organization of the Phll fit that i:lade him undertake at ray 
verse criticism, confident ihlt when P ?l'f iU S£ e S ace of ad " 

soldier would show to the world that C ^ ^ cane the *iHpino 
inferior to none when he def ends WiL La t eq ^ al oi ' the best and 
constant faith in an AlmiShtv Gofl on t n 2 ? re edom. And it is his 
and even, in his milita^? fSuSquls tnnT^* hi3 ^ lic ^tementa 
strength and power in their da r "est AomenL o? giS.^* MS "** 

^ls° of ^0215: ^ &^°^ tt ctiv ?. r 

the repositories of faith, and inwhateve^ fiSnt^ln^inT 1 ^ 83 
Arthur nay be, he is there as the staiwl^ lender" of alV ?ho^°" 
ideals that in the hearts of an f*on Jit , cl 01 ail those 

of faith. " 01 aJ " L lreo r * ieu everywhere are the epitome 

he accePted'the posH? M?fftSl^S^ ral IIacArtl ur undertook when ' 

n C p , ? -p£-n?° S * of ^litary Adviser to the Commonwealth Govern*, 
lent of the Philippines. He was .practically starting from scratch 
But he had faith in the government and in the peopled ox whom he was 
tojork, and he gave of himself without stint, with passionate con- 
viction and energetic zeal, to organize the Philippine Array Fence 
it cane to pass that when the hour of danger • struck for the American 
flag in its 'far-flung, outpost in the Pacific, at the bead of a ox- 

aS'd I2 7 ono V?° Flli g ino soldiers 19, 000 United States Army ??oops 
and 12,000 Filipino Scouts, General •incArthur kept the Japanese 
hordes at bay for more than four months and the epic of Bataan was 
written in the annals of history, side by side with Thermopylae the 
^n4crific| U ~ Thierry the 0ther ^orgettables in human heroism 

^ ''^numbexed, ill-equipped, outgunned, starving, our Filipino 
and. American soldiers repulsed assault after assault of the Japanese 
enemy because of their courage and because of the t! oroughness* of 
.e-neral MacArthur's planning; and execution. It is the same thorough- 
ues u m planning and in execution that he has and is displavins in 
!fOna Buna, Munda, Villa, Salan^ua, Pinschafen, in Lew Guinea and 
mnn?wf ara ' in the Central Solomons. In Bataan, our lines hold" 
thfn. f : er month a sainst the rilmerically superior enemy because of 
jue lignting power of our men and because we had superb generalship 
f - tne nhomo and American soldier, the Japanese soldier has met*" 
Zltr ? an his natch in coura £ e and skill, In the brilliance of 
rlflft v ac frthur and his able commanders, the Japanese military have 
snming steel better tempered than their own, 

sun " T1 ! ,Qeneral MacArthur had to leave the Philippines in obedience to 
nnil P ? or ders to direct another battle, but the essence of his 
uuv/ayermg will and the potent body of his command remain -in the 
"ixrit of our fighting, soldiers who are upholding the American and 
nes i n ° riaGS ~ il r the Mlls > in the .jungles, in the mountain fast- 
en^ 63 ° f tiie ^killp]?ines tor 1 ay where resistance against the enemy 

»nt inues with unabated vigor. For shall he be away from the Phil- 
bat+? eS ^ or lon &* T he Philippines and Australia are two decisive 
bon • in tile sane war J one supports the other, and the winning of 
; u b! ^necessary to the winning of the war. The Philippines and- 

Australia are two ends of the same bridge and wo must hold both ends. 

in . ''General JIacArthur is the one nan today who stands like a tower- 
^ wall between the Japanese and total victory In the Southwest 

a* u - * IIe is standing in their way and blocking them, exactly 
« be "stood in their uay and played havoc wJtth their time-table in 

ba « r 'hilioPines. Fe ' has won spectacular victories., one after another, 



- 3 - 



.redeem his nlertaS 1 Iaan 01 fa itli, wants to achieve. He want 
&?ioS£es more ?b*n S Up ° n hiS ajpri ^l in Australia from the 
etirn!' ^ as ° ; fI broke through and I shall 

J^4°U^ B ^^^ S Q ° re than a ^01, Bataan is a fact - 
iS iff! n fi^lh 0 I b ^ tt ? r as death. Bataan is a grim story of 
men f igUxng against terrible odds, of men who believed 

fierC S S^oVS r US ? f0r which the y were fighting, and in that fait 
'• e r ? L ImI H J? d i e ' Bataan i s the story 'of men who gave of ther. 
selves in tne lull est possible measure, and Douglas MacArthur is not 
forgetting them. 

"This bust, standing sentinel in the. quiet academic atmosphere 
o? the University of Tennessee, as Mrs. Quezon is -rivileged to wit- 
ness its presentation today in representation of the Filipino people 
is an earnest reminder to us of the historic words of President 
Franklin D. Roosevelt which we heard over the ether when we were 
still in the tunnels of Corregidor : 'People of the Philippines, 
stand firm, your day is c oiling, » " 



PR— 2 

10/13/43 



President Quezon's address was read by Ma j . Gen. Basilio J. 
? aldes, veteran of Bataan and Corregidor, Chief of Staff of the 
Pll Uippine Army and Secretary of National Defense in President 
Quezon's Mar Cabinet. 

Representing the Philippines at the MacArthur bust presentation 
c ereaonies, besides General f aides , were Mrs. Manuel L. Quezon, wife 
<* the President of the Philippines; Miss Zeneida Quezon, daughter 

^ . , . . „.;rip to the President. 

of the President; and Lt. Antonio Madrigal, axa 

W % the Philippine party was Mrs. Arthur MacArthur, widow - — 



of the' 



1617 Massac tote ts Ave. F «t 
• Washington 6 , D.c , * ' ' * 
' HObart 1400 

' COM M oTfTfl ^»I0N AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 

u oi THE PHILIPPINES 



ADDRESS^ 

XI A.M rr FRIDAY, OCTO BER 15, I^TKNUIvILLE . TEMESSEE ; 

President Manuel L, Quezon, on the occasion of the presentation 
of a bust of Gen. Douglas MacArthur to the University of Tennessee at 
Knoxville, called the commander-in-chief of Allied forces in the 
Southwest Pacific "the man of faith. " 

"General MacArthur is the one man today who stands like a tower- 
ing wall between the Japanese and total victory in the Southwest 
Pacific," said President Quezon, "He is standing in their way and 
blocking them, exactly as he stood in their way and played havoc with 
their time-table in the Philippines. He has won spectacular vic- 
tories, one after another, with the limited means at his command. 
But there is only one victory that Douglas MacArthur , the man of 
faith, wants to achieve. He wants to redeem his pledge made upon 
his arrival in Australia from the Philippines more than one year 
ago: f I broke through and I shall return. 1 

"For to him Bataan is more than a symbol. Bataan is a fact — 
as large as life, as bitter as death. Bataan is a grim story of 
brave-men fighting against terrible odds, of men who believed 
fiercely in the cause for which they were fighting, and in that 
faith, were not afraid to die. Bataan is the story of men who gave 
of themselves in the fullest measure, and Douglas MacArthur is not 
f °rgett'ing mm..% :-*T '~— ' ......... 

President Quezon's address was read by Maj, Gen. Basilio J, 
Valdes, veteran of Bataan and Corr egidor , Chief of Staff of the 
Phi Hppine Army and Secretary of National Defense in President 
Quezon's Mar Cabinet. 

Representing the Philippines at the MacArthur bust presentation 
Ce reaonies, besides General Valdes, were Mrs. Manuel L. Quezon, wife 
of the President of the Philippines; Miss Zeneida Quezon, daughter 
of the President; and Lt. Antonio Madrigal, aide to the President.. 
^ the Philippine party was Mrs. Arthur MacArthur, widow of the" . . 



- 2 



brother of General MacArthur. 

Present Quezon- s aaaresS) infull> follows; ' 

"Nothing affords me greater n1fl 
public tribute to one of tht ™« ii. easure than to participate in this 
General Douglas MacArthur %w 2- nost outstanding soldiers — 
ersity of Tennessee by the nrnSi f b ? st is Presented to the Univ- 
to make it possible is a ttiktr, r ™\ have spontaneously contributed 
qualities of leadership tPQ+^S ? l a i ■ ln an American whose sterling 
under the nost tryinp circun^^ Bataan > Corregidor, an* Australia 
and gratitude of his nation^ 3 ' entitle to the admiration 

,? It is indeed most annrnnriqfn f u n4 . , , 

dered to one whose vision and n^lL * a token shoulcl be ten ~ 

unwavering faith. For it is h f h"" 6 ' , bte offs P ria S s of his 
shoulder tasks under which otw« ™i ? America that has r,iade him 
faltering faith in tn J S v;o ? ld have jailed. It was his mi- 

nes? the organization of SS%5??? le - tlia S mde hin at my 

verse criticifm, confident illt ti 11 fil**^**, in the face of ad- 
soldier would show to the world t t tl ^fZ cane ^e Filipino 
inferior to nnn P „hon \ a 2 V . iie ls tiie G( 3 U ^1 Of the best and 
ohstant faith in an A?StShf 6n S S J Ufltioe and ^eedom. And it is his 
and eve* in his g 7 ^ S ° evident in his Public statements 

strength and nL^ *?? communiques, that has given him and his men 
strengtn and power m their darkest moments of trial. 

ennobleme^ C nf a . m ^ f £^ th ' tllis tribute ^ the constructive 

01 ?n?L2 ?f learning, is most fitting. Universities are 1 

Ji?hf,r P r^v Sf f • :\ h ' and ln wllateve * f ront line Douglas Mac- 

?S y + • ' ? e 1 f tbere as the stalwart defender of all those 
of faith! b - earts of a11 freo nen everywhere are the epitome 

"It was an arduous task that General MacArthur undertook wben 
he accepted the post of Military Adviser to the Commonwealth Gov em- 
neat oft he Philippines. He was practically starting from scratch. 
m he had faith in the government and in the people 'for whom he was 
to work, and he gave of himself without stint, with passionate con- 
viction and energetic zeal, to organize the Philippine Army. Hence 
it cane to pass that when the hour of danger • struck for the American 
flag in its 'far-flung outpost in the Pacific, at the head of aporox- 
lmately 100,000 Filipino soldiers, 19,000 United States Army trooos 
and 12,000 Filipino Scouts, General ■iacArthur kept the -Japanese 
nordes at bay for more than four months and. the epic of Bataan was 
written in the annals of history, side by side with Thermopylae, the 
Alano, Chateau-Thierry and the other unf orgettables in human heroism 
and sacrifice. 

"Outnumbered, ill-equipped, outgunned,- starving, our Filipino 
and American soldiers repulsed assault after assault of the Japanese 
enemy because of their courage and because of the thoroughness of 
General MacArthur f s planning and execution. It is the same thorough- 
ness .in planning and in execution that he has and is displaying in 
uona Buna, I-lunda , Villa, Salamaua, Finschaf en , in hew Guinea, and 
j-oiobangara, in the Central Solomons. In Bataan, our lines held 
ontb^after month against the numerically superior enemy because of 
ne fighting power of our men and because we had superb generalship, 
a the Filipino and American soldier, the Japanese soldier has met" 
Gen than llis natch in courage and skill. In the brilliance of 
-apt? 1 - -acArthur and his able commanders, the Japanese military have 
sinning steel better tempered than their- own." 



"General MacArthur had to leave the Philippines in obedie'nce to 




tisses of the Philippines today where resistance against the enemy 
satinueswith unabated vigor. For shall he be away from the Phil- 
hSi? es for lon e» The Philippines and Australia are two decisive 
Wv 4 8 in the sane war; one supports the other, and the winning of 
Jotn i s necessary to the winning of the war. The Philippines and 
-ustralie are two ends of the same bridge and wc must hold both ends. 

"General MacArthur is the one man today who stands like a tower- 
m wall between the Japanese and total victory * n the Southwest 
^cific, IJe i3 standi • - 

thA C , ? t00d in their v 
Xfc thilippingg^ ile'h 



ng in their way and blocking them, exactly 
ay and ole.ycd havoc with their time-table in - 
as won spectacular victories, one after another, 



- 3 - 



} h the limited means at his mmmnn* n *. ^ 

lt Douglas MacArthur he LnT! ^v But there 13 only one vlct0: ! 
rPdeen his dIp^a " oj? faitli > wants to achieve. He want 

i Urines more Shan Up0n hls "rival in Australia from the 

aiopineo more than one year ago: 'I broke through and I shall 

i»3fJ°-|?fp 3 no a ^ n ,H iS m0>re thGn a symbol. Bataan is a fact - 
if * fitter as death. Bataan is a grim story of 
a ^ e men fighting against terrible odds, of men who believed 

3rce H t»J£t t U ?-' f0r Which the y we ^e fighting, and in that fait 
re not afraid to die. Bataan is the story of men who gave of thei 
Ives in the fullest possible measure, and Douglas MacArthur is noi 
rgettmg them. 

'•'Tils bust, standing sentinel in the quiet academic atmosphere 
the University of Tennessee, as Mrs. Quezon is privileged to wit- 

ss its presentation today in representation of the Filipino people 
an earnest reminder to us of the historic words of President 

anklin D. Roosevelt which we heard over the ether when we were 

ill in the tunnels of Corregidor: » People of the Philippines, 

,and firm, your day is coning."' 



PR- 2 

10/13/43 



r or getting them/" *" 

President Quezon's address was read by Ilaj. Gen. Basilio J . 
Valdes, veteran of Bataan and Corregidor, Chief of Staff of the 
Philippine Army and Secretary of National Defense in President 

* 

Quezon's "for Cabinet. 

Representing the Philippines at the MacArthur bust presentation 
oereaonies, besides General Valdes, were Mrs. Manuel U Quezon, wife 
« the President of the Philippines; Kiss Zeneida Quezon, daughter 
« the President- and Lt. Antonio Madrigal, aide to the President. 
*» the Philip e ■ ' KaeArthur, widow of the- 



1617 Massachusetts Ave. p -r 
v/ashington 6, D.C. * * 

HObart 1400 

C 0 M M 0?0?L f TT IN F0ro.IATI0N AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 

0 * TEE PHILIPPINES 




President Manuel L. Quezon, on the occasion of the presentation 
of a bust of Gen. Douglas MacArthur to the University of Tennessee at 
Knoxville, called the commander-in-chief of Allied forces in the 
Southwest Pacific "the man of faith. " 

"General MacArthur is the one nan today who stands like a tower- 
ing wall between the Japanese and total victory in the Southwest 
Pacific," said President Quezon. "He is standing in their way and 
blocking them, exactly as he stood in their way and played havoc with 
their time-table in the Philippines. He has won spectacular vic- 
tories, one after another, with the limited means at his command. 
But there is only one victory that Douglas MacArthur, the nan of 
faith, wants to achieve. He wants to redeem his pledge nade upon 
his arrival in Australia from the Philippines more than one year 
ago: 'I broke through and I shall return.' 

"For to him Bataan is more than a symbol. Bataan is a fact 

as large as life, as bitter as death. Bataan is a grim story of 
brave men fighting against terrible odds, of men who believed 
fiercely in the cause for which they were fighting, and in that 
faii>h, were not afraid to die. Bataan is the story of men who gave 
°f themselves in the fullest measure, and Douglas MacArthur is not 
forgetting 'them.'" »• 

President Quezon's address was read by Maj. Gen. Basilio J.. 
Valdes, veteran of Bataan and Corregidor, Chief of Staff of the 
Philippi ne Army and Secretary of National Defense in President 
"iuezon's Mar Cabinet. 

Representing the Philippines at the MacArthur bust presentation 
ceremonies, besides General Valdes, were Mrs. Manuel L. Quezon, wife 
f the President of the Philippines; Miss Zeneida Quezon, daughter 
of tne President; and Lt. Antonio Madrigal, aide to the President.. 
With the Philip' e ' ^4*ur MacArthur, widow of the' 



brother of General MacArthur. 

President Quezon's adrt^ ' . 

- address, in full follows: 

"Nothing affords me P , Pn+ 
public tribute to one of %l Itli^T^t than to Participate in this 
General Douglas MacArthur, \ha? til f ost outstanding soldiers - 
ersity of Tennessee by the oeoeL tL if* 18 P r ^ented to the Univ- 
to make it possible is a token of t ,?^ e spontaneously contributed 
qualities ox leadership tester! in I t ln an African whose sterling 
under the most trying cir cumstat? ^egidor, and Australia 

and gratitude of his nation? J entitle hi - to the admiration 

!, It is indeed most aporonri nto +1 4. 
dered to one whose vision anr 18 such a token should be ten- 

unwavering faith. For it is h I u, are the offsprings of his own 
shoulder tasks under which othPr* ™i iii:iericJi that has made him 

faltering faith in the Filipino LoSX^I 6 * uailed - " was his un- 
behest the organisation of t f ph - that made hin undertake at my 
verse criticism, confident h t , P n ne , Artiy ' in the face ° r ad- 
soldier would show to. the world th"? ? iie . tl::c cajae the Filipino 
inferior to none when he defends W??. 1 ! S h 2 equal oi ' the best and 
constant faith in an Almiehtv GnV«n i T^ an J freedo *. And it is his 
and even in his militarv to mLn? 1 Zi Q ? n J in his P ublic statements 
strength and power li^STS^i^S. 1 ^ glS."* M ® Wen 

eniBSen^of^eaf <£^£i„?E B ^ ibutc ln the constructive 
the repositories of fai?h and ?? 'wW* 03 * J 1 ™ 1 **- diversities are 
Arthur may be, b e is Sere nf whatever front line Douglas Mac- 
ideals that iA tL Lar of a f f f Mrt defender of all those 
of faith. nearto 01 all free men everywhere are the epitome 

be acceStTthe B^* 1 ^ ^neral MacArthur undertook when 

It of the mi ■ ° f Ml J ltar : j Adviser to the Commonwealth Gov ern- 
5 he had \ flltl ?S ^ Re WaS Poetically starting from scratch. 

« I n J tn ? g? vermaen t ana. in the people for whom he was 

S '. fiL^ 6 ° f h * mself without stint, with passionate con- 
it t S C ?n ener fotic zeal, to organize the Philippine Army. Fence 

ap in tLT»r ff» Whe ? *\ e ?° Ur of danger - struck for the. American 
aatelv ion onS"^ e .° Utp0 ?^. in the pacjfic > at the head of apprax- 

d 12 000 fiUpmo soldiers, 19,000 United States Army troops 

to ' / llpino Scouts, General MacArthur kept the Japanese ~ 
t n l 103? m ? re than four months anc7 the epic of Bataan was 
Alamo rw« m?? alS of Mst oiT, side by side with Thermopylae, the 
Sacrifice 11 " ^ tbC ° theX unf or Settables in human heroism 

and AnpS nUmber ??? ill-equipped, outgunned, starving, our Filipino 
enem^w? s °i Cllers repulsed assault after assault of the Japanese 
GeSL? - 3e .° f their co ^age and because of the thoroughness of 
nesf?n - iacAr tnur's planning and execution. It is the same thorough- 
Gorm p P la nning and in execution that he has and is displaying in 
•"olohn^ G ' : -? nda » v iHa, Salamaua, Finschafen, in hew Guinea, and 
a*h Bf? ' ln t Cen tral Solomons. In Bataan, our lines hold 
the fithf^ nonth a S a inst the numerically superior enemy because of 
I" thp r! n2 . praer of our Ilien and because we had superb generalship. 
: iore tsl, } ? lno and ^e^ican soldier, the Japanese soldier has met 
Gener-i - A S ^? atCn ln coura ge and skill. In the brilliance of 
met shi«V« J ? and his able commanders, the Japanese military have 
fining steel better tempered than their own. 

s uperi'^ nerai IIa cAr.thur had to leave the Philippines in obedience to 
U nvmvt-H ora f rs to direct another battle, but the essenee of his 
spirit f Wlll . and the potent body of his command remain in the 
? ilirn ° Ur lighting soldiers who are upholding the American and 
»esse« n °/ laGS in the hills, in the jungles, in the mountain fast.- 
contin the Philippines today where resistance against the enemy 
i PMnp U ^. With una bated vigor f Nor shall he be away fx on the Phil- 
^ttipo . long. The Philippines and Australia are two decisive 
both ? S ln tne sar ' le '"' ar ; one supports the other, and the winning of 
;. U3t "^ s . necessary to the winning of the war. The Philippines and 

-raiie a re two ends of the same bridge and wo must hold both ^ ends.- 

ii E ''General macArthur is the one man today who stands like a tower- 
HaiJ. 1 be tween the Japanese and total victory in the Southwest 
a a ^ic He is standing in their way and blocking, them, exactly 
th* L? too< * in tl-eir way and played havoc with their time-table in - 
^ tn iHppines " He has won spectacular victories., one after another, 



/ 



"VOICE OF FREEDOM" 



C 0 M M 0 N. W E A L T w n ™ 

Department of Inf Q ? n ?n TH ? PHILIPPINES 
1617 Massachusetts A e nf ? Public Relations 

the "Voice" of^^fo^ 0 ^^^^ Philippines over 

when the forces of )ib P «H». which' returned to the air 

Leyte. Thus tofled ita aUe^e slnc^ ff ° T t0ber 20 ' 1%4 ' in 
Corregidor on ? T av 6 iqio rt Slncfc tne Japanese overwhelmed 

on January 5, 1942, as the ' voiced? i?^ e P ated °* Corre ^ dor 
tance to the Japanese invasion! Jlll P^o-Ai:ierican resis- 

tions T Comiss?ofofu i rUnncr"t e nt by federal Comraunida. 
and available for re D J 2 n States. They are authorized 

in part. 

********** 



bSl^ S K ™ f r C ce ™° J /^ IC 3CH00LS 

the United Stnt^ ^ f ent Commissioner of the Philippines to 
and pSbllP B^fiJ? Secretary of the Department of information 

and Public Relations and the Department of Public Instruction! ) 

the Jh«?i ) ^! I ' Iy + f ? UoW ooun ^yAen: Today in Tacloban and in 
In this citv of SmSE" ° f L6 ? te ' WS ° pened the P ublic s ^ools. 
Rowing speeohf ' txeSldent S **&° Osmena delivered the 

"'I am happy to greet the teachers of Tacloban and to 
nnh?^ 06 ?*? c °nuom,ealth of the Philippines Seonens the 
mt\ \ Vtt^r' 1 ^ 111 th ? libe ^ ate d areas of the Philippines today, 
jith justifiable pride we have always presented our oublic school 
system as v/e have developed it since its establishment in 1%02 
as an achievement which is one of the permanent contributions 
to the progress of our people by Filipino-American collaboration, 
it is our privilege to reopen that same school system today. In 
his inaugural address of November 15, 1935, President Quezon said- 



We shall build a government thajy will be just, honest, 
elficient and strong, so that the foundations of the common 
republic may oe firm and enduring, a government indeed that 
nust satisfy not only the passing needs of the hour, but also 
the exacting demands of the future. T ' r e do not Lave to tear 
a own the existing institutions in order to ?ive way to a 
Xd^? 6 ' Th6re will .be no violent changes" from the established 
llt.l • * 2f S > exce ?t such as may be absolutely necessary to 
An™ :??2- effe ° t * he innovations contemplated by the constitution 
h. new edifice shall arise, not out of the ashes of the oast 
out out of the standing materials of the living present". 



H ft 



This pronm^nement of the first president of our Common- 
wealth was literally carried out. The government, it is true, 
| a living thing- which develops and progresses continuously as 

, f ca fe of the Commonwealth of the- Philippines. But in 
left V t changes imposed by the circumstances, the government 
mfl^L ? U ! y tlle 1&st American governor general has been 

. ? 6d substantially the same in its structure and in basic 
Principles, 

att • tTh:3 - s is especially true with reference to the government's 
^titude towards our school Problems, both public and private, 
inere is an historic reason that explains and (justifies?) this 
P Xl cy. Under the American regime public instruction has occupied 

prominent place because from "the start the .Americans had 
Proposed to facilitate the development of self-government in the 
^Uippines. They considered as a fundamental phase of that 
-'Program the formation of an intelligent citizenry cognizant of 
lts duties and responsibilities. On the other hand, there is no 



- 3 

"*We have a definite v,-i, , 

7 and ^rffwf Q i n ! 0f our ^lture. The common responsibi- 
Inprican dcodIc thnn of this war have placed us closer to the 
J f ? iS?, ! ^ f llQVC evcr been before We shall continue 
and our contacts must be extended to the sister nations of Latin 

^flt** tJ^ B J ??J abl5 -sU cultural relations with our 

"If fn fSjn??SS? f 7 mth ° hina and ^ith those groups with an 
origin identical to ours, the (Malays?).* 



n t 



3y our constitution, ny fellow countrymen, we have 
renounced war as an instrument of notional policy. By our history 
providence has willed that, as a people we should be the most 
occidental. amoung the orientals end the most oriental among the 
occidentals. Our mission therefore is to be that of peace, or 
good will, or mutuality and cooperation between peoples of the 
orient and the Occident. 

"'I hope and expect that our schools will prepare our 
children to be worthy of this great nation of redemption and of 
civilization.'" FCCF A43 



Ci 01 4 Oil , 



tl 11 



'We Filipinos interpret this action of the American people 
not only as -an endorsement of his foreign and domestic policy, 
out also as an unmistakable approval of his liberal policy towards 
the . hilippines. ' " OFCCF A35 

R01JU10 ANNOUNCES OSMENA 'S REPLY TO. ROOSEVELT'S REAFFIRMATION OF- 
AMERICAN PLEDGI TO FILIPINOS : • ( VOICE OF FREEDOI . ( WVLC ) , Leyte! 
m English at 4:00 am, Nov. 9, 1944 to the Philippines.,) . 
r • 

: (Text) "The Voice of Freedom now presents General Carlos 
P. Ronulo, Resident Commissioner of the Philippine Commonwealth 
Q nd minister of Education. General Romulo: 



"'My fellow countrymen, •;?rop6s the re-election of President 
"oosevelt, on the dap we landed on Dulag Beach and in Leyte, he 
sent President Osmena the following message to the Filipino 
Pejple. I'll re ad the telegram, for President Osmena. 

"'Please deliver the following message to the Filipino people 
vn°V 16: the suffering, humiliation, and mental torture that 
jou have endured since the barbarous, unprovoked, and treacherous 
in f£ u P°n the Philippines nearly three long years a-o have aroused 
n the ^ hearts of the American people a righteous anger, a firm 
^ ern ination to. punish the guilty, and a fixed resolve to restore 
1 G ce and order and decency to an outraged world. 

. "'Until we were attacked at Pearl Ka-rbor, we had done our 
p wiost to be self-respecting neighbors of the Japanese in the 
Sw ic * For half a century in spite of signs of a decadent end 
gAt'aristio Japanese leadershio, we studiously avoided any act 
nat night aossibly disturb or alarm. Our decency was mistaken 
° r weakness. Our plans for the indeoendence and freedom of the 
role of the Philippines have been ruthlessly but only temporarily 
bushed aside by Japanese acts of exploitation and enslavement. 



people on earth that can surpass the Filipino people in their 
earnest desire to educate their children. 

" fv 'hen, upon the arrival of the Americans here they announced 
their purpose to provide the people with universal coeducation, 
such a policy was receiver! with public approval. In the short 
period of two decades, school buildings were constructed even 
in the most remote areas in a number that exceeded the school 
buildings constructed during the 300 years past. 

"'There were not more than a dozen Filipino teachers in 
English when American sovereignity was established here. The 
official language thenwas Spanish. Under the Commonwealth' 
Government in 19/. 0, nearly 44,000 Filipino teachers were 
serving in the public schools and what is more important, the 
enrollment in the public schools at that time w as almost two 
million. 

'"When in 1908 the first Filipino assembly discussed a 
bill making attendance in schools compulsory, the Assembly 
quickly rejected it as unnecessary. During the whole American 
administration in the Philippines and that of the Commonwealth., 
tnere has not been registered a case of any school closing its 
doors 1 or lack of attendance. On the contrary, the ... problem 
has always been how to increase the number of classes to" accomo- 
date so many children who register at the beginning of each 
ochool year, always in excess of the number that can be 
accomodated in the existing schools. 

t'-«* r"nv n th S c ? nten P° rar y history of education in the Philippines 
Gaboon A^\°£- w SU ^o° f VGry ^-reaching significance: the ' 
nnStlt V** /; ? 1Ch in 1907 voted one million pesos for the 
iH&BthS lJ e ^ Ch °^ iG the ^os; and the Falria Act 

measures the 72???^? mlll0 5 .?? s ? s fo * the schools. In both - 
,i.itasurcs tne initiative was Filipino. 

considcJpfln^? Ur S S h ° 01 SySten ' wMch at its inception could be 
considered American because of its principles wn« i,f„ 



"** entirely borne by the mipino 
FhUipSneS VRg^WS di8l0OOtod our "'es in the 



serve 



Force:'^^^^^^ the Philippine Aroe* 
continuation of the nubli? apan.es e occupation was the 

where Commonwealth tZ^h» * « 7 Zl . . !?! 11 em wi thin the free areas 
Principles of f reedom^f ~ l^tToo^ 

Join theM'cL^s l/!^^ h g ^r ati ° n tMt 1 once more 
Secretary of Public Instruction I an ^ a ^ted when I was 
the tremendous responsibility es that vn ^ that ybQ wil l realize 
work of our schools. From ieyle we win 0S1 r res ^*S the 
throughout the length and breadth of our E w the ' sc nools 
military operations permit. * e must L a f Soon as tne 

an intelligent citizenry imbued w the i^nifV^ 312 of fornin S 
human dignity. Our public r esponsIbiliUes Sni °- deuoc ^cy and 
approach our independence. ' 1Xltles Wl11 increase as we 

"'We have duties to fulfill not nnw ~ 
to those with whom we are associated close w fnl fi f ople but als ° 
or. cultural reasons or because 0? our MoS£n£? I f lther P olltical 
the .true concept of education is that Us § ^ io &1 p ? s ; itio n. *or 
years of experience to transmit the full " \ll a rich deposit, 
generations. '** ex P e i"ience to new 



"VOICE OF FREEDOM" 



° ° 11 VJrtnrt L 5 ? * ° F T H E PHILIPPINES 
^ H fl i S, S v f Inf °^tion and Public Relations • . 

6. D.C. HObart 1400 

These broadcasts come directly from the Philippines over 
the "Voice of Freedom" radio (TOO), which returned to the air 
when the forces of liberation landed on October 20, 1944, in 
Leyte. lhus ended its silence since the Japanese overwhelmed 
Corregidor on May 6, 1942. It was inaugurated on Corregidor 
on January 5, 1942, as the voice of Filipino-American resis- 
tance to the Japanese invasion. 

These broadcasts are recorded by the Federal Communica- 
tions Commission of the United States. They are authorized 
and available for reproduction in whole or ir> part. 

****** ***>i *******%v.********>M-****^>;-!<*H->K*****^^** 

No. 2 (Thursday) November 9, 1944 

* *>:•• * * * V * V * * * * >;- ********* * * * * >|. >,< * ;|< * * >j. * * * * * * * * * * * v * * * * ^ * >,, £ ;] < * * * * 

ROOSEVELT 

OSMENA FAILS /REELECTION AS ENDORSEMENT OF POLICY ON THE PHILIPPINES 
(VOICL OF FREEDOM ' ( T, TLC ) , Leyte, In English at 4:00 am, Nov. 9, 
1944, to the Philippines.) 

(Text) "President Osmena made the following statement today: 
"'From this battlefront of Leyte, where our armed forces arc 
engaged in a deadly struggle with the Japanese invader, I have 
sent President Roosevelt my heartiest congratulations for his 
re-election. 

"'Breaking all precedent, the Aaerican people have retained 
him as the chief magistrate of the nation, thus giving him the ' 
confidence that has never been conferred' upon any other American . 
citizen. 

"'We Filipinos interpret this action of the American people 
not only as -an" endorsement of his foreign and domestic policy, 
but also as an unmistakable approval of his liberal policy towards 
the '.. hilippines. »« OFCCF A35 

ROL'ULO ANNOUNCES OSMENA T S REPLY T0< ROOSEVELT'S REAFFIRMATION OF' 
AFRICAN PLEDGE TO FILIPINOS : ■ (VOICE OF FREEDOM ( WVLC), Leyte) 
in English at 4:00 am, Nov. 9, 1944 to the Philippines.) . 
If' 

(Text) "The Voice of Freedom now presents General Carlos 
p .'Ronulo, Resident Commissioner of the Philippine Commonwealth 
°nd Minister of Education. General Romulo: 

"'My fellow countrymen, •;?ropo.s the re-election of President 
Roosevelt, on the day; we landed on Dulag Beach and in Leyte, he 
s ent President Osmena the following message to the Filipino 
- - -Pie. I'll read the telegram, for President Osmena. . 

"'Please deliver the following message to the Filipino people 
ir oa me: the suffering, humiliation, and mental torture that v 
y°u have endured since the barbarous, unprovoked, and treacherous 
^tack upon the Philippines nearly three long years a- o have aroused 
* n the hearts of the American people a righteous anger, a firm 
germination to. punish the guilty, and a fixed resolve to restore 
Peocs Qn a order and decency to an outraged world. 

M+ . "'Until we were attacked at Pearl Harbor , we had done our 
g*f»t to be self-respecting neighbors of the Ja £ a ^eln tne 
r : ?}fic> For half a century in spite of signs of ^ decadent end 
^eristic Japanese leadership, we studiously avoided any .ct 
^ night possibly disturb or alarm. Our d^f^^eedom of tne 
i°* fakness. Our plans for the independenc^aM ^JJJ^^J^iiy 
I °Plc of the Philippines have been ruthlessly out only *P y 
Pushed aside by Japanese acts of exploitation ana 



- 2 * 

'."hen the Japanese invaders have been driven out, the Philippines 
will take its place as a free and independent member of the family 
of nations. 

!M 0n this occasion, on the return of General MacArthur to 
Philippine soil with our soJ^iors and our sailors, we renew our 
pledge. We,. 'and our Filipino brothers in arris, with the help of 
Almighty God, will . drive out the invader; r "e will destroy his 
power to make war again, and we will restore a world of dignity 
and freedom, a world of confidence and honesty and peace. 
Franklin D. Roosevelt.' 

"'To this telegram, President Osmena sent the following reply. 

'•"Yours of October 20 just received. I immediately delivered 
your message to the Filipino people. ' In the darkest days after 
the fall of Bataan, the Filipino people, by their unflagging 
resistance to the enemy ; showed that their faith in America never 
faltered. Your message, Mr. President, will further bolster up 
their morale and deepen their gratitude to the American people. 

K ^!!T i H^ t ? € V; ,,# of the L!i g ht of American democracy, as shown 
«f ??5 initial blow against the enemy, and your solemn reaf f irxasti* 



of the American principles of freedom, justice and eouality, the 
forces of tyranny and barbarism in the Far East have been shattei 
slavery!" sinister designs of domination, exploitation, anl 

'"The dawn of a new era of freedom and security has broken 

b?p^ thf° PleS ?V he . Facific ' Qnd * fateful humanity mil 
bless the name of America for its (actions?). With your inspi- 
ration and under your guidance, the Filipino people wm resume 
their onward march toward independence.''' FCCF A43 

6:35 ana 9:21 pm, IIov. 8, 1944/ to North A^l?)*"* 11 " 1 8 * 

9, 194l'f S0Uthwest Pac ' ifie 6«anioue nuuber 946, Novenber 

"Philippines, Leyte— In the loth 80ms sentni. .iSi *, -. . . 
is engaged with enemy defensive forces n7?h L ' 2ttn Dlvlsl 
fighting on the (norsin? > 1? nr < = f ?" e ru0 ° road - Heavy 

road. B margin?) line is taking place along the winding! 

of «^^:^^^M n KJ °-«-°us interdletion 
of opportunity in the e»yt™ " °° oorrldM «* on. target. 

isolate? !5%K r « 0 - MW^. ^ 

his freedom of movement. 1CCS " nd e£f ectrtoely hampering 

^sembfe bivouc suppi y dUBlpa Gnd ' 

air p^K ^letS e^^* -ale. Our 

hurricane is restricting all operations?" h& area * A tropical 

tf Philipni nes visayas . — Our heaw nnHo « 
dro^d 37 tons on Alicante airdrome Lilt nfi " rclvcr - weather 
harassing attacks on enemy airfields FiihfoW eM c ° n( ^ed night 
Negros and Panay throughout the da^'strafinf %T?t ° VCr Cebu > 
and engaging several groups of enemy • intent cW lt '^ ee ~^ hei Sht 
enemy planes were destroyed and fouf Z^^k^ addition 



- 3 ~ 



a 1,000-ton freight ev 

Occidental?). We los t oL'Sk^ Str; f in S at Sarcvia, fregros 

one bouber and three fighters. 

"Kindanao Mediun 

Cagcyan, scoring hits on ^!l. eyRCUted a low leve l attrck at 
parked plane on Delnonte niS in the ba y c - nd destroying a 

aZQ airdrone." FCCF A195 - FGCF A243 



"'At the foot of the christian cross, which Magellan 
planted in the island of Cebu, they listened grcv3ly to the 
gentle gospel of God-made nan and they thought it good. So 
they treated the strangers... and they took their nane. uut 
these sinple men were free - free as the hills they hunted, 
free as the sea they roaned. They had never breathed any air 
but the sweet wind of liberty. 

"'When the white strangers deuanded tribute for their 
distant kings, this naneless tribe rebelled. Armed only with 
spears tipped with fish bones and arrows sharpened on the 
village file, they fell upon the Spanish conquistador es and 
they reddened the fields of -■>actan with the blood of the best 
infantry in Europe. 3ut the Spaniards returned, and slowly, 
stubbornly, the rien of the islands yielded, though every 
"village was a every island a caupaign. 

"'Their race had. been called L'alayan, which in their 
language neant (free). Now, with the blood of battle they were 
Mptized 'Filipinos,' which was the name of their new sovereign, 
Felipe, King of Spain. The long, colorless isolation that 
followed was broken" only by recurrent explosions of revolt. It 
was a painful process of revolution, but^in the conuon bondage, 
and in the o oilman memory of freedom, the far-flung islands and 
the scattered tribes grew and achieved unity. 

"'Thus, through the labor of centuries, a nation was born, 
Surely if any nation was ever narked for freedom and deserved 
freedom it was these Filipino people. Sold into slavery, reared 
m ignorance, kept in subjugation, they had never forgotten 
freedom, never ceased to hunger for it. Animated only by a deep 
inherited instinct for freedoml they died for it in a thousand 
obscure rebellions, hopelessly but tirelessly and with undaunted 
courage. 

"'And when the final battle was joined never in the history 
cf liberty was a poople so spirited or so united. ■ The great 
°ry of independence that rose when Andres Bonifacio, leader of 
the revolt against Spain, led his men at Balintawak echoed 



"VOICE OF FREEDOM" 

C 0 M i: 0 IT W E XJL T F n * 

Department of i nfn ' 1 h E P.HI L.I P P I N E S 

1617 Massachusetts Ave £• 10 5 and Publi c Relations • 
^**************#**^ 3|C J,| ^« j .^shington 6, D.C. HO bar t 1400 

These broadcasts come £*e£i T ******************** *** 
the ;t Voice of Freedom" rati n /SSfiT fro::1 tiie ^WPPinas over 
when the forces of liberntt™ V which returned to the air 

Leyte. Thus ended its sfienSe sW*- '?? °? t0ber 2 °' 1944 ' in 
Corregidor on Mav 6 lQ/,5 ?: since the Japanese overwhelmed 

on January 5, 1942, 'as the voicfnf ate ? °» 0°W<WiJ°* 

ance to the Japanese invasion!: FiHpn.no -American lesist^ 

tions'c^ 

«^^SS^9^S^I: - e L a partr il0ri£ed 

TVTn 3 ' \ ' 



No 



"FROM IIACTAN TO 3ATA..U AND NOW LEYTE" (Voice of Freedom ' 
{NLCJ Leyte, in English at 4:00 an, November 11, 1944, to the 
Philippines) Address by General Carlos ?. Romulo. 

(text). "The Voice of Freedom now introduces General Carlos 
P. Ronulo, Resident Commissioner of the Philippine Commonwealth 
Government and Secretary of Information and Public Relations 
and Secretary of Public Instruction. General Romulo: 

"'My fellow-countrymen: More than four centuries ago 
today a Portuguese dreamer, Ferdinand Magellan, saw a eroup of 
nameless islands laying in the bosom of a nameless sea. There in 
the silent fields and pleasant valleys of a virgin land, ; he 
found a people without a history, happy, hospitable folic, 
scattered along an untrampled shore; industrious fishermen and 
peaceful traders, marked by a simple trust. 

1 

"'At the foot of the christian cross, which Magellan 
planted in the island of Cebu, they listened £rrv^ly to the 
gentle gospel of God-made man and they thought it good. So 
they treated the strangers... and they took their name. But 
these simple men were free - free as the hills they hunted, 
free as the sea they roamed. They had never breathed any air 
but the sweet wind of liberty. 

"'When the white strangers demanded t ri bute for their 
distant kings, this nameless tribe rebelled. Armed only with 
fpears tipped with fish bones and arrows sharpened on the 
village file, they fell upon the Spanish conquistsdores and 
they reddened the fields of ^actan with the blood of the best 
infantry in Europe. 3ut the Spaniards returned, and slowly, 
stubbornly, the men of the islands yielded, though every 
"village was a every island a campaign. 

"'Their race had been called Malayan, which in their 
language meant (free). Now, with the blood of battle they were 
■baptized 'Filipinos,' which was the name of their new sovereign, 
? eli pe , King of Spain. The long, colorless isolation that 
followed was broken 'only by recurrent explosions of revolt. It 
■'" s a painful process of revolution, but in the common bondage, 
and in* the common memory of freedom, the far-flung islands and 
the scattered tribes grew and achieved unity. 

"'Thus, through the labor of centuries, a notion was born, 
Surely if any nation was ever marked for freedom and deserved 
freedom it has these Filipino people. Sold ^ r B J*I«& * e 
in ignorance, kept in subjugation, they kf^ never ^gotten 
^cedom, never ceased to hunger for it. Anma ted 
inherited instinct for freedor.il they died for i£ f^™!^*. 
obscure rebellions, hopelessly but tirelessly and with undaunted 
courage. 

-Ana when the final battle „ as joined never in the history 
« liberty wo. a people so spirited or so " 3 ^ ; ™ e l a *„, 
«T of independence that rose ^"..^"Vuntawnk echoed 
«he revolt against Spain, led his men at Ban 



- 2 - 



throughout the island, and the bolos fleshed like lightning in 
the tall s toiler grass. 

"'But the Philippine Republic which was built on the ruins 
of the Spanish empire did not survive. The Philippine 
constitution, known as the Ilalolos Constitution, which had been 
sanctioned by so iiuch blftod; the rlalolos Congress, which had 
embraced so many. heroes, never found the peace for which they 
had been designed. The young nation was taken under the tutelage 
of America, and one Qore chapter -was begun. 

"'It was a tribute to the good sense of the Filipino people 
and to the sincerity of the Americans that a mutually honorable 
and mutually profitable relationship was ouickly established. 
Under the guidance of Anerice , the Filipinos learned those lesson; 
in practical democracy for which they never had the opportunity 
or the tine. • . ■ 

/"Under the inspiring leadership first of (first?) Speaker 
S T 10 ? snenQ « and later of .-"resident I .camel 'uezon, they slowly 
ana patiently developed the permanent structure of the future 
Republic, ^hus in the ... years of peace, the fruits of t he re- 
volution ripened into the fulness of maturity and it seemed 
that finally, after four centuries, God was smiling on this 
tragic people, tried so sorely and enslaved so long. It seemed 
that after four centuries, they would r eceive in peace' the 
freedom they had lost in so many dark defeats. But today the 
Filipinos are again at war. 



imr^l'^ Skater part of their country is still under the 
-invaders heel. One more battle must be fought. Once more the 

MsL\v f o? U f feri "f- C ^ Sac n fiG * ™ t bE This is 

Ours is ?n i? 1 ? 0 nQtl0n ' U - iS iS tlle record 01 °ur liberty. 

, nt , ' n, " e , ll£Ve P ne Q lon£ wa ^* c hcrc! '-y* f*QH ilactan to 
Bataan and now Leyte. <"e have fought many' times on many fields 
to regain the heritage of our ancestors, those nameless free 
men without history. We, the Filipinos of this Snerftion 
c-re writing today in the Philippines of this struggle for liberty. 

it k« W I??? s 5 a11 il recd > 1 GS y° u > fallow countrymen'? Shall 
it be said of us that in the decisive hour with the forces of 
liberation here with us, when liberty was within our ■ • 
we faltered and we were dismayed? Shell it be said of S P, n, 
fellow-countrymen-, that disunited and despairing we betrVei K 
the sacrifices of our fathers? betrayed 

wortnf Kerfea' 6 * uSttT^-f ; ; St ' v?ort1 ^ of liberty," 

hour/of defeat* ^e^ri^^^^^ fj^ff ' 
the . ast, when all seeriPrl in"? t a 2 , hcid fallen all over 
East the flame of liber tv , ^ keep alive in the Par 

the tyrant of Asia rf L P Jf Xt De , s o^ that the sword of 
People. I ?Ln^ 1 you:?« Jr ^cf/^ ° f ° Ur indomitable 



VOICE Of FREEDOM" 



c o M M 0 N W E A L T H n w 

Department of Inf ornp+4 ~ 1 5 PHILIP PI 
1617 Massachusetts Ave \° r- 1 ° n Qnd Public Relations 

** i 4 r i^ghington 6, D. C, HObart 1400 
»u ooa y,^ nA * ********* *** **>:• **** **** *** 

inesc oroadcasts con? rn ra „4.i 
th e "Voice of Freedom" radio f^TVLpT f f£? £ he Philippines over 
when the forces of liberation i« * I hloh rcturncd to the air 
vte Thus entire! vi« „?? 0n lQndc <3 on October 20, 1944, in 

5c^.dor U on C Kaf 6 f ? 9 42 "it w^? the JapaneSe ^ej** 
1 Tfinnnrv ion '«« 7.Z * lt was inaugurated on Corregidor 
^X^i^^lr^^ of Filipino-American resist- 

tions-Con'\^?^ C ^^ v ar 5. ^corded by the Federal Connunica- 
t 1^ the United States. They are authorized 

j&i***** ***********^ 

9ffi COIliON-EALTi: ITTJIVERSARY C7.LEBRATED: (Voice of Freedom, 7VLC, 
Leyte, in English at 4:00 an, November 13, 1944, to the Philippines) 

(Text) "In a proclamation issued today, President Osnena set 
November 15 as a legal holiday, narking the 9th anniversary of the 
Philippine Commonwealth, 

"The people of Tacloban on Sunday gathered in the town plaza to 
hear General Romulo describe what the Philippine Commonwealth 
government accomplished in the United States since 1942 and its 
activities since its 'return to the Philippines on October 20. 

"The mass meeting was presided over by -the Mayor of Tacloban. 
Others who spoke were Congressman (Manteo? ) , the f ormer governor of 
... and Dr. J. R. Hayden, former visa-governor of the Philippines." 
FIXE A3 8 



"THIS IS OUR "7R," Address by General Carlos P. Romulo. (Voice of 
Freedom, 1,T VLC , Leyte, in English at 4:00 am, November 13, 1944, to 
the Philippines . ) 

(Text) "General Carlos P. Romulo, Resident Commissioner of the 
Common-wealth Government now' brings you his daily message. General 
Honulo: 

i "'My fellow countrymen': There is one central thought that we 
Filipinos must bear in mind in connection with the present war. It is 
that this is our war.' It is the war • of the .Filipino people against 
Japcn, No amount of Japanese deceit^ subterfuge and propaganda can 
obscure that one incontroversial fact, ^lnost daily until that day 
v 'hen (word) our towns and cities were bombed by the Japanese. Our 
countrymen were killed or injured by Japanese bombs, our homes and pro- 
perty destroyed by the Japanese. Every' pr ovinia e has felt the sting of. 
Japanese invasion. 

"'It is important to bear these frets in mind. Fortunately, his- 
tory has recorded well b} whom this war was started. There can be.no 
u orcl justification whatever, no excuse that can satisfy the conscience 
ot any civilized community for the dastardly manner in which Japan 
stacked the Philippines. 

, "'The issue of war guilt has been settled definitely. Impartial 
history C an allow no nuestion to be raised upon this issue, in so tar 
:? the conscience, of the civilized world is concerned tne issue oi 
;JSht tua wrong has been determined beyond a doubt for ail t ime. ii 
*/m P inos<wire mere spectators in this war, ^ w?o ?ake If we were 
J e 38 v;hat side our moral judgment would incline us to take. If we were 
I Pe 3 p3)e upon another planet, looking down on events baow our 

^science would toll us evcA then which nation is in the right, and 
in the wrong. 

* in this war. ' v . r e are 

"iBut we Filipinos are no mere spectators i spec tators, and 
on the sidelines watching a game, Vc are not> 



this is not a game, This is war, and it is our war as much as it is 
anybody ^ else's war. The shadow of death has fallen uoon our towns 
and cities. Our people have been maimed and killed by the Japanese 
Our peaceful earth has trembled beneath the impact of Japanese 
bombs. Our hones have been wrecked or burned by the Japanese. Our 
sacred snore has been trampled by the feet of the Japanese invaders. 
This is our war. 

_ "'Does it matter now that the war was not of our own choosing' 
that it was (word) to us by the will of the enemy? Can we say that 
we shall lave no part in a war that has wrecked our homes, ravaged 
our towns, and killed our countrymen? By every nation's first duty 
of self-defense and self-preservation, this has been our war since 
the first enemy bomb was dropped in Davao at 6:30 in the morning 
of ..ondoy, December 7, 1941. " 

^ I" 1 " 0 ? elf -respecting nation could have shirked the challenge 

of that treacherous attack. To have avoided that challenge or to 
have cowered before it, would have been to lose all pride and dignity 
npn^r " Uff f red // D ° tt0LlleSS humiliation. The Filipinos are F ' 
fn fif T cust0 ^ ed t0 crooking the knee to any power that nay purpose 
to invade our country and to hold us in thrall. purpose 

" TI ? the past we iiave been overcome by superior forces but wp 
clnllT™ I"? °f vi v 0USht ' 0?' country hos also 1 in the past beef 
conquered. But we have never been vanouished. Every power that his 

tl°l "?, Cfl *° ovcrrun our oo^try has known the avenging lnaer of our 
•none of fiitS C .': n8 centuries of thrallrtoo underpin the hot 

Antonio Luna and Gregorio del Pilar. 

today wjtn Y JapPn hiS Thr 0e . S n^°? the rcasons **? we a ^ at war 

reasons that rr :'inhc? P r ? ?* ^ounds^ are already there as well as the 
Planted in our heart and what <^tr vf -f^ '°+ • '? at P^*^ instinct had 
between what ^smoraUy right an! iSS l^nn^i J*** 6 US to Anguish 
to account for our actions Rn^J? is morally wrong, are. sufficient 

t?U l^li: ?^^&yr&y& are 3gfe? 

"ore 8 lo;'iouslL a n1his C one '^L^L^ 3 "f ' "° Ie "ceessary, ' ' 

the American people. pinos 111 ^gating side by side with 

"'But my fellow countrymen rmr 
is not thus so purely sentimental' ^ arc^n? f ° T f 1 ***** in this war 
com of gratitude the favors that we have %ebetSSJ e J y P ^g lith *fie 
States. Stronger than the feeling of sent! en t v £?*S* OIa ^ne^nited 
compulsion of pure self-interest, Sat is whv tM^* US ' 
much as .it*. is America's* This is why our ( fervent? v * is ou * war as 
and our Will are absolutely and unstintedly in tSs J!? uls ' °^ reason 
perhaps truer 1 . to say that America is fighting this wat ^ FoT lt \^' 
millions of other peoples like us , than to say that we «2J ^ S an ' :I 
this war for. America's sake. (For we can?) stiU I JS £f 6 ^fi^rting 
are fighting for our own safety.. ociy p^Ply that v H - 

"'•This is our land which has been ..invaded and it • : 

to defenn it. ft is our liberties that have been trampled ° Ur dut "' 

we must safeguard them ag i nst suhersion. It is our right ^ pon > Qn « 

self-determination and independence that is at stake, and ,£°. natio ^l 

inescapable obligation to defend it. The fate of democracv \- ~ S • 0ur ' r 

«y is m the ■ 



- 3 - 



1 \ t i"no+r i inis is whv thr 1 • 7 ua ' we i,ieen t0 fight for 
llig hest instincts of our natiL ?/ lllpino People are at war. The 
dictates of our conscience the'in • CCU1 of our ne *°i° blood, the 
drive of our will, all, ray'feiL™ f our reason > thc passionate 
sts nd against the common encrv «-2 untryBlen » bid us to make a 
and ally, the United States TV £^ Sidc with our 6* eat friend 



Stripes, the Commonweal tn Government was reborn to assume 
once again its constitutional duties and functions of the 
only legal government here recognized by the United Nations. 

"'♦The second significant fact about the ninth anniver- 
sary of the Commonwealth is the beautiful spectacle that today 
greets one's eye in Tacloban and the other liberated areas of 
Leyte, The American soldier has endeared himself to the 
Filipino heart ♦ The Filipino is his friend and his ally with 
whom he must work. There has blossomed out in this island 
a heart-warming friendship between GI-Joe and the Filipino. 
He shares his rations with the native who had been deprived 
v of everything he had by the Japanese. He visits with him 
and together they walk on the street like long standing 
friends. The Filipino, on the other hand, cannot do enough 
for the American soldier. Between the two there is mutual 
confidence and good will. Here is. a picture for the whole 
world to see. Two peoples, of two different races, meeting 
together on the common ground of true friendliness. Here 
is social equality born spontaneously out of mutual respect. 

n "'The third significant fact is that this is the last 
anniversary of the Commonwealth, By Congressional enactment, 
independence has been advanced prior to July 4, 1946, ii ™e 
Japanese are expelled from Philippine soil before then and ^ 
constitutional processes are restored. I am certain pf.^an . 
early victory in the Philippines. This being so I fioresee^ 
that instead of .celebrating the 10th anniversary of tne. 
aonwealth next year, we will see the inauguration oi 
Philippine Republic. 

t vi n ™ f + i o mv privH.Bsge to 

" My fellow-countrymen: Now it is my F - w> . 

Introduce to you as our mam speaker *&*|2*fc3 o^mouwealth, '• . 
on the occasion of trie ninth anniversary £1^% faet&lcr 
tne President of trie Philippines, His Excel .. 

Osmena, * .V.f #. ;'• ' 

. separate press 

(The President's speech is being issued as| 

release today. i 



"voice of freedom" * 

COMMONWEALTH rtWfo ' 

. Department of ™ The P H f L tpp't wt <5 

^*,m****„„4e^ w -^Washington 6, D* CJ HO 1400 
These broadcasts com * < ******************** ******** 
tb e "Voice of Freedom" radio from tile Philippines 4ver 

air when the forces of libiL| W ! LC ]« whicn returned to the 
inLeyte. Thus ended its «i? n landed °n October 20, 1944, 
whelmed Corregidor on Mav 6 Since the Japanese over- 

Corregidor on January 5 iq/o ^ * Xt was inaugurated on 
iC an resistance to the Japariese a inva-ion 1Ce ° f mi P ino ~ Amer - 

These broadcasts r, * * 

tions Commission of the Titiltafl c+ + the Feder al Communica- 
and available for reproduotf^ Y tates « They are authorized 
♦*************v****2SSS5S?**£2 J$ wnole or in part. 

^ < F,r *****W******4*si ***************** X** 

i*^*************^****^^^. ^,,^... (Wednesday) November 15, 1944 

********,. *.****•**,} >> ********* *** «J *** 

ROMULO AND OSMENA SPEAK ON COH 'ONVEALTH nAV- n *> 
Freedom (WVLC) Leyte in Engllsh^f tfoo Se^hiUppines 

nf thi^Mlln^rn 1 Carl ° S P * RonUl °' ^sident 'Commissioner 
of the Philippine Commonwealth Government, now brings vou 
his daily message. General Romulo: 

"•My fellow countrymen: There are three significant 
facts about today's anniversary of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, The first is that I am speaking to you from 
the Philippines. Our Commonwealth Government is no longer 
in exile. It is back home, firmly re-established on Philip- 
pine soil. It came back with the forces of liberation. 
Nine years ago, it was born under the ae'gis of the American 
flag. It went to Washington more than two years ago, where 
it advanced and was given the attributes of an independent 
government. Under the protecting folds of the Stars and 
Stripes, the Commonwealth Government was reborn to assume 
once again its constitutional duties and functions of the 
only legal government here recognized by the United Nations. 

"'The second significant fact about the ninth anniver- 
sary of the Commonwealth is the beautiful spectacle that today 
greets one's eye in Tacloban and the other liberated areas of 
Leyte. The American soldier has endeared himself to the 
Filipino heart. The Filipino is his friend and his ally with 
Wh6m he must work* There has blossomed out in this island 
a heart-warming friendship between Gl-Joe and the Filipino. 
He shares his rations with the native who had been deprived 
,of everything he had by the Japanese. He visits with him 
and together they walk on the street like long standing 
friends. The Filipino, on the other hand, cannot do enough 
for the American soldier. Between the two there is mutual 
confidence and good will. Here is a picture for the whole 
world to see. Two peoples, of two different races, meeting 
together on the common ground of true friendliness. Here 
is social equality born spontaneously out of mutual respect. 

\ "'The third significant fact is that this is the last 
anniversary of the Commonwealth. By Congressional enactment, 
independence has been advanced prior to July 4, 194b, 11 ™e 
Japanese are expelled from Philippine soil befo ^ n J^Sf 2n ' 
constitutional processes are restored. I ^f% ta \ n // r( ^ e ' 
early victory ih the Philippines. This ^ngje.' I fore ee_ 
that instead of .celebrating the 10th anniversary of ^ ^ ' om 
fconwealth next year, we will see the inauguration 01 -cue. 
p hilippi ne Republic. - . 

. «V fellow-countrymen: Now it is "^M^. 
introduce to you as our main speaker in today . 1 >m ^ ealth . 
J? the occasion of the ninth anniversary of |^ , 6 ^ io . 
the President of tne Philippines, His ExceiJ- 

°smena.» ". :-f m 2 " ' 

. « a *i separate press 
'(The Presidents speech is being issued as. , 
release today. E.O.. ; 



"VOICE OF FREEDOM" "* [' ' 

0 K M 0 N <T E A L T H" o F * r r „ 

Departnent of i ft f orn : H 1 h E P H I L I P P HE S 
07 Massachusetts Ave., N w £«t£? Publio Relations 
Jj*4****.*************>;:4c**^ - : *44*S?M^ feon 6 > D - C. EObert 1400 

These broadcasts cone flirer.+i,, 
, l6 "Voice of Freedon" radio ( vfil 2? J he Pnili PP ines over 
« the. forces of 1 i hp^t t \ VL w » which returned to the air 

pyte! Thus ended its sl^L^n^ X ° 0 T t0 ^ 20 ' 19U ' ln 
J J !^nr nn Hnv ft l o; o ?f Slnce the Japanese overwhelmed 

Jorr n?i ? IQL2 y io'tv2 4 • Zt was inaugurated on Oorregidor on 

STffi^^SK • iSSaSlSnT 010 ^ ° f ^Pino-/c,erican resistance 

These broadcasts are 'recorded by the Federal Communications 
UBBDlssion of the United States. They are authorized and 
mailable for reproduction In whole or in cart 

%*f ************* * ** ****** (Monday) November 27. 1944 



RELIEF AND R ' lHABILI TATI ON ON LEYTT . (Delayed. Leyte in English at 
4:00 a.m. Monday, November 18?, 4-944, to the Philippines.) 

• (text) ,r ' r e present a spokesman for the Philipppine Commonwealth 
Government: Today I shall devote my time to a discussion of the 
subject which I am sure will be of great interest to all of you, 
relief and rehabilitation. As you have been told before, studios 
and research on the relief and rehabilitation plans of our government 
v;ere actually begun while President Osmena and his cabinet were still 
in Washington. Acting on the president's instructions, o staff of 
scientists and (word) specialized in the various aspects of agricul- 
ture, public health, nutrition and welfare, assembled and collected 
all data which might be of use to us in determining our needs in 
the different categories of relief supplies. 

Among these. workers were many of our own pensionados, promising 
young men whom we had sent to the United States.^to take post- 
graduate studies in the various universities, -their first hand 
knowledge and experience were among the most valuable assets our 
government had in America. 

In their task they had the advice end active assistance of 
internationally known institutions, like the Rockefeller foundation, 
as well as" United States government agencies like the department 
of agriculture, the public health service and others. They also 
Had other assistance: The mere mention of Philippine relief and 
rehabilitation brought up spontaneous offers of aid f rom many 
sources. Americans' everywhere , in all wal.es of life, arc only too 
anxious to pay tribute to our loyalty and courage, to our people s 
^nd onlataan and Oorregidor, to their continued res 1st f^iaSiSn 
^ Japs through two and a half years of almost complete isolation 
f rora the world. 

The first results of this planning (*o*;)^f d 0 ?? t g° rnd 
^tinated relief needs of the Philippines for o , Ji^ n ^nd 
laical supplies arc as complete and up-to-date as present circus 
targes will permit. 

port alone covers hundreds of needed items fron 
s from hypodermic needles to" comr 1 
mrormation was then placed in hands o« 
in relief and rehabilitation for the Philippines, 

iii,ionv;ea 
i inns . 

organized 



, The ndfeical, report alone covers hundreds of nee; led it "on 
jsulin z: di a |&lis, from hypodermic .nacdles Jo °^^%% P lrtlY*B 
£1 this information was then placed in the hands qf 06cncie| 
kt * in relief and rehabilitation for the Philippines. - ... 

. Fron the very first days of ^ our arrival , the ^^^^ At 
Jjernueat had been busily planning Cor aid fo Uliit . v , r . s organ: 
-vena's d/roction, a women's yoluntcci c lot hing. 
S, Ta ?lobtn for thelollection and aietpibutxon nC eds are. . 

2}° ^ , C w bei distributed in towns ^here cio^ f alCGS , Qare of 
(S te8 t under the direction of a cabinet member 
Piaces > in greatest' need. ■>.; : - ' .: ' , ■ 

. & L ? . „ A ^^nodelcd by- groups of 

, w Th ^c clothes were sorted, tended and rem (refug6es) H&t 
^i c ^ea women and were distributed to the ^ c to 
1* ■ example, they brought a truck load f ^ public 
,J ' U;st Wednesday, Commonwealth day, 



distribution took place at the maternity hospital in Tacloban* • 
We plan to seUip sinilar organizations in other towns and expect 
to receive (help) fror.i many sources in the Philippines as well 
as in %eMca, 

In this connection the relief work of the U.S. Amy and Navy 
dserves public c emendation. They have organized a special unit, 
i'he Philippine Islands Civil Affairs Unit, called PICAU, .for the 
sake of brevity. One of Picau's functions is the administration 
of public relief when and where needed. Many of its officers and 
men ore Filipinos and if I could but mention names, you would recog- 
nize anong them many (medical officials) who (practiced) before 
the war, members of our own university faculties , and many others. 

For _ example, of the doctors who accompanied the wounded on • 
V? ko&Pjtal ship Mactan, four are now back on Philippine soil, 
all of them being medical officers of this Picau unit. I have 
seen then at work in many places in Leyte and Sanar, end I have 
^? r t : 1 ^! )ut Pf ai ff for then. At Dulag I saw them distributing 
army rations to the needy on the beeches, and at (place) I saw ' ' 
then efficiently organizing the unemployed into labor groups 
repairing houses damaged by the recent typhoons. They work <• 
right up at the front lines before the shooting hcA died down, 

XS^^S*" 13 T 4ief W0rk t0 be done ' 0ni of the units has 

fofSJnvV eV ! r f L1 - n ' end hCS receivcd G number of decorations 
i or neaical (...) services. 

Special groups will rent in in charge of (word) areas in 
any area as long as it is the neans of military operations After 
a while the work will be undertaken by the Co^onwealth WbbJSi 

n „, f ,^J decentralization) of responsibilities is not as sharply 
marked as that may sound'. Both entities) are so interested in 
helping people that from the very beginning thr 7, n L 

cooperation between them. Conf er end es^akf JffXS 7 °i? sest . 

between tho qnuMoi^fn \> t triiGe ° Pinpe almost continuously 

bvLn*fhr P "J 8 of. each group and assistance is rendered 
?l <t °* lier whcne ver requested. As far as possible Picau 

welfare Zi T? %?*H &g local 01 Lionel machinery for social 
nursed o.rHt?S eS . f ° r e ? anple ' lncIude on its Payroll, doctors, 
geverm'ent? 7 lnSpeccors ^. other pre-war employees of the' 

of tl-.rUnited b ?i?f4 S ' the hl T'l 0utlinc 0f the ^'^ewed activities- 

Unit6d S ^tes Amy and -avy and the Commonwealth Government." 



"VCIcr OF FREEDOM" 

C 0 M M 0 N W E A L T k at, 

Department 0 f Ir, fn ;/ + . T E E PHILIPPINES 
1617 Massachusetts" Ave w vi S ond P ^ blic Relations 

^ • i , Washington 6. D.C . Hobart 1400 . 

the mm of -KSd&f^S^M**^ thC ^iiPPinen over 
when the forces of librr^t (fTLC), which returned to the air 
Leyte. Thus ended it w 2? 5** ° n 0ctober,2O, 1944, in 
Corregidor on Mav 6 l qio ?f lce the a Panese overwhelmed 
January 5,. 1942 , Qs 'the voicf oHl }?^ ur f ed . on Corregidor on 
to the : Japanese invasion! Hipmo-American resistance 

Co^islidn- of?he a Ctef S fat^ ded T^ the PedeEal Communications 
available for I§l*^S|?^^f^;^ ^authorized and 

™5?^ or ln Part. . 

*********£*** ** *•* *************** 

^/^I****^*'*^*^^^^,.^,. _ (Wednesday) November 29, 1944 

i-fi*^JM5*>ta|c^ ..> 4^ .***** S !c**** S j tS H*******.******* 



SffTSS^RS™ ° F CONSTITUTIONAL . JUSTICE AND 

SSwSh^ • ?'*5 ^ DISLOYALTY CASES . (Delayed.- :Leyte.in 

English at 4:00 a.rv, November 24, 1944, Friday, to.the Philippines 

■ (PPJ5BISENT .OSMENAi) "Since ray return, to the ■ Philippines a 
nionth ago. it has been ' my good fortune to meet a , number, of ' 
guerrilla leaders.- The -world will long remember the eoic stend 
of the guerrillas. After the fall of Bate an and Corregidor and 
the tragic defeat of the Allied armies in Asia, our people ' 
found themselves pitted against the might of . "apen. Then the guer- 
rilla movement cone into being. It was the people's continued 
fight against the invaders. The guerrillas, almost without orms 
m the; beginning, hungry and unclothed , gave battle to the- enemy 
from every nook and corner of the land. For three seemingly 
interminable years, and despite unbelievable hardshios, they 
carried the torch of freedom, confident that America' would not 
fail them ond that hiacArthur would fulfill his pledge to return. 

"Our nation is justly proud of its guerrillas and the 
Philippine Government shall see to it that they are properly 
rewarded. We have tcken the initial step of incorporating all 
guerrillas- recognized by the- military command into' the Philippine 
army with, (state) army pay. 

"But in our praise of the guerrilla, we should not be 
forgetful of the loyal civilian population that was left behind 
to face the ire of the invader and support the guerrillas. It- 
was not possible for all to evade the enemy. The fate .of the 
innense Majority was to bear the manacles of enslavement, 
Unfortunately this has given rise to different attitudes and 
actions in relation to the Japanese rule, causing some mis- 
understandings among our people. This- state of affairs has created 
one of the most serious problems with which our government is 
confronted. • 

"WB cannot close our eyes to'the r eolities of the Japanese • 
occupation. It is cruel and harsh and (every kind 'of ) (w) has 
been •: imposed on the Filipino people by this rule. The initial 
misfortune of Anerican and Filipino armies left the majority 
of eighteen million Filipinos no other recourse but to submit to 
the despotic regime if they were to survive. Not all public 
officials could take to the hills to carry on the heroic struggle. 
Some had to remain in their posts to maintain a s cable no© of 
government; to orotect the population from the oppressors to the 
extent possible"by human ingenuity and (to comfort) the people in 
their misery. Had their services not been available, the Japanese 
would either have themselves governed directly and completely or. 
Utilized unscrupulous Filipino followers capable of any treason 
to their people. The result would have been calamitous and the 
injuries inflicted to our body politic beyond cure. 

"The problem under consideration must ^jAl^Zl^ t±all ^ 
justice and dignity. Every case should be e^mined impartially 
end decided on its own merits. Persons holding public oil ice 



during eneny occupation for the most part fall within three 
categories: Thpse jronpted by .desire to protect the people,, 
those actuated- by fear of enemy reprisals, and thos e moti voted , ; 
by disloyalty to our government and cause. The $Gt% ves which 
caused the retention of the of fice . and (wd\..)'' in' office rrithp 
than the ,sole f act of its occupation ought .to : be 'the criteria 
upon - which such persons will be . judged. .' ' \ t r ' 

"Those' charged with giving aid and'' cronf Ort , --to .the eneny , " 
whether as office holders or 'private 'citizens, -. ith being traitors 
and disloyal to the government of the Philippines a'rid the United 
States should be dealth with in accordance_with the law, ,3ut for 
the 'cor.ir.ion good and our national welfare , i .appeal tb all ''the 
citizens of the Philippines to support their government in meetinp 
its respo.nsibilit.re.s. by lawful procedures. '•.;••.. .... 

"Persons in possession of information .on acts .of. disloyalty 
to the Commonwealth Government or that of the United States 
should report it to the authorities, but under no circumstances 
should any person or group take the law into. their .hands. ....Qurs 
is a constitutional government. Ours is a community educated in 
the (norms) of a -Christian civilization. D U e respect for the 
law, rigid adherence to those principles established in civilized 
countries, complete obedience to the decisions, of. the courts 
all these involve strength of character arid" hi b h moral 
attributes that are the oossession of enlightened countries, like 
ours. On the threshhold of occupying a sovereign olace 'in the" 
concert of free nations, we must live up to our* responsibility. 
' -e must prove our -ability to maintain, domestic oeace and our 
capacity to mete out justice. Precisely when the eyes of the • 
nif. i5 world are focusspd on out country, we cannot allow 
on nn? ,?^?? na .- reVCn 5 e Qnd 1 ^ed . zeal to cast a reflection 
rovlvnn. J ^T^ 0 ; and °™ ability to maintain "an orderly 

i Zt n^/h, l 5 • ^ overn ^ ^ law; its splendid majesty : 
must never be dimmed in our land. * 

in ^" X t iS (wd or two) (courage) that the Filipino dcodIp 
Jwld! *ith°a 6l i CitGd the ^miiaUon P o C f° P the. 

waged war SaSelv he $t«°? of . pe£ ^ the «4««> nevertheless 
of him by tTeftrnit 2 heroically when death was demanded 
Japanese! he tould ?o su?vi v^'^f * i Under granny Of the 
were competed to rein de^h on it th€ fo *^s : of redemption 

in order to dislodge the ene\v h« ^ > Gnd dGSt ^y his property 
He realized that the price offrrL W^Z^ heard to complain, 
pay the cost. P ° f freedouis high. and he was ready. to 

of iS^feffe l^ly^f^^^^ tills the fields 
or regrets, with the enthusiast J ® T herc without hesitation 
free to shape Ms'desWn ^ 1 }^ 0 ^; 1 being who is. again. 

hasl move forward, ( Inst m ^ fit T^i e Wno llJVe cone of Sge, we 
united animated Sy'thTs S^^^J**** cnd ^^ane^ closely 
bound together as a political stltl K 1 ?^* 1 ?* 8 to happiness, " 
of our constitution and our' a * f J*? ^ lse dispositions' 
to this end." • ±jr&a - helpin j ne, I shall strive 



r. ONFIDENTIAL 

For the personal information of 



Services 



£4? *5 a . summ ary of f , 



est to the Commonwealth Gov^nm? + ro 5 dcasts of items of inter- 
monitored by the Foreign BponJSfSJS ? is based on broadcasts 
the U.S. Federal CommuSoSiS^^^S^ 06 SerViCe ° f 

CONFIDE NTIAL • Thi c, 0 , 
of the PEIUppIne GovernmeT^L^ 01, the sole use of officials 
edit out any Japanese or athl* SJL Us no effor t is made to 
is based upon a service sSnni LI ? pagancia - Since this digest 
FCC, all who receive it are e^l?^ U ? hy , the courtes y of the 
nature at all times. expected to observe its confidential 



No. 35 



July 12, 1943 



of the Philippine ^^fc.^&SgJSo^'S^g* £ coT ^ 
S Phi ? f 0U ^ dW ° rk f ° r the realization of S independence" 

^^iW^hfrnSr^ 8 ?^ 81 ^- With tne P who?enearted 
JJ: ???f?I S^? f . the member 'S of the Executive Commission and 
the entire Filipino people," according to a Manila-datelincd 
report broadcast this morning by Tokyo (July 12--A85) Tolo 
"also expressed satisfaction at the way the work of the Com- 
mittee is progressing." 

Tojo's address was made at a conference with the Committee 
members, including Chairman Jose P. Laurel and Manuel A. Roxas. 
(This is the first time that the middle initial of the Manuel 
Roxas previously mentioned in connection with this Committee 
has been given in enemy broadcasts.) "Frank opihions on 
Philippine independence were freely exchanged between the 
Premier and the members of the Committee," says the report. 

Laurel reportedly "expressed his appreciation for the 
growth of independence in the Philippines and assured the 
Premier that all the Filipino people are now firmly determined 
not only to reconstruct the Philippines and to regain indepen- 
dence of the Philippines but also to do their full share in 
overthrowing the Anglo-American imperialism to bring the war 
of Greater East Asia to a successful conclusion." He allegedly 
said further that "when the Filipinos think of the day when 
the national ensign of the Philippines will be hoisted high 
in the sky, they cannot suppress their feeling of glad excite- 
ment . " 



The Tokyo broadcast continued: "Expressing his appreciation 
for the promise to grant the Philippines independence, Mr. 
Laurel said that his appreciation not only represents the heart 
jnri soul of the 18,000,000 Filipinos but also those of all 
^he peoples of Greater East Asia who have long suffered under 
the shackles of the Anglo-American imperialism and who -have 
nov; been liberated from them, thanks to Japan's war effort." 

To jo arrived in Manila Saturday noon in the course of an 
inspection tour in the Southern regions, according to Manila- 
a ^telined Domoi report (July 12— A34) . He was reportedly 
gloomed by Lt. Gen. Shigenori Kuroda, commander-in-chief of 
*ne Imperial Expeditionary Forces in the Philippines; Shozo 
'■foratn, adviser to the Nippon Military Administration, members 
? f the Philippine Independence Preparatory Committee and mem- 
bers of the Executive Commission. 

Tojo loft Manila ^•"^^^2**^^2 ffihina, 
-io 13-day inspection tour included visits o , 
China, Thailand, Shonan* Sumatra, Borneo, and Java. 



- 2 - 



0 $ "PACIFICATION" BUREAU CREATE a 

and Public Security has been create V ew B * reau of Information 
and effective cooperation tn ?f'f #d in order to § ive f irm 
fties of the Imperial Ja£ a «L* a S peace and pacification activ- 
Jo promote the establishment Sf 63 i V he Philippines and 
ailanila broadcast (Julv 10 ?lof? aoe , and order >" according to 
B, Vargas, "with the approval of th P f° Utive Chairman Jorge 
tie-Imperial Japanese Fo?ceI " I? supreme commander of 

173, creating the new bu?elu\vh^h mU ^f at S d Executive No - 
Jf the Interior DU ^cau which will be under the Commissioner 



This bureau will have luvi a** „+* Aw 
(Has Its fiinptiono J » ctl0n over a11 provinces and 

Sorption and ?o 1 be to ci *oulate Proper and correct 

onini™ ahS.,? 7Si° P a m ° re diligent and enlightened 

tho cuir? *p«22m ^\ neW ° rder ' witn a viev ' toward achiev- 
S5i?5rfS2i° t S? f lls ^ ent of Peace and order all over the 
? U c?S? ?i nSnSn^ 7 °?2 e *Pl°it ways and means which will 
b ? US r^ifrS ?!i ne acti vities of the Central Pacifica- 

tion Committee , with particular reference to the urgent need 
for immediately reestablishing complete peace and order; to 
obtain and submit such reports f rom t he public as the Commis- 
sioner of the Interior may order from time to time, as circum- 
stances may^require, and to discharge various other duties per- 
taining to investigation and information on pacification and 
public security. " 

THIRD GROUP OF "RELEASED WAR PRISONERS" GOES INTO TRAINING: 
The third group of "realsed Filipino war prisoners, formerly 
offers and men of the USAFFE," were inducted into a training 
camp "with an appropriate ceremony" in the presence of Military 
Administration representatives and other officials, says a 
Manila-datelined Dome! report broadcast by Tokyo (July 11 — 
A99). 

A Military Administration official, in a speech,'acknowledged 
their realization of Japan's true intentions as well as their 
spirit of cooperation with the Philippine Executive Commission 
since their release last year." He also "congratulated the 
trainees who are about to render service toward construction 
of the new Philippines" and "declared that with the Philippines 
about to gain independence this year, the role of the trainees 
is vitally related to that historic event." 

About 80 released war prisoners, war widows and orphans 
working in the YMCA Foodstuff Shop were scheduled to receive 
this first quarterly bonus at a ceremony at the corner of San 
Luis and General Luna Streets, according to a Manila broadcast 
(July 11— A110). The Foodstuff Shop, started last April, 
"now produces an average of 500 food products a day," with the 
turnout "expected to increase as the workers become more 
Proficient." Basic wage of the workersfe70 centavos, "although 
some earn aa much as two pesos and 50 centavos." The products 
are made from local materials and distributed through the 
^deration Retailers of Manila." 



SEWS BRIEFS: A cotton factory is planned for Capas , farlac , 
^cording to Capas-datelined report broadcast by Manila- 
(J% 9--A379). The Kaisha Ltd. will do the construction of 

factory! which "will employ hundreds of workers "Kaisha 
;lroady employs "thousands of laborers agr^ultural inspec 
to r ... in various cotton plantations ... m BamD-n, o y 
°oncepcion." 

A Manila broadcast (July 10--A54M^ 

fign against gambling is bei ??^ st ^ P '^ m b?i ng houses especially 
report: "The continued operation of gambling brought forth 
th ose in the most populous regions of M&niA- itiGLting Q C am- 
a » order from the Metropolitan Constablular f J eratlng openly 
^en.... The gambling houses ... have boon 
°n during the day." 



CONFIDENTIAL 

For the Personal Information 0f__ 

Prepared Daily Sj^^W 
- tl- J:f_ £ _ °P e cial Services 

This is a summary of fnr«- 
interest to the Philippine p en broa(i casts of items of 
casts monitored by the p o : P i ! e * nt - It is based on broad- 
of the U.S. Federal Co^unL'Si^'c^Lsi*^ 11261106 Sem ° e 

CONFIDENT IAL • m« olm 
officials of the PhiliLf£?~? y is f or-the sole use of 
is made to edit out any Japanelf^ 611 ^ ' and thus no effort 
this digest is based upon TSu ° tner P ro P^nda. Si 
courtesy of the FCC, all who reeeJve^i^ t0 US by the 
observe its confidential natu*B »l ol , J* Q ex Pected to 

uUit aL ail times. 

No. 72 - 



nee 



August 25, 1943 

TALIBA ATTACKS PRESIDENT QUEZON 



says;™ f or oissss ; ^s^T^e^r « n . Hew 

propaganda ana so-called American Iriends* ? sfL^ e £" a ? 

tine in uflonf fis^f t°ie ^pff X^eaflV- 119 * 
letters of American domination and commercial exploitation 

"It _ said there is only one thing left for Quezon to do, 
ana it is to spend the remaining years in ease and comfort! 
it said: . 'Quezon should realize by now that, thanks to the 
benevolence of Nippon, the New Philippines is well on the 
way to^ being completely restored to the Filipinos and that 
the Philippines has come into its own as an integral part of 
the Orient and no longer belongs to the Western Hemisphere or 
Don Manuel Quezon.' 

"It pointed out that Quezon and other Philippine refugees 
v;ould do well to cease trying to interfere with Philippine 
affairs. The paper said: 'They should bear in mind they run 
the risk of being denationalized and held guilty of high trea- 
son if they become parties to any intrigue to cede the Philip- 
pines to the Anglo-Americans, who are enemies of Nipponese 
and all peoples in East Asia. Nothing could be more dishon- 
orable than for a person who was born a Filipino to die with- 
out a country.' It concluded, 'We would hate to see Quezon 
the 20th century edition of the Flying Dutchman. "' 

i A Manila broadcast in English to the Philippines and 
>outh Seas (Aug. 24— A34S) says: 

"Mr, Manuel L. Quezon seems to be resigned to playing the 
Puppet of American propagandists wherefore he delivered a 
Q ost suitable speech on the night of his 65th birthday anniv- 
ersary August 19 last, Mr. Quezon, who voluntarily abandoned 

responsibility as the supreme leader of the Philippines, 
chose to live in the United States, addressing 18,000,000 
^lipinos at a time when they were in (words apparently missing;. 

Pathetically explained that he had decided to leave the 
^Hppines at that time with the expectation of coming back 
aft er retaking the country with the aid of the Allied Forces. 

"Quoting th 
11 W-S, Manuel 
weat wish that 
5lne s ... for Mr 




- 2 - 

time in her history, i s oni 

vji th the . aid of Nippon'. She^n att ? £n 1 eal dependence 
forever free of the trouble! S make ft c ^ippines 
now on the threshold of a ^ln?f Amerie ^ doini^. nation and is 
nation under the New Orclor of th i? ture a3 a!1 independent 

xne GaA. Copsiosrperity Sphere. 

"There is no room in an 
Quezon and his American f ri P n£« pe ™ ent ™lS?pines for Mr. 
left for Mr. Quezon to "do anfl ?h 4 . T1 ? e - e **■ one thing 

York in peace and comfort n S rer ^ ai - T i in New 

millions of dollars deDosi*J? ?® ^? 1:L » he2 is reputed to have 
the International Bank of New York ° f " * and in 

"He should realize by now thnt ' 
of Japan, the New Pbili^ninpo ?■ 5™* :s fc 0 the benevolence 
completely ... for the FlSoinos ' ^tll^^l^ 7 t0 being 
own as an integral nart of rv v : " :a s come lnto its > 

to the We S tern 0 Hemiipnere 0 %^o1io?LXS ^ 

to sefhow^tTin^ -curious ( ? ) 

bear in mind that they rS the r^V^, " sf£a - irs - shoulci 
become a party, to e^'SaS^ 

| e an S tS^oo?e S S ^ a J e .^enemr, i J:^ P of% an , but 

honorable thIS P f or n i & ' £ CC=llM be mo * e * ia - 

npnoraoxe than for a person who was born a F^'ilioino to die 

SS°oen^irv h °S ? f- W V?? ld hate *• Quezon become a 

20th century edition of the Flying Dmcmuaaa.. " 

(The commentator on the second br-oad. cast was not identi- 
l led, but the text is similar in many- rersoects to the editor- 
ial attributed to Taliba in the first br oadcast. The Manila 
comments indicate that President Quezon' i=s sppeech was widely 
heard m the Philippines. In any event, ttee comments appear 
to have helped to publicize it.) 



VARGAS BUSY ON BIRTHDAY: "Shouldering t he ereat task of -pre- 
paring the Philippines for independence withnin this year/ 
Chairman Jorge B. Vargas of the Philippine Executive Commission 
... observed his 53rd birthday hard at vuoit in his office 
in the Malacanan Palace,'" says a Manila — dat-clined Domei repoit 
broadcast by Tokyo (Aug. 24— A362) . 7, In the early morning 
Chairman Vargas' family celebrated mass at — tue Malacanan 
Chapel, followed by a simple breakfast. Simiplicity narked the 
observance by the Filipino leader, who bias gpiloted the country 
to the position of receiving the honorr ofT la dependence within 
the current year. 

"Following breakfast, Vargas iiim ediSB.tel y plunged into a 
busy office routine at 9:15. Members ofT th e staff paid 
respects in a brief ceremony (and) presented Vargas with a 
Painting by Fernando Amor solo depicting the Chairman' s his- 
toric meeting at the Manila Hotel wi ti i_ier Tojo on the 
latter 's first visit to the Philippines ia }iay.... Noon found 
the Chairman smilingly greeting weUnAaln s, who arrived in 
a steady stream. The modest and una_ssurrning- Chairman smiled 
happily and said: 'Indeed this is the ki::, iffist birthday of 
&y life. Ever since I can remember I*f«e «aaifced to see the 
Philippines free and independent. This pmn. after 53 years, 
I am at last going to see my country- fr ee. 1 

During the day Vargas stressed "the importance of Japanese 
... as the common lanaguage of East Asi s," according to a 
•anila-datelined Domei report broadcast by Tojcyo lAug,^-- 
A 219). He spoke before the Normal ZEnstcitB*e.fbr Japanese 
language Teachers, • 

"Complete mutual understanding -JjoM -* ^ the PjUtM' 
a na economic cooperation of all Oriental n lan«uapc » 

understanding can only ^^tained *»g ,™ 1 ^a^ ' 
• aj, gas is quoted further as saying „ >- dcStinod to be 

a s the language of the leader nation m ^ ^ a 



- 3 - 



the principal medium of « 

countries in the Sphere M tion 611110116 the diffe *eat 

On the same occasio 
Military Administrating + ?S Direc tor Cxeneral of the Japanese 
chosen as pioneers to tlle students: "You have been 

the Philippines. I reouI«+ n fu oriG ntation to education in 
accomplish the renovation ]vp 55 ^ ou vigorously proceed to 
free and independent nation » Philippines as befitting a 

The same day Chaimin ir„ 
the Council of 'State 7tl £ naried ! icentG Madri S al » of 
pine-Red Cross, succeeding AiS??i as _ chai ™ r a » °* the Philip- 
died, according tot SaniL ^'2?^ O ^ 0e8 l Sr " who reC6GU 3 r 
by Tokyo (Aug.25— A21 9 a -^telmed Domei report broadcast 

president of the- Ban5 } of tL^hT^rV^ °^° S > 
* f thp Rpfl p^noo « ux one Philippine Islands, treasurer 

G. Sison, Arsenlo LuTone SS&feSSSf ' 

TOKYO COMMENTATOR ATTACKS -ROOSEVELT W: Frances Hopkins, 
Tokyo commentator in English, as broadcast by Tokyo (Aug,2i- 
%(t j j S8.ys i 

"Could the Institute of Public Affairs at the University 
of Virginia have failed to understand how riddled with false 
and equivocal statements was the lecture there nine years ago 
by Prof. Rodney Clark on American affairs in the East? 
Filipino General Aguinaldo helped the Americans to their 
victory in Manila before their victory in Manila. (Then she 
quotes Aguinaldo's recent version of the capture of Manila-.) 
No wonder the Filipinos, including Aguinaldo, now are welcom- 
ing the Japanese, who people of their word and arc to give 
them their independence. 

"True Americans, how long arc you willing to stay blind and 
dazed to this thoroughly wicked Roosevelt war and try to 
obstruct the honorable new order in the. East? True Americans, 
when will you see Roosevelt's wild (?) of a New Deal to the 
blessedness and honor of a fair deal, domestic and international?" 

« 

UCHIGASKI SATISFIED r 'TTE INSPECTION: "During tho course of 
their trip- to comfort officers and men in the South, Sakusaburo 
Uchigasaki, vice-speaker, and his party of other members of 
the House of Representatives are inspecting various phases of 
the Philippine Military Administration," says a Manila-datelined 
Domei report broadcast by Tokyo (Aug. 21— A13 ) . Vice Speaker 
Uchigasaki, in press interview at the Manila Hotel, declared: 

"I am sincerely grateful to the officers and men of the 
imperial Forces who arc serving in the maintenance of peace 
and order and in construction under the intense, sweltering 
Sun. The construction of the Southern regions is steadily 
Progressing by reason of the blood and scat of the officers 
and men. An absolutely invincible foundation has been built 
&ow,... The fact that construction in various areas has pro- 
gressed to the stage where it can bo carried on- by the strength 
°f the respective areas themselves was truly reassuring. 

ms BRIEF: Two hundred more youths have ^rolled in th c 
elementary course of the Manila branch of the ui i«ow ^ 
Affairs of the Japanese MiUtary- Administration, ace 
Manila broadcast (Aug. 24— A99) . Age limits^ip; 
f rom 16 to 25 years. 



" U I.UI 
n I il :. 



ill 



MANILA BROADCAST 



3y 

HON, HARKI B. BAWES 



At Request of 

Mr* Alan Murray 
Office of War Information 



'Washington, D.C. 
July 9, 19^3 



fiends in the Philippines: 

It would be a pleasure to oall many friends by name on 
this broadcast. I send you all greetings. 

The stealthy, unprincipled attack on pearl Harbor and 
Clark Field shocked the American Nation, but with the shock oe.ir« 
unity, determination. As President Roosevelt said: "As our 
power and re scour oes are fully mobilized we shall ^arry the 
^tack against the enemy. We shall hit him, and hit him again, 
wherever and whenever we can reach him. « 

Then came Bataan and Corregidor. We were not surprised et 
the final result. Your heroic defense brought tears and ap-olaus 
The great democratic experiment had not failed; Filipinos and 
Orleans gave their all in defense of Democracy, Which was 
G oing through a supreme test of blood and fire. 

When the Japanese occupied your islands, they did thexr 
best to keep you from knowing the truth about the war. 

TW have tried to prevent your hearing the Worldwide 

K.Kisolini preparing his nation 
atopy of Hitler on the run; ox Mussolln 

•v.n. -f-n r-PDulse the Japs: ol T,ne 
for defeat; of China continuing to repuls 

. , n If rioa with the surrender of German and 
great victories in Airica 

1M there . of the opening of the Mediterranean, pre- 
Italian armies there, ^ ^ 

paring the way for a safe passage for A 
Plane's through the Suez Canal to the Far 2 ast. 
• As each days stories of added victories c a »e throug.. , 

smiles were upon the faces of our people.. 



-2- 



But when over the Japanese radio we heard that Japan was 
offering independence to the Philippines, that for the first 
ti»e brought a laugh. The whole Nation laughed. 

It is not the first time since the war began that the Japs 
have produced comedy not to be exceeded by Hollywood at its best. 
When the pickpocket is found with the stolen purse in hie 
possession and on the way to jail offers to return it to its o 1 
as a present, we have a perfect pioture of Japan's offer of in- 
dependence. A s we say in America, "That would make a horse latig \ 
When Premier Tojo promised independence for the Filipinos 
knowing that this promise was made by the .American people ten 
ye?rs ago and is to be fulfilled in the brief period of two yearr 
it might have induced Hitler to promise freedom and the restora- 
tion of Democracy to France, to Belgium or to Holland. It might 
have induced Mussolini, the back-stabber, to promise freedom to 
Africa or Greece. 

But the answer came quickly; it was loud; it was emphatic; 

it was conclusive. 

It came from Russia. It came from England. It carne from 
the United States. It came from China. It contained just two 
words: "Unconditional surrender.'" That was the answer to Japan. 
She must know she will not be able to give anything to any one 
because she will have nothing to give. 

President Quezon, Vice President OsmeiTa, Commissioner 
Elizalde, and Cabinet -have laid the foundation for repayment by 
the Japanese for damages done to your lives, your buildings 



I 



and your crops. Assisted by his Cabinet, President Quezon 
is dicing a detailed itemization of damages you have suffered 
to be supplemented later by your own evidence. 

As to your independence; It is fixed. It is certain. 
It is sure. Your independence win be complete. 

In every hotel, railroad station and club in America you 
will find a beautiful colored poster placed there by President 
Quezon, It portrays a Filipino with his head bandage^ in 
bloody cloth, with fighting face., with his right arm thrown 
back and in his hand a bomb which he is about to hurl a.% the 
Japanese; it tells the story of the Fighting Filipino. It is 
an artist's portrayal of the Filipino sector, battling for 
"Unconditional surrender] 11 

The Japanese may offer independence to the Koreans because 
independence is on the way. They may offer independence to the 
Chinese in Manchukuo and other sections. 

'Tnen they offer independence to any Nation they are 
trying, as we say in America, to "sell a gold brick." 

You are having a terrible time now, but you will have 
good times then. You will have a clear conscience because you 
have a brave heart. You will have nothing to be ashamed of, 

everything to be proud of. 

Your Government in Exile is making diplomatic advances 
in many directions essential not only for independence in »46, 
but rehabilitation when it comes. 



i 



Hot alone are our men fighting, dying and spending ^heir 
|py for you, but our women have put on uniforms. They are on 
e march on the land, they are in the air, and on the sea. 

The first women the United States sent to your country 
m school teaches. They brought with them school textbooks ^ 
nd bibles. When our uniformed women arrive on their next visH 
hey will bring a military atmosphere. They will oome with 
Adages to tie up your wounds. T.ey will come with a bright 

qnre and songs which will gladden your hearts, 
glue sau c informed 

. a r „. M( , lne the Japs are not. in©** 
You may be guessmb, * . 

not win in recent months they have lost 
leaders know they can not win. I ^ 

every fight from Alaska to Australia, Sack 

enemies for them. t logt 

• divine out the German armn.es and lias 
Russia is driving u h 

+v* Q + rermany would make peace w-v 
-ttv 1 believe that German, 
a single bet tie. x lil^e the rest 

,, vlf Bhe could. But Russia's reply, 
Russia today if sae , 

, . HTTnconditional surrender. 

Th ree nation, *-* * ^ _ ^ feB the f00 a, 

v> Q <5 always had tne men, 
America has axw«j 

the determination, 
the ships, the guns, and - ,,, c , r thur, President Quezon, 

in rome when General MaoArro 
The day vail come War pianns, 

with our Army, snips 
fna V10e president Osmena, - Demoora oy, freedom a»a 

„ P turning vanguard 01 uw 
«ill visit Manila-a r, ^ by th9 

happiness. Bach of the power 

« „= throughout the world is 
United Nations throug Philippines. 

+*™si the enemy from tne 
step toward ousting tn„ 

f In the meantime, Mahuhay! 



By 

At Request of 

Mr. .A.Ian Murray 
fice of War Information 



17a shington , D , C . 
July 23, 19^3 



fiends in the Philippines: 

I en grateful for this opportunity to send my voice across 
the ocean to you, whom for many years I have treasured as true 
friends, Your welfare, and above all, your independence, have 
im® one of the chief objects of my life. There is nothing of 
v.-hich I am more proud than the opportunity which has been given 
to me to participate actively in the movement for Philippine 
independence, in the actual planning of the procedures involved, 
rad in the negotiations by which these plans have become realities 

Independence is not a gift which can be bestowed by one 
people upon another. Whatever contributions may have been made 
by the United States to the attainment of that status by the 
Philippines, it was your own inner urge for liberty, your own 
deathless determination to be free, your own unending resistance 
to tyranny and subjugation, that brought you along the road to 
freedom which in other years had been traveled by the American 
people and other liberty loving peoples who established democ- 
racies in various parts of the world. 

Today, although your islands are overrun with your would-be 
conquerors, the Japanese, your march toward the independence 
already arranged for has not been impeded. Indeed, it has been 
hastened. In his message to you last February, President Quezon 
said: 



"Our independence i s fllTVaD/q 

8 alre ady a reality, since the 
president of the United States hv *m 

a > °y his several acts enumerated 

above- has given recognition ^ a 

fe iw* .o the Philippines as possessed of 

the attributes of full Jiat^n^^«j 

^a,ionnood. The only thinp: lacking is the 

formal establishment of the Philippine Republic. This cannot 
happen until our country i s liberated from the invader - until 
you, my fellow citizens, can exercise your full right to . 
elect the officials of the Government of the Republic." 

I do not know at what precise moment the Japanese war lords... 
alter occupying the Philippines, began to realize that not all 
their brutality and repressive measures could stifle your urge for- 
freedom. At the outset they made contradictory statements on the 
subject, sometimes vague phrases about an unnamed time in the 
future when you might be permitted to be independent under their 
soverignty, at other times descriptions of a new colonial status 
that was to be explained later. 

As time passed, however, even they began to see that it was 
useless to call on you for any kind of cooperation without going 
through the form of pretending to r>lan for independence. When thi 
happened, they began the appoih^ent of committees, councils, and 
other trappings, which are currently employed in attempting to 
deceive you, 

It is impossible for an enslaved peo-ole to extend freedom 
to another peoj^Le. Yet this is the remarkable feat which the 
-Japanese cl^m to be about to perform'. The> Japanese people them- 

V A. Ml 



Ives are not free, but live under the subjugation of their 
x lords. The people of Japan in actuality make up a colony 
.ke any other colony of an empire except that^they live in the 
3 ,tion itself « Their rulers are the military oaste. The people 
hem&elves have no tradition of liberty. The Christian and 
uddhist concept of human brotherhood is a complete mystery to 
,hem. It is clear that such a nation is not capable of extending 
independence to another nation. 

In my work of drafting various proposals for Philippine 
independence over the last decade, including the final Philippic 
In dependence Act which is now in force, I studied continuously 
end intensively the legal aspects of the subject of independence., 

with the slightest knowledge of the subject, it is clear that 
,ny Japanese promise can have no validity. 

. n + + wn™tfl of any democratic aation is that 
The fundament si attribute 01 an v 

, „ a-v,^ -npo-ole of the nation, 
of national sovereignty residing in the people 

*- ^-p thP r)Por)l«- in carrying ouc 
A government is the instrument of the peopl 

their wishes, ^^..^ 

. ' to be valid, must he complete. No grouo 
Thp sovereignty, to oe v c x_ , 

sovereignty over the rest of the nation 
,ithin a. nation can assume nover*-gnt, 

,. olfl . the national boundaries can 
Also, no group or nation *»• 

assume sovereignty- Japanese, 
Sh, hypothetical independence spofcen of b, , 
f , f lt wre to become a re^ty, would call f x 

therefore, ii .1^ t,vex , 



tvc actions 



1 Both of these *o«°» s ErK lra P 08Bltle 

by the Japanese. Botn ox 



^nr them to take, withrm-t- * 

A ° ' h0Ut des ^oying their whole aim, 

The first action i B i*i, 0 + - 

cnet 0i withdrawing their forces, their 

olfioials, and their rai>paaw+ n ^ 

■i il -^-naao,ve.s completely from the Philip- 

£*t, Unless this is acne, your independence is impossible. 
G ,a you imagine, the Japanese voluntarily doing this? I can say 
t0 you that it is indeed true that they will withdraw from the 
Philippines, but th,y will do it only under the compulsion th,t 
v ,ill be brought upon them in the coming days of their unconditionr 
surrender. 

The second action called for by your independence would be 
a condition in which Tokyo withdrew all authority over your 
islands, demanding no tribute from you, extorting no money and 
property. This again is unthinkable as a voluntary action on the 
•:rt of the Japanese,, 

It is unnecessary to go into the legal aspects of this 
Tritended offer of independence. The first moment it is examined, 
it reveals itself as a bluff, a pretense. 

But there is another aspect to this offer. I have said that 
•7,11 the Japanese realized they must try to fool you by attempting 
to enlist to their advantage your urge for freedom. This was the. 
only way that they could hope to soften a little the bitterness 
•'hich you feel toward the people who have despoiled your country. 
There, was still another factor involved. This was the fact that 
, conditions in the Pacific war have undergone a fundamental change, 
is now on the defensive, in all the ,r,p.e of the Pacific. 

t - - * ;< 



, MAKIL4 bp.qa.pcas t 
By 

_HQN.. HAP.B.Y B. HAW ^S 

At Request of 

Mr. Alan Murrey 
Office of War Information 



Washington, D.C. 
July 23, 19^3 



ill 44 * 



fiends in the Philippines: 

I am grateful for this opportunity to send my voice across 
m ocean to you, v,hom for many years I have treasured as true 
fiends. Your welfare, and above all, your independence, have 
one of the chief objects of my life. There is nothing of 
trhioh I am more proud than the opportunity which has been given 
to me to participate actively in the movement for Philippine 
independence, in the actual planning of the procedures involved, 
:id in the negotiations by which these plans have become realities 

Independence is not a gift which" can be bestowed by one 
people upon another. Whatever contributions may have been made 
by the United States to the attainment of that status by the 
Philippines, it was your own inner urge for liberty, your own 
deathless determination to be free, your own unending resistance 
to tyranny and subjugation, that brought you along the road to 
freedom which in other years had been traveled by the American 
people and other liberty loving peoples who established democ- 
racies in various parts of the world. 

Today, although your islands are overrun with your would-be 
conquerors, the Japanese, your march toward the independence 
already arranged for has not been impeded. Indeed, it has been 
hastened. In his message to you last February, President Quezon 



-2- 

"Our independence ls already & ^ m 

President of the United States, by his several acts enumerated 
above, has given recognition to the Philippines as possessed of 
the attributes of fall nationhood. The only thing lacking is the 
formal establishment of the Philippine Republic. This cannot 
happen until our country is liberated from the invader — until 
you, my fellow citizens, can exercise your full right to . 
elect the officials of the Government of the Republic." 

I do not know at what precise moment the Japanese war lords., 
after occupying the Philippines, began to realize that not ail 
their brutality and repressive measures could stifle your urge for 
freedom. At the outset they made contradictory statements on the 
subject, sometimes vague phrases about an unnamed time in the 
future when you might be permitted to be independent under their 
soverignty, at other times descriptions of a new colonial status 
that was to be explained later. 

As time passed, however, even they began to see that it was 
useless to call on you for any kind of cooperation without going 
through the form of pretending to olan for independence. 'Then this 
happened, they began the appointment of committees, councils, and 
other trappings, which are currently employed in attempting to 
deceive you, 

It is .impossible for an enslaved peoiole to extend freedom 
o another people,- Yet this is the remarkable feat which the 
-'•Japanese claim* to be about' to perform. The Japanese people them- 



selves are not free, but l ive under ths subjugation of their 
war lords. The people of Japan in actuality make up a colony 
like any other colony of an empire except that-they live in the 
nation itself. Their rulers are the military oaste. The people 
themselves have no tradition of liberty. The Christian and 
Buddhist concept of human brotherhood is a complete mystery to 
them. It is clear that such a nation is not capable of extendin- 
independence to another nation. 

In my work of drafting various proposals for Philippine 
independence over the last decade, including the final Philips i; <- 

Independence Act which is now in force, I studied continuously 

and intensively the legal aspects of the subject of independence., 

Even with the slightest knowledge of the subject, it is clear thr 

any Japanese promise can have no validity. 

The fundamental attribute of any democratic aation is that 

of national sovereignty residing in the people of the nation. 

A government is th« instrument of the people in carrying out 

their wiahsfl. 

The sovereignty, to be valid, must be complete-. No group 
within, a nation can assume sovereignty over the rest of the nation. 
Also, no group or nation outside the national boundaries can 

,sume sovereignty. 

The hypothetical. Independence spoken of by the Japanese, 
!* therefore, if it ever were to become a reality, would call for 

two actions by the Japanese. Both of these actions are impossible 



for them to take, without 

, wx-Gnout destroying their whole aim, 

The first action i s that of withdrawing their forces, their 
officials, and their representatives completely from the Philip- 
pic*. Unless this is done, your independence is impossible. 
Can you imagine the Japanese voluntarily doing this? I can say 
to you that it is indeed true that they will withdraw from the 
Philippines, but they will do it only under the compulsion th:;t 
will be brought upon them in the coming days of their unconditxon: 
surrender, 

The second action called for by your independence would be 
a condition in which Tokyo withdrew all authority over your 
islands, demanding no tribute from you, extorting no money and 
property. This again is unthinkable as a voluntary action on the 
pert of the Japanese, 

It tfcs unnecessary to go into the legal aspects of this 
pretended offer of independence. The first moment it is examined, 
it reveals itself as a bluff, a pretense. 

But there is another aspect to this offer. I have said that 
e-van the Japanese realized they must try to fool you by attempting 
to enlist to their advantage your urge for freedom. This was the 
only way that they could hope to soften a little the bitterness 
which you feel toward the people who have despoiled your country. 
Thtrre was still another factor involved. This was the fact that 
Conditions in the Pacific war have undergone a fundamental change. 



Japan is now on the defensive, in- all the areas of the Pacific. 



-5- 



The offensive hpq ho,^ * i 

naf been taken by the WW Nations. 

'-•Pan is desperately trying to hold the territories which 

she has occur>ierl t>~ ^ 

Piea. To do so, it is vital for fae* to keep the 

people in those tt-rr>itnr.^ * 

x e crritoriHs frora k now i n g how conditions have 

changed. That is why you are not allowed to hear the truth, and 
that is why feverish efforts are made to lull you into a feeling 
that your status will be made better under Japan at some day in 
the future. 

So I say to you, my friends of the Philippines, that you 
should treat such tactics on the part of Japan with the contempt 
they deserve. The truth is that your independence is on the way, 
and also that your release from the Japanese clutch on your 
throats is also on the way. My heart goes out to you in these 
days and months of your tribulation. Your reward will come as 
surely as the tide flows in. 



k i 

id 



HON . HARRY B. KA^ S 

At Request of 

Hr. Alan Murrey 
Office of War Information 



Washington, D.C. 



July 23, 19^3 



-lends in the Philippines : 

I m grateful for this opportunity to send my voice across 
m ocean to you, whom for many years I have treasured as true 
rriends. Your welfare, and above all, your independence, have 
b&m one of the chief objects of my life. There is nothing of 
::ich I am more proud than the opportunity which has been given 
:: me. to participate actively in the movement for Philippine 
i dependence, in the actual planning of the procedures involved, 
in the negotiations by which these plans have become realitie 
Independence is not a gift which" can be bestowed by one 
; eople upon another. Whatever contributions may have been made 

the United States to the attainment of that status by the 
^Philippines, it was your own inner urge for liberty, your own 
d-athless determination to be free, your own unending resistance 
to tyranny and subjugation, that brought you along the road to 
freedom which in other years had been traveled by the American 
~eople and other liberty loving peoples who established democ- 
racies in various parts of the world. 

Today, although your islands are overrun with your would-be 
conquerors, the Japanese, your march toward the independence 

already arranged for has not been impeded. Indeed, it has been 
j " ' ' ' 

hastened. In his message to you last February, President Quezon 



-2- 

"Our independence i a »<i v, , 

■ iuence is already a reality, since the 

president of the United ?k+ 

- unixea States, by his several acts enumerated 

aDuve. has given recognition to the Philippines as possessed of 
the attributes of fall nationhood. The only thing lacking is the 
formal establishment of the Philippine Republic. This cannot 
happen until our country i s liberated from the invader — until 
you, my fellow citizens, can exercise your full right to o\ . 
elect the officials of the Government of the Republic." 

I do not know at what precise moment the Japanese war lords,, 
after occupying the Philippines, began to realize that not all 
their brutality and repressive measures could stifle your urge fo: 
freedom. At the outset they made contradictory statements on the 
subject, sometimes vague phrases about an unnamed time in the 
future when you might be permitted to be independent under their 
soverignty, at other times descriptions of a new colonial status 
that was to be explained later. 

As time passed, however, even they began to see that it was 
useless to call on you for any kind of cooperation without going 
through the form of pretending to olan for independence, '."hen this 
happened, they began the appointment of committees, councils, and 
other trappings, which are currently employed in attempting to 
Receive you. 

It is impossible for an enslaved people to extend freedom 
to another people. Yet this is the remarkable feat which the 
Japanese claim to be about to perform. The Japanese people them- 



selves are not free hut 

' bUt 11 ve un *er ths subjugation of their 

nar lords. The people of Japan in actuality make up a colony 
like any other colony of an * mm except that^they live in the 
nation itself . Their rulers are the military caste. The people ■ 
themselves have no tradition of liberty. The Christian and 
Buddhist .concept of human brotherhood is a complete mystery to 
them. It is clear that such a nation is not capable of extending 
independence to another nation. 

In my work of drafting various proposals for Philippine 
independence over the last decade, including the final Philippine 

Independence Act which is now in force, I studied continuously 

and intensively the legal aspects of the subject of independence,, 

Even with the slightest knowledge of the subject, it is clear that 

any Japanese promise can have no validity. 

The fundamental attribute of any democratic aation is that 

of national sovereignty residing in the people of the nation. 

A government is the Instrument of the people in carrying out 

their wishes* 

The sovereignty, to be valid, must be complete. No group 
within a nation can assume sovereignty over the rest of the nation. 
■O-^o, no group or nation ouutside the national boundaries can 

f assume sovereignty. 

The hypothetical independence spoken of by the Japanese > 
therefore, if it ever were -to become a reality, would call for 
two actions by the Japanese. Both of these actions are impossible 



for them to take, without a ^+ 

, wx-cnout destroying their whole aim, 

The first potion -i e +-u * 

ftQW*o*j is that of withdrawing their forces, their 

otmm-B, and their representatives completely from the Philip- 
pic Unless this is done, your independence is impossible. 
Cai you imagine the Japanese voluntarily doing this? I can say 
to you that it is indeed true that they will withdraw from the 
Philippines, hut they will do it only under the compulsion that 
will be brought upon them in the coming days of their unconditional 
surrender. 

The second action called for by your independence would be 
a oondition in which Tokyo withdrew all authority over your 
islands, demanding no tribute from you, extorting no money and 
property. This again is unthinkable as a voluntary action on the 
pert of the Japanese, 

It its unnecessary to go into the legal aspects of this 
pretended offer of independence. The first moment it is examined, 
it reveals itself as a bluff, a pretense. 

But there is another aspect to this offer. I have said that 
•v.'ii the Japanese realized they must try to fool you by attempting 
to enlist to their advantage your urge for freedom.. This was the 
only way that they could hope to soften a little the bitterness 
v/hicb, you feel toward the people who have despoiled your country. 

-re was still anoth-r factor involved. This was the fact that 
conditions in the Pacific war have undergone a fundamental chenge. 
is now on the defensive, in all the areas of the Pacific. 



The offensive has been taken by the United Nations. 

Japan is desperately trying to hold the territories which 
she has occupied. To do so, it is vital for her to keep the 
people in those territories from knowing how conditions have 
changed. That is why you are not allowed to hear the truth, and 
that is why feverish efforts are made to lull you into a feeling 
that your status will be made better under Japan at some day in 
the future. 

So I say to you, my friends of the Philippines, that you 
should treat such tactics on the part of Japan with the contempt 
they deserve. The truth is that your independence is on the way, 
e.nd also that your release from the Japanese clutch on your 
throats is also on the way. My heart goes out to you. in these 
days and months of your tribulation. Your reward will come as 
surely as the tide flows in. 



The United States Office of War I nformation 

Presents 

THE PHILIPPINE HOUR 



Spot 1 

, M ld STAR SPANGLED BANNER (FULL CHORUS) 

HIESTAND* This is the United States of America, calling the 
people of the Philippines 

MUSIC! PHILIPPINE NATIONAL ANTHEM 

i;C iMYRSf This is the Philippine Hour.. Tonight we record 
with sadness and respect, the passing og the 
greatest Filipino of this century. Manuel L. 
Quezon, President of the Philippines, has been 
added to the rosier of Filipino heroes who died in 
the service of their people. He now belongs to 
history' s pages. We dedicate our broadcast to 

Manuel Quezon's memory and to the inspiration 

he has created for his country's future. 



msic: 



PHILIPPINES MY PHILIPPINES 



Spot 2 
Page 1 



Manuel Luis Quezon, President of the Philippines, 
died yesterday at Saranac Lake, New York, after 
a long illness. He would have been 66 years old 
on August 19th. At his deathbed were Mrs. Quezon 
and their three children. 

Upon the death of President Quezon, his old 
friend and collaborator, Vice President Sergio 
Osmena, succeeded to the Presidency of the Philippines. 
This succession is in accordance with the law enacted 
by Congress last year and also with the will of the 
Filipino people expressed in the last popular 
election in the Philippines which was held in 194-1. 

Manuel Quezon was born in Baler, Tayabas, 1878, 
the son of Lucio Quezon, of Manila, and Maria 
Delores Molina , of Baler. He attended the parish 
schoibl in Baler, and la&er San Juan de Letran College 
in Manila, where he obtained his bachelor of arts 
degree with high honors. Then he took up law at 
the University of Santo Tomas, where he was a 
classmate and roommate of 6ergio Osmena. 

Before he could finsh his law course, the 
Filipino revolution against Spain broke out and 
Mr. Quezon joined the revolutionary army under 
General Mascardo. He remained through the war 
against Spain arid the subsequent war against the 
United States, serving on Bataan, where 40 years 
later Filipino soldiers, with their American 
comrades, fought against the Japanese invaders. 

After taking the oath of allegiance to the 
United States, he resumed his law course at Santo 
TonA8 , Following graduation, he returned to Tayabas, 
v ,nere-he developed a lucrative law practice, became 
' interested in politics and won. many friends among 
. the American administrators of the province. Soon 
* was appointed provincial fiscal in Mindoro , and 

^ths later provincial fiscal in hi, own provxnce. 



six mc 



Spot 2 
Page 2 

HIESTANDj Prom 

0n Mr * Quezon rose rapidly on the 

Filipino "noii + n* -i 

* 1T,lcai scene. He bacame provincial 

governor of Tp+i^o * , . 

iatabas, and his administration was 

highly commended by the American authorities. • 
In 1907 he was elected a delegate to the first 
Philippine Assembly. His friend, Mr. Asmena, 
became the speaker of this national legislature, 
and Mr. Quezon was majority floor leader. In 1909 
he was sent to Washington as Philippine Resident 
Commissioner. 

In Congress he became the voice of the Filipino 
aspiration for an independent nationhood. He not 
only campaigned for Philippine independence in 

Congress but took the fight to the American people. 
His labor resulted in a new organic act for the 
Philippines, known as the Jones Law, whereby the 
Filipino people obtained almost complete local 
autonomy. 

In 1916 kr. Quezon returned to Manila, where 
he was hailed as the new leader of the Filipino 
people. He was subsequently elected president of 
the newly-created Philippine Senate. He remained in 
that ppsition until in 1935 he was elected President 
of the Philippines under the Philippine Independence 
Act of 1934, known as the Tydings-McDuff ie Lay. In 
1941 he was re-elected President of the Philippines 
and took his oath of office in the island fortress of 
Corregidor. On President Roosevelt's invitation he 
went to the United States in 1942 and set up the 
Philippine government there. 

From 1922 until his death President Quezon was 
the unquestioned leader of the Filipino people. He 
won every election in which he was a candidate. 



Spot 2 
Page 3 



President rvp ^ 

iaeat of the Philippine Senate and as 

President of +hP p, n • • 

ne Philippines, he was beset by 

constant in ness and tQok ^ ^ ^ political 
battles. i n the UnitQd ^ of ^ 

p hili P p ine campaign, added to his earlier illnesses, 
began to tell and finally, yesterday, August 1st, 
death came to him at Saranac Lake, New York 
PHILIPPINES MY PHILIPPINES 



Spot 3 
Page 1 

Vffil ° e an a PP re ciation of the personal qualities 
of Manuel Quezon, the P h iii ppine Hour beings a 

tribute from nno r.-p u* 

. -ue oi nis countrymen, a newspaperman 

who knew the president well, James G. Wingo. 
Mr. Wingo » 

Good evening, .... . 

The star that rose in the Eacific coast town of 
Baler sixty-six years ago and had shone on the 
Philippine national firmament for three generations 
of the most eventful decades of Filipino life burned 
out yesterday.. Manuel Luis Quezon is dead. But 
the light of his star will contdinue to illumine 
hi£ people for conntless yeatfa to come. 

For the influence of men such as he does not end 
with their death. Jose Rizal was one of these men. 
The ppirit of Rizal has not ceased to guide the 
Filipino people in their march toward freedom and 
independence. He has remained an inspiration to 

f 1 r 

hip people* 

Manuel Quezon now takes his place among Rizal 
and the other truly Filipino heroes. No more apt 
tiile has been given President Quezon than that of 
Father of his country. No man has done more to 
unify his people and to prepare them for their 
destiny as an independent nation. No man has 
accomplished more for the attainment of a true and 
lasting Philippine Independence. 

But even these facts, I know, will not comfort 
you. The death of President Quezon at any time 
would have been a blow to the nation, His death, 
coming as it did at this time, makes the blow more 
poignant. You know that he will not awaken to see 
the greAt day for which he had devoted his life, 
his last measure of energy. As many other world 
he roes before him, death has denied him the supreme 
fruit ofhis labors and deeds. 



Spot 3 
Page 2 

Same for- 

mis poignant fact, every Filipino can 
take consolation that Manuel Quezon has lived a 

m fruitful life in the service of his country. 

was b0 ^n early enough to dutifully take his post 
in the revolutionary army against Spanish tyranny, 
"thus doing his part to pave the way for the reali- 
zation of the dream of his boyhood hero, Jose Rizal. 
With the same purpose in his mind — the establish- 
ment of an independent Philippine republic — he 
fought the American forces until he had been convin- 
ced that the American objective in the occupation 
of the Philippines was to prepare the Filipinos for 
self-government. He took the oath of allegiance 
to the American flag; he kept that oath until his 
death. 

Endowed with - a brilliant mind and a magnetic 
personality, he steadily rose in political prestige 
and in the affection of his people. In turn he 
used the power and influence he had gained in the 
promotion of the welfare of the Filipino people and 
toward the realization of their national indepen- 
dence. He bacano so well known throughout the world 
for his accomplishments as a nationalist leader 
that his qualities and achievements as a public 
servant have -been overshadowed. But the Filipinos 
so greatly appreciated what he had accomplished for 
the promotion of iihe health, education and pros- 
perity of his people that in 1935 they elected him 
their first President. And before the Japanese 
invasion, from north of Aparri to south of Zamboanga, 
one could see the living monuments of his progressive 
and successful administration. 

In 1941 he felt that he needed a rest from public 
office, but upon the insistent demand of the people, 
he consented to continue to serve, although he knew 
he was very sick. 



Spot 3 

He made this * an4 . 

t . ons ^ S ° ecis ^n iri thQ fme Qf Qtrong Qb . ec- 
- ns from his family. With his greit friend and 
xaxthful collaborator aga . n ag Ms running 

PGSident ^ Ue20n was reelected. His second 

inauguration was punctuated with bombs and shells. 
Ho faciei 1 o-p+ t~ 

U J -Panese-si G £Gd Manila for Corregidor. 

When the fall 0 f the Philippines appeared 

inevitable, he left toe country for the United 

States to maintain the continuity of his government 

To leave or not to leave the Philippines, was, 

according to him, the hardest dicision he- had ever 

made in his life. _ Later events proved that the 

dynamic leader of the Filipino made the right 

decision.. 

For in America he was hailed as the gallant 
leader of a gallant people. He became the shining 
symbol of Filipino resistance against Japanese 
aggression. Bis leadership was regarded by the 
United States government so essential to the 
prosecution of the war against Japan that Congress 
enacted a resolution permitting his continuance in 
office beyond the term specified by the Philippine 
constitution. 

In America, despite his worsening health, he 
also succeeded in completing his work .for the 
foundation of an independent Philippine republic. 
In June, 1942, just a few weeks after his arrival 
in Washington, President Quezon, on behalf of the 
people of the Philippines, signed his name to the 
United Nations agreement. Thus his country became 
a full-fledged member of the United Nations, which 
are now victorious on all war fronts. 

MaMlys through his efforst, Congress last June 
made it more definite than ever that American . 
policy is to establish an independent Philippine 



i 



Spot 3 
Pag§ 4 



republic upon the expulsion of the Japanese from 
the Philippi nes% Mainly through. President Quezon's 
efforst also 3 Congress created the Filipino 
Rehabilitation Commission, which is calculated to 
• place the Philippines on a sound economic basis, 
in order that the independence to be granted the 
Philippines will be true and lasting. 

President Quezon died as he would have wished, 
with his boots on as the national leader and the 
commander-in-chief of his fighting people. But his 
work was done. He himself had told you that he 
could see the dawn of victory. And I am sure that 
his last thoughts were of you, his -loyal people, 
and your liberation. 

Just before I dame to Australia, President 
Quezon called for me and I went to see him in 
Miami Beach, Florida, where he was recuperating 
for the winter. I never saw a man who was So 
determined to live to see his dream come true. 
When I started to take my leave, I said to him, 
n Mr . President, this is goodbye." He snapped 
back, "Goodbye, hell, I'll see you in Manila." 

•m-ri +h-t we will not see the 
Providence has willed that wc wi 

- ^ llt we know that his spirit 

great man in Manila, 3ut we mi 

o« -it will be so long as there is 
will be there, as it wnx 

s Filipino nation. No man has loft , stronger im- 
print of his wiU, determination and personality 
upon the Philippines than Manuel Quezon. As he 
fought to the last measure of devotion for the 
fr , d omof his country, so yoi, all of you who 
be lievod in the ideals and prinoiples whioh he 
uph eld Will also fight on. Pilipino leadershrp 
Z fallen upon another groat Pilipino, Serg.o 

. the Filipino people will earry 
esmena. Under f ree , P happy and 



on 



pr 

Manue- . 
IXC, INTERLUDE 




Lead Spot 4 

m tUlU The death of President Quezon has profoundly affected 

the leading American and Filipino statesmen. President 
Roosevelt declared* 

"President Quezon died without seeing the cause 
of Philippne Independence fully realized. His death 
came at a time when the nation ho loved and for whose 
welfare he labored for many years is in the hands of 
the Japanese invader. He died, however, in full con- 
fidence that eighteen million Filipinos of his home- 
land will bo freed from foreign domination and that, 
ik with the pledged assistance of the United States, 
they will become a self-governing people. 

"We shall always remember President Quezon with 
admiration and affection. He will be remembered by 
his people with the respect and veneration that we 
have for the name of George Washington." 

General MacArthur said: "Presidant Quezon's death 
will be a great shock to the people of the Philippines 
who so keenly anticipated his return to Manila. He 
was the very apotheosis of the aspirations of the 
Filipinos for the higher tilings of life. A great 
liberal, his fame and glory will increase as his . ■ . 
policies gradually approach fruition. I mourn him." 



Pft 0 MYDEN' S STATEMENT (RECORDED) ggg } 

tfOAKDi Dr. Joseph R. Hayden is W ith us in the studio tonight. 

Dr. Hayden, as many of our listeners know, was Vide- 
Governor General, and at one time acting Governor- 
General of the Philippines. He has. memories of a long 
and deep friendship with President Quezon, and speaks 
of this remembrance: Dr. Hayden? 

NOW HE BELONGS TO THE AGE Si This statement, made upon 
the death of Abraham Lincoln is equally true of Manuel 
L. Quezon. Like Lincoln's, Quezon's name will be 
immortal among men of every race and every clime who 
love liberty and are willing to die for it. There are 
many reasons why Quezon will hold a perrnan nt place in 
3the history of the Philippines and of the world. They 
may be summed up by the statement that in our times no 
man has been a wiser statesman, a more courageous and 
successful national leader, a purer patriot. 

America will never forget that when the terrible 
moment of dicisiin came Quezon threw in the lot ofhis 
country with the United States and its allies in their 
struggle tp prevent liberty and democracy from • 
perishing from the face of the earth. As early as 
January, 1941, Quezon had officially assured America, 
"on behalf of the Commonwealth that the entire Philippines 
- its manpower and material resources - were at the 
disposal of th/united States in the present emergency." 
When the fateful hour struck Quezon stood fast and to 
the last full measure of blood and suffering the 
Filipino people have made good the pledge of loyalty 
which he uttered on their behalf. 

in that same momentous address to the Philippine 
Assembly, Quezon said, "Trusting in divine Providence, 
_ t mD ve forward firmly and courageously to achieve 

„ i' Q Wi ideal - the establishment of the 
u r long-chenshed idcax 

• , R^ublic - and to secure for our people 
Philippine Repuoxic 



we mus' 
our 




Spot 4 
Pago 2 

ana fteeedom under the shelter of 



ates, although his doctors told him 
o risk of his life j the President 



e great national goals* 



' iy congressional and Residential actions marked 
the success which crowned his efforts. 

The Filipino-sw will never bo swerved from the 
course in which he led them and which they have 
sanctified with their blood. And America will never 
forget their loyalty and that of their great leader. 
To the end he kept the faith with his own beloved 
people and with America. 

As truly as any soldier who died on Bataan, Quezon 
gave his life for his country. 



i 



Add Sppt 4 
Pago 1 



m Lit, v.- j. 

President Qn > i 

«ue 2 on s death has profoundly effected 

the leading American and Fiiip ino statesmen. Vice- 

President Osmena 

wim.) who automatically becomes President 

of the S>hilipp iaes , said j (Quote) "It is with a deep 
sense of sorrow and personal loss that I must give 
the sad news of the passing away of President Quezon 
of the Philippines. He died at Saranac Lake, New 
York, this morning with Mr. Quegon and his three 
children at his bedside. 

"President Quezon's death is a great loas to the 
freedom-loving world. No champion of liverty fought 
for such a noble cause with more determination and 
against greater odds. Kis whole life was dedicatdd 
to the achievement of his rjeople's freedom and it is 
one of the sad paradoxes of fate that with the fordes 
of. victory fast approaching the Philippines he should 
pass away now and be deprived of seeing the culmination 
of his labors - the freedom of his people. 

"To the Filipinos, President Quezon's demise is 
a severe blow. No man has recieved mroo tokens of a 
people's love and confidence than did Lanuel Quezon 
at the hands of the Filipino people. His death will 
be taken in the Philippines as another terrible ordeal 
. visited upon .a nation already so sorely tried by 
brutal invasion,-.and oily the Filipino courage and 

> + thP no* 1 ' grant sorrow of so 
fortitude can oiimt- one po-^--" 

irreparable a loss. 

~ a'4oc! mv dear beloved friend. Our 
"Manuel Quezon, was my aoai 

* Ja +h- test of all political differ- 
friendship has stood the t-s-o 

• Mthole ond unimpaired. Mjz 
ences and has remained whole ...n . 

&tt — * - U was ,00** in ^ — ~ - 

^ has f th «• ™ « 

tt 0 h „o P one to his reward as a valiant 
affection. He ha^ g^u^ 

. H llvP forever In the hearts ofhip People 
leader who wi\l 101 



KLEIMANi 



Acid Spot 4 
Page 2 



Lssed 



)ines 



ts memory will help me %Q fa(JQ thQ tasks ^ lie 
shead wi"th th 

3 same Patriotism with which he led us 
in our fio-ht -pr 

° ior ireedom, and with the same devotion 
vO the masspQ ^-p ^ 

& 0f our People which has characters 

MB administration as President of the Philipp: 
and has been his form of conduct in all his public 
life." (unquote) 

Senator Tydings of Maryland, author of the 
Tydings-McDuffie Independence Law, and a long-time 

■ advocate of Philippine independence, who is now 
Chairman of the Philippine .Rehabilitation Commission, 
Said, (Quote) -The Filipino people have lost a gseat 
leader. I have lost a wise and understanding friend. 
Those of us who hold the future welfare of the Filipino 
people at heart take renewed courage from the life of 
Manuel Quezon. In his name we dedicate ourselves to 
the liberation of him homeland and the the establish- 
ment of a free and independent Philippine nation. 
In death, as in life, the inspiration of this groat- 
souled Filipino patriot will march with us on the 
road to victory." (UNquote) 

Paul V. McNutt, Chairman of the War Manpower 
Commission and former High Commissioner to the 

• Philippines, said: (Quote) "President Quezon' s death 
is -j. great - loss to. the Allied cause and to his own 
people of whom he was the unquestioned leader. He 
gave his life for those things in which he believed. 
Those of us who know him have a dpep senso of personal 
bereavement and '.feel that his place cannot be filled. 
He was one of the most colorful figures on the 
international scene and played a most important part. 
He will go down in history as one of the Philippines 
immortals." | (Unquote) 



MUSIC: 



KATKINS : 



SANCTUS m 



MoEITYRE : 



HESTAND: 



aoINTYRS : 



Spot No. 6 
P«ge 1 . 



- iUlll PPine kour presents next the news of the 

a y • Htjre are th« i 

J-atest dispatches dealing with 

-Allied proe-r>ooo ^ 

Progress m the Pacific: 

Today t s communique from ueneral iWrthur's 
headquarters reports a continued expansion of our 
position on the Yogelkop peninsula in Western New 
Guinea. Following Sunday's landings in the S cnsap or 
area our forces have fanned out, and we now control 
ten miles of this coast line, including the village of 
S„nsa P or itself, b Only eight. Japanese patrols 
have been encountered. Air patrols swept coastal 
sectors in Go el v ink Boy and strafed a village in the 
Ivlupia -Elands, 115 miles north of M&nokwari , 

Further down the coast - in the ^itape-Wewak 
sector - our ground forces have crossed the lower 
Drinimour ^iver on a two-and-a-half mile front, and 
are driving eastward through the jungle. The 
communique also reports an engagement Friday night 
between Japanese and American forces in the Afua 
sector, with an additional 409 counted enemy dead, 
bringing the total to 3,368. Our air units dropped 
thirty-five -'tons of explosives on rear areas, 
bombing troop . concentrations and supply lines as far 
east as the ^epik river. 

Ameriocn'-and New Zealand heavy bombers fanned 
out in a widS arc to bomb airfields and coastal 
shipping. -11 the way from the 1'alaud Islands, less 
than BOO miles south' of Bavao , to ^lores in the 
Netherlands mdias. Fires at -aomore airdrome were 
visible ffrty miles away. Our planes sank a five- 
thousand-ten trrnsport off Amboina, a freighter and 
two coastal vessels off Halmahera and another coastal 
vassal in the Ta laud Islands. 



HIE STAND : 



MoINTYRS : 



HIE STAND: 



MoINTYRE : 



Spot No. 6 
Pago 2. 

T oday' s Pacific fleet communique from Pearl 
Harbor announces that all organized Japanese 
resistance on Tinian i sl , <nd has oa ased. The Second 
ond fourth Marine divisions are continuing to clean 
out isolated pockets of Japanese trapped along the 
beaches and cliffs at the southern end of the 
island. 

On ^uam marines and army troops have occupied 
four more towns, driving forward as much as three 
miles in some sectors. Carrier aircraft from the 
task force operating with the land units are 
helping wipe, out Japanese concentrations with bombs 
and rocket fire. Mopping -up operations have been 
completed on the Orote peninsula. 

In the -Burma theater it appears that the 
Japanese 33rd Division, will be trapped between two 
pursuing Allied forces. Meanwhile, troops 
operating against the supply line of the Japanese 
retreating down the ^iddim road, have struck far 
in the enemy rear and threaten to cut their main 
escape route. 

Today's communique from the Chungking high 
command reports that the kinase, ringing the outer 
defenses -cf -Kengyang, have halted the Japanese 
advance. Chinese driving east and west of the 
C^ton-Hankow' railroad have made some gains, while 
Japanese attacks toward T.yakou have been repulsed. 
Along both tides of the rail link from ^hangsha to 
Loiyang fitting rages unabated but without 
decisive results. 



MUSIC: 
UATKINS: 



Symphonic Tha 



Spot No. 7 

me 



"V* 

° U apQ list '3ning to tha Philippine Hour, 
lean broadcast from Australia, the 
headquarters of General MacArthur. Continuing 
with our press reports, here are today's 
bulletins from European and American sources: 



(Insert S pot 8 - European News - Hi 



iiiestand & Mclntyre) 



HI E STAND : 



McINTYRS : 



HBSTAND : 



MoHTTYBS: 



Spot No. 8 
Page 1. 

^OSCOW di q nQ + „i, 

patGilQS report the oapture yesterday 
° f K£mnas > Ga Pital of Lithuania. With the fall of 

aunas, many more men and armored units will be 
released to swell the big Russian Army whioh is 
already threatening to sweep over the East Prussian 
frontier up to the Baltic. 

On the central Polish front, the Battle for 
Warsaw has begun. I n a communique issued late 
yesterday, Moscow announced that Russian and Polish 
troops, covered by hundreds of aircraft, launched 
4n attack on Praga, Praga, is Warsaw's chief 
industrial suburb and is situated on the eastern side 
of the v istula River. Russian troops fighting in 
Praga can hear the sound of explosions across the 
river as German demolition squads put the battered 
Polish capital through its final agony. Russian 
aviators report that the Nazis are blowing up and 
burning Warsaw' s buildings. 

According 'to a report received by the Polish 
Government in -"ondon, all German officials and their 
ftmilies have left Warsaw, with only the Gestapo 
and the military remaining. The rumble of Russian 
guns is said to be heard all over the city. 
Isolated air battles are being watched by thousands 
of Polish people in the streets. The German News 
Agency admitted" yesterday that strong Russian armored 
forces were closing in on the city's defense lines. 

At the southern end of the P&lish front, the 
Russians south of Przemysl are pushing a spearhead 
into the Carpathian mountains. r %is new advance is 
now threatening to cut off the road and railway 
junction of Sambor, an important oil center and a 
vital railway junction. 



HcHTYR3 ; 
(contd. ) 



HIESTAND: 



MoINTYRS : 



HKSTAND: 



Spot No, 8 
Page 2. 

SQ P ° ints ^ *n within 30 to 40 miles of 
Czechoslovakia's mountain border. The German 

©ws Agency states that the Russians are making 
very strong efforts to push through passes leading 
to Hungary. 

Allied headquarters in France yesterday 
reported that American armored columns rapidly pushed 
ahead in the we stern sector of the Allied offensive 
in Normandy. Ten miles south of Avranches, the 
Americans have already crossed the Selune river. 
I'hey have also captured two key dams southeast of 
■Kicey , and high land near Vezine. Other American 
units meanwhile, have taken Brecoy, eight miles 
inland from Avranches and have succeeded in reaching 
the See river in this area. dispatches report that 
the American break-through to the S 6 lune River is 
opening up the door out of Normandy. It is also 
outflanking a strong natural system of hill and 
river lines on which the Germans might have made 
a stand . 

Tne British advance south of °aumont has 
• progressed nearly ten miles since Monday. The head 
of the British bulge is now across the Soulevre *iver 
for a' width of almost half a mile. A correspondent 
reports thers was .little enemy resistance when the 
British entered Lebeny Booage and those forces were 
rapidly driven out. 

Forced "out into the open as a result of the 
Allied , dvanc , 3S in iWandy, Gorman motorized transport 
yesterday ran the gauntlet of AlMed air superiority. 
0n^ Hoyal -ir *oroe fighter-bomber squadron created 
navoc in tne Villers Booage, Yire and Harcourt area, 
littexing the roadside with burning, damaged vehicles. 



HIE STAND : 
(contd. ) 



McINTYHE : 



EI3 STAND : 



One 



Spot No. 8 
Page 3. 



squadron of SnitfM ^ « 
. , Pitfires dived to. inspect a lone 

! * pamy hiaa ™ ***** w hen tte last 

Spitfire. pulled 



and 34 others 



aw &y, 11 vehicles had been destroyed 
were left burning. 

Allied headquarters in Italy state that at least 
50,000 GflTOioro « 

113 arQ now massed on a wide semi-circular 

front before Florence and are counter-attacking 

ieroe..y. Picked Nazi parachute troopers and Panzer 
Grenadiers are said to have been posted at the 
immediate approaches to JTlorence from the south, 
forming an iron ring around the city. The Germans, 
despite the infiltrations by the Indians and New 
Zealanders, still strongly hold the hill line 
guarding the city. South African troops, east of the 
Home -Florence highway, have reached the Grave River, 
but the Germans are strongly defending the three river 
crossings. Southwest of Florence, heavy fighting 
still continues for the possession of high ground. 

Swedish dispatches state that President %ti 
yesterday resigned the Presidency of ^inland and 
Marshal xdannerheim has been appointed President. 
These dispatches state that Marshal Mannerbeim was 
appoint ed by decree and was not elected, as is customer.. 




HIS STAND: 



Spot No. 9 

-•••and that concludes the complete edition of 
world news. Thft Ph , 14 

e ^ilippine Hour will present 
a condensed vp^,-^ - ^ 

lon of this same information in 

" ^ ~ ts - in keeping with the 

dedicatory sni-M-h 

y spirit of our program tonight, here 

is the "Kvri^ Rio** « ^ 

yrie iSi.©ison M from Mozart 



MUSIO: KYRIE SLEISON 



M % 



1 



WATKINS : 



AYE: 



Spot No. 10 

^ Q hlllppine Hour continues tonight's press 
coverage with th« 

the lm Portant features of the news 

*** at dotation speed: 

° anS eXtend control over Vogelkop peninsula 
^ew Guinea ///// 

Japanese resistance ceases on Tinian . 

^i&erican f o-poq o ^ n 

° es on Uua m occupy four more towns ///// 

mese halt Japanese advanoe toward Hengyang /// 
Japanese vice-Admiral Oka relieved of diuties /// 
Asians capture Kaunas, Lithuania. Battle for 
Warsaw begins - Russians eight miles from East 
Prussia - 40 miles from Czechoslovakia border ///// 
•Americans advance into Brittany ////// 



imarn ■ s POt No. 11 

HIESTMD: 



Tills i s the Phil • 
«"W*Ul to th« „ 1PPln9 HuUr ' a 

t t9 »h»i . th ° f the late Sresident of 

; : lllpplns — * raaarl0 «. 

Marquardt i A 

' ^ Eclated with the journalism 
wat had deoiotpri + u 

epioted the growth and approach to 
nationhood of thp dv. • -, . 

^Hippines under that leader- 

P ' brin§S US * P^ture of Manuel Quezon, and 

^ PUrP ° Se hQ has ^-athed to his country. 
Mr. iWquardt: 



Spot No. 13 

fiJSlC: • CREATION mm 

-JATKINS: w 

** e return to +h 
nf > .. . , ™ e new s...with a short summary 

of today's dispatcher 

. . ■ ^cnes, presented for those who are 

-Listening under aiffi 

^niicult conditions. 

(Insert Snnt n a tst 

POt 14 ' News Summery - Mclntyre & Aye) 



AYE* 



Spot No. 14 

AYE: p Page 1 

•'resident Manuel T m 
at Saranae " L ° qUG20n died yesterday morning 

sworn C . ^ York - Vice-President Osmena was 

M ; 18 succe ssor. President Roosevelt, General 

*»c«« i r thur , pp e s id 

» . ' Gnt 0sm erta and many other prominent 

Americans and P iliT3lnoe 

. t ipinos ^id high tribute to the Presideni 

UeZ ° n 8 Statesm ^ship, courage and leadership. 
MCINTYREj In 

° tUPn American control has been 

extended along a ten mile stretch of coast around the 
village of Sansapo*. Air strikes in tMs area lmluded 
a raid on the M,,pi a Islands. • 

In the Aitape-Wawak sector American forces are 
living eastward through the jungle after crossing the 
Drinimour River." Bombers dropped thirty-five tons of 
bombs on enemy concentrations in this area. 

In other raids, airfields were pounded at Floras 
Island and shipping was hit off Amboina, Halmahera and 
in the T a laud Islands. 

On Tinian all organized en ./ resistance has been ended 
and Marines continue mopping up operations. 

MCBTTYRE i Four more towns have been occupied on Guam and the 

Qi»otG peninsula has been cleared of Japanese troops. 

' The' Japanese 33rd Division, trying to fight its way 
out of B u rma ^ appears to be trapped and the main escape 
route of another enemy force, retreating down Tiddim 
Road, is threatened. 

NClNTYREs The Chinese defenders of Hengyang have halted the 

Japanese advance. Fighting for control of the Hankow- 
Canton railroad continued with Chinese forces making 
some local gains. 



MCINTYREi 



AYR 5 



Spot No. 14 

^ Bombers 0 f th . PagC " 2 

a submarine at H ° ° UrtGGnth »** **ee probably sank 

ongkong and bombed railyards at Wuchang. 
MCINTYRE: Ra dio T ok vo a 

A d m^l Oka f " * * ^ - • 

' f ° rm0r ° hi ^ <* the Na val Affairs Bureau. 

AYE* President Roosevelt h- ~ 

vclt ' has nominated Lieutenant General 
Joseph Stillwoll to *w 

A t0 thG r ank of F u li General. 

MCINTYREs Marshal Stalin ™« + ■ 

taxin yesterday announced the capture of 

Kaunas - capital of Lithuania. m the Suwalki triangle 
other Russian forces are now within eight miles of the 
old East Prussia border. 



saw 



m ° n the centr al Polish front, the battle for Wars 

has begun. ,i u ssian and Polish troops - covered by 
hundreds of air-craft yesterday launched an attack on 
Praga - Warsaw's industrial suburb. Nazi officials 
and their families have already left the P 0 lish capital 
whose buildings are now being blown up or burned by 
remaining G G stapo and German military units. 

MCINTYRE t In southwestern Poland, the Russians are pushing a 

strong spearhead into the Carpathian mountains. They 
are now within 40 miles of Czechoslovakia's mountain 
border and driving for passes leading to H u ngary. 



x4 



nil 



The Americans on the Western sector of the Normandy 
front are now ten miles south of A v ranches and are driving 
into the Brittany area of France. They have captured 
two key dams and have already crossed the S e lune river. 
Since M 0 nday, the British advance south of Caumont has 
progressed nearly ten miles. The German High Command has 
admitted that the British and American offensive has 
"engulfed the whole Normandy front." 

The Germans in Italy have massed 50,000 troops on a 

V 

. i v before Florence and aro counter-attacking 

wide scmi-circi. - uoxuj. 

fiercely, Indian, South African and New Zealand troops 
are slowly advancing however 



MUSIC : 
HIESTAND : 



^10 POR STR1K0S 



Spot No. 15 



LTJSIC: 



(°ver musio) . n A 

ana so, tonight's dedication ends, 

ana the Phili • 

iPPine Hour for August 2nd, 1944 has 
covered for its n a 

-Listeners the momentous events of 

the day j Ust 

^ sea * w e leave you with the 

deathless words r»-p 

r&S of ^ 1Z ^ as President Quezon 

would have wished: 

■Farewell -r* m i, 

dCar J *therland, clime of the sun caressed, 

^arl of the Orient Seas, our Eden lost; 
G ladly now I g 0 t o give thee this faded lifQtg bast> 
And were it brighter, fresher, or more blest, 
Still would I give i t thee, nor count the cost. 

Good night and good luck to the Philippines from 
the people of the United States. 

PHILIPPINE NATIONAL ANTHEM 



AYE J 



VLC 2 at 30.99 meters. We are nay signing off 
Good night I 



a release from 



THE 4th WAR LOAN NEWS DESK 

staffed by 

Press Volunteers ■ Press Section, War Finance Di vision . 0fe of War Mormatim 
ARTHUR SYL = ^mN AGING EDmR 

CARL CEFOLA ■ N. V. Herald-Tribune HAROLD FLEMING ■ Christian Scienr* M 

HARRY KERR - Akron BeaconJoumal MRS DOWSLEY CLARK MinZ , °""° r WCY CREENBAUM " N - Y - Ti >™ 

IEIGHTON BLOOD - Treasury EDWARD MA YI - Treasuw Trikme FREDERICK HOLLOWELL • OWI 

y MARGARET HUSTED ■ OWI 
ROBERT PHILLIPS Jr. ■ Treasuru 

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE J gSLI&SE MO. 301 

Wednesday, February 2, 1944 



WASHINGTON, Feb Q 2 — Every cent of the personal savings of 
Manuel L Q Quezon, president of the Philip pine Commonwealth, and his 
vri-fe v, r as invested todajr in War 3onds 0 In the absence of President Quezon, 
now ill in Florida. Mme 0 Quezon this morning handed a check to Ted Gamble, 



Mme 0 Quezon this morning handed a check to Ted Gamble, 
national director of the 1. r ar Finance Division of the Treasury, to cover 
Bonds for her husband, herself, each of their daughters and their son 0 



"Yfe must put every- 



"I agree with my husband," Madame Quezon said, 
thing — everything — in Bonds o For the time being, this is the most 
effective way of avenging those who died on Bataan and of rescuing those 
who still are prisoners of the Japanese Q Actions are more important 
than words, and buying Bonds is an action everyone can take" 

Aurora Arajon Quezon understands what remains to be done before her 
country is freed from Japan,, She and her family have been in Washington, 
orov sional capital of the Philippine Commonwealth, since May, 1942„ 
Here she has chosen to lead a secluded life, devoting herself to ner 
husband and children, working with the Filipino unit of the Red Cross, 
Which she organized, and aiding other war activities,, 

ThP need for helping "avenge Bataan" caused her to appear in 
public herftoday Stofcw York yesterday . This morning in an xnter- 
Sew at the Quezon apartment in The Shoreham, she saxd: 

-The friendship existing between the *™ 
of the United States xs now a sacred link tog efcher in Japanese 
husbands died together at ^«d stxn^ffer^ j _ 
prisori-canipso -L nope x-ms j-uiu 
it vail© 

^ . • rontinental United States 

JjBidpJltXX) Filipinos resxdxng xn tte«** - ^ 

a are not wealthy out they are W^S ^ ± oversubscribed 
.Wing the. First War Loan d^et» ^^ itiGS in this country have 
•their quota 100 per cento ^ ^ Htlrr Bond driveso The recent 
oversubscribed their allot ed quouas xn treatment to Filipinos 

.lication of Japanese atr ocx^xe 3 ^ r ^ ccords during the Fourth TJar 
aid spur them to extend tnexi former 
.Loan drivco 



326 



;* - obiective and thus saved the city from a second 
River and constituted a military c*i ^ hel that Fat her Andrew 

fjZrS I -nder if Hr. e Salter oS owS suU renderod to the 

Cerviui, S.J. , and *n 

A n * * * * 



"The flag of the Phj li DDino ^ • 
0 f rod and blue enclosing at M n com P°sed of two horizontal bars 
on a white field. In tine of ^ Side the s y mbo1 of thc c o^tvy 

ter on top-now the red bar is^ppe^t^fh^ flow " ^ th the blue 
t0 buy, the sooner that blue bar , he more Bonds v ' e can nana S e 

the sooner we shall once more be free « t0 th ° t0P again ' ^ 



0O0 



326 



f. 



" ■•*, % 



4 



I 



toijyi Wis osr 

Cervini, S.J., and the re „ 
Arny. " * * 

r 



HIS EXCELLENCY 

THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 



Address of Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt 
delivered on December 4, 1943 

USO CLUB 

Program, Buffet-Supper, and Dance 
in honor of 

^.I 113 -* 511103 se rving in the 
United States Armed Forces 
under the auspices of 

The Filipino Women's Club 
Washington, D. C. 



Respectfully submitted by: 

Nestora M. Calabia, President 
The Filipino './omen's Club 
Washington, D. C. 



Transcribed by: 

Ifrs. Evangeline Paredes 
Philippine Commonwealth 
and 

Hiss v Mary G. Lipari 
general Accounting:, Off ice 
Olafcnsf Division « 



- +4+ * * n military objective and thus saved the city from a second 
River and constituted a the w0 uderful help that Father Andrew 

boding? I wonder ii Lr. Sa iter ^. y£ thera in Mindanao rendered to the 

Cervini , S. J* > v 

Army* " * * * * 



Madam President, it gives 

great pleasure to be able to be hare 
tonight for a little while »«* 

and say a word of welcome to all of you. 

I am very happy to have heard on a «r 

Q one of your young fighting heroes be- 
cause he expressed thf> f OQ n 

the feeling which the whole Philippine nation 

must have. They have msd« o~-v, 

y «ave made such a wonderful fight for freedom. It 

is very wonderful that there i, e+ m 

Mere is st iH resistance going on when the 

people themselves carry it on fl wi t +v,- i_ ^ 

Ay on and I think the people of the United 

States have gained a greater and greater respect for the love of free- 
dom as it has been shown by the people of the Philippine Islands and 
I can only say that I hope with you that the day of victory in the 
South West Pacific is growing rapidly nearer. I was very happy to 
get the opportunity last summer of going down to Australia and New 
Zealand and to a great many of the islands which we now occupy because 
it gave me some idea of the fight in that area, of the difficulties 
which you people were meeting; of the fact that your people, in their 
resistance, must fight not only the Japanese, but illness, starva- 
tion and many other things besides the actual enemy. 

It will take time before we have won a military victory, to 
help people who have gone through so much again to come back to an 
economic position where they will be able to have the kind of 
life which contribute? to the health and happiness of any people. 
I hope that the United States will always be a real friend. I hope 



# " 1 



I 
I 



ci the citr* from a second 

Cervini, S.J., and the 



that with the freedom of the isn , 

the Pilipmo people will come a bond 

which is even closer th«« 

nan the Present one because it will be a 

voluntary one; a bond which people give out of affection and 
that will mean we will help each other and we will prosper be- 
cause of the help which we give each other. I hope your nation will 
prosper. I hope that your people will be increasingly happy. 
Hapiness only comes to people through the medium of education; of 
an economic standard which makes it possible to obtain such things 
as you need for health and enjoyment. And I hope that the years 
that we have already worked together will be years of stimulation 
and that, in the future, you will feel that there has been some 
advantages in the years that have gone by and that we will continue 
to work together to the greater advancement of both people. I 
happen to have a very strong feeling for the Philippines, I think 
strengthened by this last trip. The older people owe a very great 
debt to the young people of the generation because it is the young 
people who have had to fight this war and in addition the young 
people will have to live through the early postwar years. They 
will be hard years and which carry great responsiblity because the 
foundations which will be laid in those years will be of great im- 
portance. On them we will either be able to build in the future 
a peaceful world or we will find ourselves slipping away to bitter 
understanding - back to the selfish attitude where each country 




^Prtive a" d thus saved the city from a second 
River ana constituted a ^^f^^I wonderful help that Father Andrew 
' Sing? I wonaer if I Jr. al ^-^ it Fathers in Mindanao rendered to the 

Cervini, S.J.i and the res* 
Army* * * 



- 3 - 

has ideas only to its own advantages which leads us back in the 
long run to war and no advantage to anyone. 

If this war can teach us that the advantage of one' 
group is the advantage of all groups is the advantage of all wars. 
Even though it may mean that every group has to give up something 
that is advantageous to the greater majority of the people, is, in 
the end, the advantage of each group, we will have gone far to lay 
the . foundation for peace. I feel that the younger generation only 
have made their sacrifices and I am not talking of the sacrifices 
of life because nobody can make any return to the people who give 
their lives. There are many other sacrifices, sacrifices in which 
men and women have wanted to give many things than the things they 
have given — sacrifices by years of separation between families and 
loved ones. Those things can only be worthwhile, if because of 
them, we get a better world for the young people who have come 
through the war alive. And so, I would like to say to the people of 
the Philippines that while I cannot speak for all the people of the 
United States, I think I do speak for many of them when I say that 
I hope for freedom and peace for the well-being of the peoples of 
the world in the future. 



eoaibing? I ^Vf ; e 'f ol our Jesuit Fathers in Mindanao rendered 

Cervirxi , S. J» * and 

Army. " * * 



/ 



F K I L I P P I If i V A VI t? n 

ir,or t L 1 3 F (° F TIIS UNITED STATES) I1TC. 
J^O I STREET , IT. 

DIRECTORS tfAoHIITGTQNT, 3, D. C. 

Ho n. Frank Murphy, President" ^ 25j 1044 DIRECTORS 

jjrs. Millard Typings, Vice Mr - p ^iIiP E - Spalding 

jjrSi Paul MclTut t e °' Colonel Carlos F . Roraulo 

Hon. Dwight P. Davis Colonel Manuel Uieto 

Major Gen. ITorman £» KirV Hon ' Henr y P- Grad y 

:; ajor Gen. Myron C. Cramer SECRETARY AFD 

Hon. Robert A. Tart EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 

Hon. John W. McCormack m * Charles ^ lite 

Hon. Joacmin M. Elizalde v T TR ? a ^?? EER T 

Mr. J. /eld on Jones 

Mrs. Manuel L. Quezon 
c/o Philippine Commonwealth 
1617 Massachusetts Avenue, V. 
//ashington, D. C. 

Dear Mrs. Quezon: 

This organization was incorporated in the District of 
Columbia on April 28, 1944. f e are registered with the President's 
tfar Relief Control Board and have recently been formally admitted 
as a Participating Agency by the National (far Fund. 

The National «/ar Fund is the only organization authorized to 
solicit direct cash contributions from the public for war relief 
purposes, and allots therefrom sums to the various participants. 
The 1944/45 Campaign is to be conducted in October next, and the 
goal set is $115 , 000 , 000 . 00 and the tentative distributions arc 
as follows?. 

(a) Total for Services to Armed 
For ce s S uch as U . S . 0 . , United 
Seamen's Service and 7ar 

Prisoners' Aid $ 67,167,325.0X1 

(b) Allied Fations Relief and 

Refugee Aid 37,949,382.34 

(c) Reserved for Contingencies 3,682,792.16 

(d) Reserve for administrative 

* and Campaign txpensae 1,200,000.00 

' 1 115.000,000.00 

• % 'fall in catecorv (b) and our tentative allotment is slightly 
' {ess than $270,000.00. All other participants m this category 
are concerned with foreign relief. The publicized list is as 
•f ol lows' i 

. $ 149,775.00 

America Denmark Holiei 514 420 00 

fc' American Relief for Czechoslovakia 469 %Oo!oO 

.vmerican Relief .for FJ^nce 2 ^ 000^000. 00 

American Relief for- Italy . * 1,000,000.00 

American Relief for hovymp . 400,000.00 

Belgian .'ar Relief Society . 2,936,000.00 

British /ar Relief Society 



- " \ Hiitar objective and thus saved the city from a second 

River and constituted a ^^° 0 £ s the wonderful help that Father Andrew 
bonking? I wonder u , liV '*+ n l 0 „ Y Jesuit Fathers in Mindanao rendered to the 
Cervini, S.J., and the rest of our 

Army." * * * * 



'age ^° 



ifp lends of Luxemb oure 

; reek Jar Relief Assootatlon ' , g?'°2H° 

Philippine lar Relief ( 0 -r t ;-o u a \ T 2,461,087.39 

U .fer Relief ttu tne ^^-) Inc. 269,390.00 

ked n cSn a R IoiIff 8 ; 5 oo;ooo: 4 oo 

United uuna Keiiet Q » , » 2fU 00 

United Lithuanian Relief ' 'Ut'ololoo 

Un ited Yugoslav Relief .Fund 702*100.00 



$34 ,450 ',32 7. 84 

9 



Mexican Field Service 543 500.00 

Refugee Relief Trustees 2,727,796.00 

Ut S. Commiutee for Care of European Children 227,259.00 

&37 t 949.332.84 

The role that we have "been cast in, at least for the present, 
is somewhat minor and the main function that has been assigned to 
uS by the /ar Relief Control Board is that of collaboration with 
governmental agencies who are expected to rnaxa relief plans for 
the Philippines ( includ ing internees) in the expectation that when 
those plans are developed, gaps may be found which wo can fill and 
thus supplement governmental measures. One comparatively small^ 
project of providing typical Filipino clothes customarily worn by 
the more indigent Filipinos has been permitted. The program is _ 
that this clothing will be made by volunteer help, principally m 
?Uipino communities in this country and Hawaii, provided the 
material can be obtained. This latter is the greatest obstacle to 
overcome owing to the very great stringency in the cotton textile 
-iPld .mother project to provide for the clothing needs ot 
1 ernees at time of liberation and until they reached their home- 
tod was contemplated but this has been vetoed on grounds of State 
fitment information that WP^^S^JSS-S^^i^ 
route and others expected to - ( ^ ba^ ^obtained of a 

internment" would ueet tne neeaa. 
reconsideration at a later date, however, 

^4. +Hrri p rational chapters would have 
It was hoped that ny this time rag aonai ^.^^ dGlay 

been established, but owing tQ ^ Emitted, and with a drastic 
occurred in consideration o, budgets o has bG en impossible, 

cut for the current pe r iod S pt e .x ^ q{ thQ next of ki n 

Had it been possible to ob ^ 1 ? n t ?| e Philippines > it would have 
and friends of those who are whom our gospel could have 

enabled us to have a nucleus jhrougn tors could have been 

S deseminnated and from wnich loc .1 ohap ^ f Qf 

formed. I am therefore reduced to ™ rtag our purposes which ^ 
whom I know are keenly . interestedly ^ Incorporatl0 n, as follows, 
arc succinctly stated m jur . 

• •■ n +o he In in furnishing aid ana 
"To do everything P<^ sl * X t^ n suffering in the Philippines 
-is for reliex of hum J ^y^nese^or^ ^ 

fefitn 0? s h ~ they may 

tat ion of 'Jar R©x»fe 



r -i-r=7i thus saved the city irora a sec* 

homing? I wonde * 1 ! h e reet of our Jesuit Fatnero 
Cervini, S.J. » atid - * * 

Amy." * 



Page Three 



humanitarian or P ^? S- anc§ to bG furnished through such 
Corporation ruav e 1 11 . i° n3 and instrumentalities as the 
of the Corporation l t0 . aid !? - nd assist or through agents 
services in connect?™ ^ r " nd . in rendering any Mid all 

ui l. c n i o n therewith." 




channeled through the r r In. f U ,°!? a should, however, be 
National ./ar Fund a orjL ?i t'l" 11 ' loc '4 commit teea of the 
State Quotas. * taoy aw bQ incorporated in the 

t0 ,t a l ^lotmenta^ii^ thi f nature dc not necessarily mean that 
Toov con i 1°° c : lhr ' ncod but ^ is felt that there is a 

Jalief ihr throughout the country, of the dire needs for 

"orseLont^ if ll ? 1 ? in °f ' ?or *il*Pin<* and prisoners alike. 
Sw^SJ* \Li t / Joulca substantiate this belief if either of the 
2^i^fi?«J h0d8 ar ° adoptQd 5 and if the possibilities of supple* 
mental relief measures develop, there will be a greater justifica- 
tion for requesting funds to carry them out. 

Donations are deductible for Income Tax purposes. 

Yours very sincerely, 

/ - 

Charles P. /hite 
Executive Director 



* ■ V „ , obiective and thus saved the City from a sec 

River and constituted a ^^ar, odj woriderful help that Father Andrew 

toeing? I :^fJlZ T elt of our Jesuit Fathers in Mindanao rendered to the 



Cervini, S.J.', and the 
Army." 



* 



* 



(Not printed at Government expense) 




Congressional Hecord 




The Jones Act— Foundation Stone of Bataan 



SPEECH 

OF 

HON. CARLOS P. ROMULO 

RESIDENT COMMISSIONER, COMMONWEALTH OF 
THE PHILIPPINES 

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 

Tuesday, August 29, 1944 

Mr. ROMULO. Mr. Speaker, 28 years 
ago today, upon this floor, America gave 
its first pledge of freedom to the people 
of the Philippines. 

On that day the Congress of the United 
States approved the Jones Act, promis- 
ing independence to the subject Philip- 
pines in a covenant that is without par- 
allel in the world's history. 

It is not my purpose to review the Fili- 
pinos' fight against America during the 
early days of American occupation, nor 
stress the fact that it took the United 
States. V/ 2 years of actual fighting to 
subdue the Philippines. We were not 
conquered, in the final analysis, by guns, 
but by the practical demonstration in the 
Philippines of America's concept of de- 
mocracy. American teachers brought us 
new methods of education. Public 
health, road building, government train- 
ing—such things were given us. Grad- 
ually our feeling toward America 
changed from resentment and suspicion 
to confidence and loyalty. 

That loyalty was sealed by the passage 
of the Jones Act. 

The long struggle for Philippine inde- 
pendence that was to culminate in the 
Passage of the Jones Act was waged upon 
this floor. It was a strange struggle, car- 
ried on in amity and understanding, for 
only Americans could comprehend the 

608529—6736 



democratic dreams of our Filipino lead- 
ers. There were two of these fiery young 
nationalists who began the fight for in- 
dependence. Manuel Luis Quezon, as 
Resident Commissioner, on this floor set 
here the demands for the outposts of de- 
mocracy in the Philippines, laid here the 
foundation of Bataan. But it was in the 
Philippines where the strategy of the 
whole fight was planned under Sergio 
Osmena, Speaker of the Philippine As- 
sembly, who, as the then leader of the 
Filipino people, gave purpose and direc- 
tion to the peaceful campaign for free- 
dom. 

The First Philippine Assembly that 
convened on October 16, 1907, was the 
supreme test of our ability to govern 
ourselves. If it succeeded, more self- 
governing powers would be awarded the 
Filipinos. If it failed, it would mean a 
set-back in our slow march to independ- 
ence. Those who made the Philippine 
Assembly a success were men of cour- 
age and vision, and our Philippine de- 
mocracy became the monument to their 
struggle and their sacrifice. I would 
like to call their roll today; yet however 
long and glorious the list, we must come 
to one name at last, that of the new 
President of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, Sergio Osmena. As speaker 
of that historic assembly, he united its 
various elements and steered its course, 
establishing for the first time the policy 
of Filipino collaboration with America. 
He led us then through a crucial period 
in our history, to emerge triumphant in 
the test that resulted in the recognition, 
through the Jones Act, of our capacity 



for self-government and freedom. He is 
leading us today, as President in exile, 
through darker days of travail, and the 
crowning service of this patient and self- 
effacing statesman will be to establish, 
after victory has been achieved, the 
Philippine Republic. 

The Jones Act, approved on August 
29, 1916, placed the legislative power in 
Filipino hands. It provided for the 
creation of the Philippine Senate, to be 
elected by the people and to be composed 
entirely of Filipinos. It gave the first 
glimpse of democracy to the benighted 
Far East at our back, to millions of en- 
slaved Asiatics. The American name of 
Jones carried to the Far East America's 
words that had hammered the year 1776" 
into history — independence and equal- 
ity. It was a vested interest in the future 
that must assure economic and spiritual 
decency for all men. 

I would like to call attention to the fact 
that on exactly that same date 6 years 
before, on August 29, 1910, Japan, against 
the will of the Koreans, formally an- 
nexed the ancient Kingdom of Korea and 
ended its independent existence of 4,200 
years. 

What curious coincidence could bet- 
ter show the contrast in ideology be- 
tween the United States and Japan, • 
These two historical incidents reveal why 
Japan and America are now at war. 
With the annexation of Korea, Japan 
started on its bloodstained march of 
conquest that was to culminate in the 
sneak attack on Pearl Harbor, while 
America, with the Jones Act, set a course 
of freedom and democracy for all peoples. 



.i; f obieative and thus saved the city from a second 
River and constituted a *^£'^J B the wonderful help that Father Andrew 
Doling? I wonder If Mr. Sf ^ Jesuit Others in Mindanao rendered to the 
Cervini, S.J., and the rest of our 

Array." * * * * 



I 



(Not printed at Government expense) 




United States 
of America 



Congressional "Record 



PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE 78 



th 



CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION 



The Jones Act— Foundation Stone of Bataan 



SPEECH 

OP 

HON. CARLOS P. ROMULO 

RESIDENT COMMISSIONER, COMMONWEALTH OF 
THE PHILIPPINES 

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 

Tuesday, August 29, 1944 

Mr. ROMULO. Mr. Speaker, 28 years 
ago today, upon this floor, America gave 
its first pledge of freedom to the people 
of the Philippines. 

On that day the Congress of the United 
States approved the Jones Act, promis- 
ing independence to the subject Philip- 
pines in a covenant that is without par- 
allel in the world's history. 

It is not my purpose to review the Fili- 
pinos' fight against America during the 
early days of American occupation, nor 
stress the fact that it took the United 
States 3% years of actual fighting to 
subdue the Philippines. We were not 
conquered, in the final analysis, by guns, 
but by the practical demonstration in the 
Philippines of America's concept of de- 
mocracy. American teachers brought us 
new methods of education. Public 
health, road building, government train- 
s—such things were given us. Grad- 
ually our feeling toward America 
changed from resentment and suspicion 
to confidence and loyalty. 

That loyalty was sealed by the passage 
of the Jones Act. 

The lon^ struggle for Philippine inde- 
pendence that was to culminate in the 
Passage of the Jones Act was waged upon 
this floor. It was a strange struggle, ear- 
ned on in amity and understanding, for 
only Americans could comprehend the 

608529—6736 



democratic dreams of our Filipino lead- 
ers. There were two of these fiery young 
nationalists who began the fight for in- 
dependence. Manuel Luis Quezon, as 
Resident Commissioner, on this floor set 
here the demands for the outposts of de- 
mocracy in the Philippines, laid here the 
foundation of Bataan. But it was in the 
Philippines where the strategy of the 
whole fight was planned under Sergio 
Osmena, Speaker of the Philippine As- 
sembly, who, as the then leader of the 
Filipino people, gave purpose and direc- 
tion to the peaceful campaign for free- 
dom. 

The First Philippine Assembly that 
convened on October 16, 1907, was the 
supreme test of our ability to govern 
ourselves. If it succeeded, more self- 
governing powers would be awarded the 
Filipinos. If it failed, it would mean a 
set-back in our slow march to independ- 
ence. Those who made the Philippine 
Assembly a success were men of cour- 
age and vision, and our Philippine de- 
mocracy became the monument to their 
struggle and their sacrifice. I would 
like to call their roll today; yet however 
long and glorious the list, we must come 
to one name at last, that of the new 
President of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, Sergio Osmena. As speaker 
of that historic assembly, he united its 
various elements and steered its course, 
establishing for the first time the policy 
of Filipino collaboration with America. 
He led us then through a crucial period 
in our history, to emerge triumphant in 
the test that resulted in the recognition, 
through the Jones Act, of our capacity 



for self-government and freedom. He is 
leading us today, as President in exile, 
through darker days of travail, and the 
crowning service of this patient and self- 
effacing statesman will be to establish, 
after victory has been achieved, the 
Philippine Republic. 

The Jones Act, approved on August 
29, 1916, placed the legislative power in 
Filipino hands. It provided for the 
creation of the Philippine Senate, to be 
elected by the people and to be composed 
entirely of Filipinos. It gave the first 
glimpse of democracy to the benighted 
Far East at our back, to millions of en- 
slaved Asiatics. The American name of 
Jones carried to the. Far East America's 
words that had hammered the year 1776 
into history — independence and equal- 
ity. It was a vested interest in the future 
that must assure economic and spiritual 
decency for all men. 

I would like to call attention to the fact 
that on exactly that same date 6 years 
before, on August 29, 1910, Japan, against 
the will of the Koreans, formally an- 
nexed the ancient Kingdom of Korea and 
ended its independent existence of 4,200 
years. 

What curious coincidence could bet- 
ter show the contrast in ideology be- 
tween the United States and Japan. 
These two historical incidents reveal why 
Japan and America are now at war. 
With the annexation of Korea, Japan 
started on its bloodstained march of 
conquest that was to culminate in the 
sneak attack on Pearl Harbor, while 
America, with the Jones Act, set a course 
of freedom and democracy for all peoples. 



a second 

ew 



. " : obiective and thus saved the cit? ^ora a 

River and constituted a ^^^^^ s the wonderful help that Father Andr 
toinbitig? I wonder if J 1 *^ Jesuit Fathers in Mindanao rendered to the 
Cervini, S.J • , and trie - - 

Army." * * * 



/ 



2BP0HTS OF 12 BATAAN 
pBliiSTS, NOW BELIEVED 
PRISONERS REACH WASHINGTON 

•; a shington, Aug, 29.~~The ac ti J?f N «C.W.C. NEWS SERVICE). 

twelve of them Catholic priests* * es . of 24 Amy chaplains now Relieved prisoners, 
fighting are covered i n a sheaf* Jr r J ns the S rim days of the Bataan and Corregidor 
year that has been received bv th chaplains ' reports from the early months of this 
Chaplains. * ™ e Bt. Rev. M S gr. William R. Arnold, Army Chief of 

The reports are terse monthl 
by the chaplains but in some c * orms showing the number of services conducted 
ever-increasing enemy, the STai- t!* . ief n °tes etch a picture of the fight against an 

As far as i s known,* all of th 8&id ln announcin S their arrival, 

become prisoners of war* of the t chaplains stayed with their charges and have 

according to the office of the rf? 8 ? 636 ' U was st ated. Efforts to trace them, 
Australia with the few memw« X !f °t Cha P lains » have revealed that none reached 

Catholic chaplains a^one tlLt h * f? rces * h ° capture. 
Provinces in the United SSJpJ £1* sports, with their Dioceses or 

Berni^lL^^ Barbara Province; John E. Duffy, Toledo; 

I T Missouri pli. Tr' Richard E. C a rberry, Portland, Ore.; John J. Dugan, 
S.J., Missouri Province; John J. McDonnell, Brooklyn. 

rPPS MeH r rS^' Indianapolis, Henry B. Stober, Covington; John A. Wilson, 

v'Zrtcn Za Matthias E - Z^rfas, Milwaukee; James W. O'Brien, San 

Francisco, and Albert D. Talbot, S.S. 

In addition to these twelve three other priests whose reports were not among 
those just received, were mentioned in the reports of their fellow- chaplains. They 
are Fathers William T. Cumrnings, M.M., an American Army chaplain; Father Edwin Ronan, 
CP,, an American chaplain of the Philippine Army, and Pacifico Ortiz, S.J., 
Philippine Army chaplain now in the United States. 



sters who did not have to go. They were below the a^e of a), m rav r f^ x * ... 

against a formation of 36 Japanese P^*>. mentioned radio broadcast, 

"As for those Ateneo boys who too^pa rj to th • a* ^ ^ ftai 

I want you, Mr. Salter, to know that most t J e her0 , s role in the 

of Bataan. Leon M. Guerrero, xor mst ajMj».^ ^ government morale broadcasts 
broadcast, was no less heroic in -r. He hand l^the^ ^ ^ ^ 
in Manila, until the very ev ^^^fWila, he joined our forces in Bataan. 
on the last motor boat that °ulleu ou Th he was taken to Corregidor and 

Here he was until he caught malignan. -a ar i even ^ or mQve 

the last time I heard of him, they told ^ ^ 

while the Japs bombed and sh ellej wxe o : ^ ^ ^ ^ veraloa 0 f the play, 

Manuel Colayco who played th e ner J Qf Maul)an and Morong H e was in 
played a hero's part, too, in the the Japanese was No Man's Land and 

the very frontline in Bataan. Between^ him ^ ^ ^ fiye young helpless 
far behind the Japanese lines, he ime 

nhilrl-pri + the fi^st day of the w a r almost all 

Chlld n n wondor if Mr. Salter ^^g^ef^L various city hospitals and 
the Jesuit others of the Ateneo were a. s^ ^ bo ^ed. I 

*ho<,e «**s erpus^ity zones like the For* at bvdldi ngs of the Ateneo were offered 
w^ndev if Mrr Salter knows that all ^g^^jji or army barracks? I wonder 
r?h'e Government to be ^^ r ° 0 Tfhe Jesuits, Father Hurley, who, together 
if he knows that it was the ^J*r*°* h D ts that were anchored in the Pasig 

with Colonel Andres Soriano, removed all t ^ ^ ^ seccmd 

River and constituted a ^£'^1^ wonderful help that fj"^ 
bombing? I wonder Hr ; *f Jfour Jesuit Fathers in Mindanao rendered to the 
Cervini, S.J., and the res* 



Army. n 



N.C.tf.C NE^S SERVICE. 

-3- 

9/1/42 - 2. 

ATTACK ON AMERICAN 
JESUITS IN PHILIPPINES 
REBUKED BY QUEZON'S CHAPLAIN 

m Yn1>1 , f , ^ (BY M. C.W.C. NEWS SERVICE) 

1 I ' * J^DeapUe the maay accounts related by Amy and Navy officers of 
we neroisc o the American Jesuit missionaries in the Philippines, says a statement 
of the Jesuit Mission Press. A certain K. H. Salter of Madison, Wis. wrote a 
letter to the Spring? iel& Rerahl iftpn 0 f Springfield, Mass. accusing the Jesuits of 
having tried to ua&ermine the patriotism of the Filipinos. The instance cited was 
a radio broadcast, given by students of the famous Ateneo de Manila University, 
conducted by the American Jesuits. 

It so happened, says the atatement, that the only Jesuit to reach this country 
from the Philippines was the man who was immediately responsible for the broadcast, 
the Rev. Pacifico Ortiz, S.j. f former Assistant Director of the Commonweal Hour in 
Manila and now a Captain in the Philippine Arm;- and Chaplain to President Quezon. 
He characterized the charge as "a downright lie" in a letter to the editor of the 
Sprin gf ield Republic an which pointed out that Mr. Salter's authority for his^ 
charges was the Phili ppine Magazine owned and edited by Mr. Abraham Van Hellig 
Hartendorp, an anti-Catholic publication which was banned from the Philippine 
public high schools by the Protestant Secretary of Public Instruction; that most of 
the young actors in the radio play fought heroically on Bataan; that 200 under- 
graduates of the school fought through the entire Philippine Campaign and many of 
them were killed; that the testimony of Army and Navy heroes such as Lieutenant- 
Colonel Clear have extolled the heroism and cooperation with the American Armed 
Forces of the Jesuits all over the Philippine Islands. 

"It is really unfortunate Father Ortiz wrote that Mr. Salter should accuse 
his own fellow-Americans, the Jesuit Fathers of the Ateneo de Manila, of being 
fifth Columnists. It is twice unfortunate that' by implication he should brand as 
Fifth Columnists 200 or more Ateneo boys who fought in Bataan. For I want Mr. 
Salter to Vnow that out of the 600 college students of the Ateneo at least 200 were 
mastered into the Philippine Army that fought in Bataan. I know 25 of these young- 
sters who did not have to go. They were below the age of 20. But they readily 
vo?untIevea. And I know that many of them are now dead. They have gone dowo fighting 
for Tout county's flag, Mr. Salterl This is the kind of Fifth Column work, they 

^ ° aptai » vi ™ who fought 

against a formation of 36 Japanese P^nes. mentioned radio broadcast, 

"As for those Ateneo boys who too* part in the Battles 
I want you, Mr. Salter, to know that ^st g hero , s role in the 

of Bataan. Leon M. Guerrero for inst ^,^0 pi aye ^ broadcasts 

broadcast, was no less heroic in war. ^f£ t int0 tUe cit y. Then leaving 
in Manila, until the rer^ev eof Jft^g 0 ^, he joined our forces in Bataan. 
on the last motor boat that pui-eu ria . i hen he was taken to Corregidor and 

Here he was until he caught ^Ugnant ma xa ^ ^ tQ etand or move 

the last time I heard of him, they told me *e 




tTZ' -nltwpen him and the Japanese was No Man's Lana 
the very frontline in Bataan. ^^Xeve his wife and five young helpless 
far behind the Japanese lines, he knew we 
children. . Vn0 _ that from the first day of the war almost all 

»I wonder if Mr. Salter kn ° w ;Jfa<,si-ned to the various city hospitals and 
the Jesuit Fathers of the Ateneo were aus^ ^ ^ bo , b ed. I 

«iose.*anger. ? ^ity zones like the Po tuilding8 of the Ateneo were offered 

wonder if Mr. Salter Knows that all ™Z hospitals or army barracks? I wonder 

loTe Government to be ^^ r T?We^ Father Hurley, who, togetner 
if he knows that it was the u the Ws that were anchored m the Pasig 

with Colonel Andres Soriano, and thus saveA the city from a second 

River and constituted a mill ar. obje * ^ ^ Father Andrew 

bombing? I wonder if *f *f 0 * r Jesuit Fathers in Mindanao rendered to the 
Cervini, S.J., and the rest of ou 
Army, * * 



1617 Massachusetts n w 
Washington 6 , do ' 
EObart 1400 



OFFICE OF THE HWnn, COMMISSIONER 0, THE 
PHILIPPI NES TO THE UNITED STATES 

(l 

October 6, 1945 

c 

FOR RELEASE AFTER r? • nn rnn.r 

_ ^i^K ^ ^QQ-iiOQ ^SATURDAY ( dOTOBgg g) : 

President Sergio Osmena of the Philippines awarded the 
Medal for Valor, highest Philippine decoration, to Fleet Admiral 
Chester W. Nimitz, at a ceremony today (Saturday) at 12:00 Koon, 
in the Philippine Commonwealth Building, 1617 Massachusetts NW. 

This is the second time in the history of the Commonwealth 
that the Medal for Valor has been awarded. The first was pre- 
sented to General MacArthur by President Osmena on May 10 in 
Manila. 

After reading the citation to Admiral Nimitz, President 
Osmena said: 

"Admiral Nimitz , on behalf of the Filipino people 
I present you with this Medal for VfJor, in recog- 
nition of your leadership and courage during the 
war of liberation. This decoration is the highest 
in the power of my people to give. We want you 
and the whole world to know that we are grateful 
to you, to your country and to the brave men who 
fought under your command, for your magnificent 
share in the great victory which restored our 
f reedom. " 

High Ranking U.S. Government, Army and Navy officials 
present included: 

' qporetarv of Navy James Forrestal; Secretary of War Robert 1, 
Patter n S or tar" of Interior Harold L. Ickes; Senator Kenneth 
mterson, btcrobci R h Under Secretary of Navy Art emus L. 

McKellar; Speaker Sam Ray burn , JJ^ • General of the 

Gates; Under Secretary of ^tcrxor^ Erncst >j. King; Fleet 
Army George C. Marsn^ll, ^ Alexander A. Vandegrift, USMO; 

Admiral William D. Le.hy ; £cner Dayid I# Walsh . High 

SKitKSS »v!m»? 6ongressman Oarl Vinson. 

full T^oYjEm^m^^m^ ra . 211 



Department of Information 
public delations n and 

goramonwealth of the Vh * •> a 

|617Mas S achusetts e Ava^ P r S 
Washington 6, d» c ' ' ,u 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 



Pedro Napalan, 50-year-old Filipino merchant seaman, has 
3d tne American merchant Marine again after having spent 

s way back from a Japanese concentration 



camp near Hongkon 



Mr. Napalan left -Mobile , Alabama, on an American freighter 
in the summer of 1941, on the voyage which was to end with the 
seizure of the ship by the Japanese during a bombing attack on 
Hongkong on Pearl Harbor Day, December 8* By the time Mr. 
Napalan returned to the United States he had gone once around 
the world and been away for three years. On Lis return journey 
lie crossed Free China, being given lifts by friendly soldiers 
and civilians. His jaunt took him through ICweilin, military 
center of south China and site of an American air base, thence 
to Kunming, Chabua and eventually Calcutta, From Calcutta he 
was able to work his way to New York on a me reliant ship. 

When Mr. Napalan arrived recently as a repatriated prison- 
er of war at the Recruitment and Manning Organization of War 
Shipping Administration, 37 Broadway, New York, he was still 
suffering physically and emotionally from his long ordeal. 
Nevertheless, he declined the offer of the repatriation section 
of RMO to send him to one of the Merchant Marine rest centers. 



which are maintained for merchant seamen by "che WSa and United 
Seamen's Services. He would not be satisfied uniil he was oacL 
at sea again on a snip carrying supplies to oe used by our ngOT 
ing forces against the axis. 

The RMO Office at that time had no ig^re^dy tc* 
him as chief cool:, which vas t ating in before. So 

out of Mobile for the Orie nt more ^n ^hr.. / tQ t . 

Mr. Napalan made a trip as ^ond °f ln Iiealth and spiri t, 

ick into the war im mediate ly . Jsriti io Union for his 

he is now standing by at the Na oio nal ? ; a ^ 
next ship. .- He expects to sail as cniei 

n , D n' - r y Napalan 's ship was in a repair 
On December 6, 1941, ^» \ anes dropped bombs in the 
yard at Hongkong .men ^P-^lster and crew of the vessel, in- 
vicinity of the yard- The master ana ^ ^ island, and 

eluding Mr. Napalaa, t led jloi. y cne island were 

fled again by motor ^unch wh en> he ^ & te c;ub and 

seized by the Ja ps. This oime t^ey ^ club also in turn 

hid in a house on one club ft™** Napala n and -his shipmates 
was taken over by one Japs and mi. g^. days, during which , 
and skipper were i i iisoned J* RQ(1 , Q - uhe small house 

they were given no icou, obey wer ^ isonerG under ml a 

on the club greanas ana held ^£ >VG re given' a half-pound oi 
puard for seven months* Ther e uu y During this 

lice a Say and were forbidden any gjg^,, ^ were Shot 

period the master and nine oi @ ^ N said, was shot 

by Japanese snipe.- ine .^^ ^ &g retuined to tne house 

^a^r^^o^^ ^ ^rShfSew! °Nin of 

in?, Napaicu Gh t ne se villagers wox j Napalan says he 

per s. So many w ^; Li k., ncre he was he la, > na * A n near-by house 

and shot on si^no ..j- 



* — 

. ^ ate in the summer Bf tw * ' ' 
ceived permission to RO to « year > 1942, Mr.. Napalan re- 
he and other Filipino L««JJ near-by settlement to work. Later 
lived five months. Mr Si* 616 removed to a ship, where they 
on an island a considerable ^ifV** 8 then sent to do fairni work 
Hearing disquiet in- rumors n? S ?£ e by fcr ^ r boat from Hongkong, 
would involve treatment OI . lurtlle r Japanese military plans WMoh 
fellow prisoners decider! I ~ f lso ? ers j Mr. Natulan and a few 

ore a t0 tr y "to escape. 

The group succeeded in Myh« 
were able to cohcoal a Stnoi- J g SIlia11 Doa ' ts in wnich thQ y 
until nightfall. After SSS> °Ii prov ?- si ons and hide themselves 
Their voyage was hazarflnnf Si y ri esed saj -^ s and set out. 
in boats intend for she lteHT + ° f the danser of Sundering 

awaited them if they were ca2t ?^ ^ ?! kn6W what 
for Free China A-ni^UTt c ^ugnt. They steered their course 

their boats tfU i at last at tne mainland and beaching 

Segin ?di &^ *nS ir Way 011 foot and by river ferry to 
av/eilin, a distance of 300 air miles inland. 

. He nad last seen his wife and two children at their home 
in Manila m Novemoor 1940. Since his capture and escape he 
has not been able to communicate with them. 



PR-119 



"Drorits unaer "one Japanese; ouspuiisxun ui r^txx px-upex-u^ ua^oo 01 
1945 pending reassessment; Sharing of laborers in agricultural and 
industrial prof its ... .Resolutions : Empowering the President to fix 
prices on palay rice. .. .Senator Cuenco introduced, a resolution to 
be sent to President Truman asking to extend the terms of Philip- 
pine officials.. . .Forests products cooperatives being proposed. 



_ _ _ constitutional guarantees must be observed 
EDTTORTAL GIST OF • in dealing with treason cases... .We will 
;SJ™™ tp TOES S • be judged abroad according to the way we 
PHILIPPINE PREbo ? handle Filipino collaborationists ... .Trai- 
tors^!." over the world are already being brought to stern ac- 
oors an over tab wu x . ...Oapas internment camp), 

counting, except in ^^S 1 ^^?^ '^11 f0 r justice ... .Mere 
Fort Santiago Bataan and Cprregidor cai ^ aborationigt is one 

service under the Ja P s . J°^°^Crf and sustenance to the enemy... 
who voluntarily gave aid and w ml i it ant in order to sur- 

Hlipino realizes that he must work or £ »j£ ftl interferen ce 

vive and be free from Chine ^ 6 + ?^ n ^estroyed in the Philippines-.... 
....Japan .must pay.for P^P^^^gfor off ioers. .. •Ifenila should 
Bonus for men, retirement ? ra ^ lTiie Licenti ous grant of commissions 
be made more clean and sanitary * V^ ission3 should be given on the 
to guerrillas is unreasonable comi candidates should 

basis of the individuals' records. ; ..Pr es ,£ ilippines needs leader . 

£ay what they stand f or secretary Ickes' cablegram 

ship and should define its con cern for our postwar sit- 

should not alarm us for it blaok marke t days are numbered 

uat ion.... With supples coming in^ ^ ^ ^ Rel?aD1 i lta _ 

..,.The Philippines is a f reexamination with Paul J. 

tion Commission ^ing?. . . .No 1 ident Trvman has reiterated that 
McNutt's appointment, beoauoer^ lokes , cablegram must 

III ^fod^o^r^t Bench. • 
F - nomlnali r,olitioal prisoners are now bc- 

-------- 7 ^ or s ?ua^^^r^nfxr E ? e =S" er co: 



PHILIPPINE NEWS DIGEST 




the PMv ery Monday by the Office of 
TAT"i lppine Res ident Conmissioner 
xox ' Massachusetts Ave.,-N.W.-. 
Washington 6, D.C. 



September PA, 1945 



MANILA FLASHES 
BY RADIOGRAM 
Sept, 15 



■ parti t .? smena recommends Philippine. 

' ii>20 nS P J^ on in the World Fund Bank 

' •Doa^ ,0 ?2 bonus for veterans is pro- 

f or 0,000 Philippine Army standing 

ippine Resident Commiss loner?* : X n^® COInmen ? ed • • • • Out lay for Phil- 
views are sounded regarding +-? ? lce is ^ 216 ' 500 » .Washington 
Commissioner to New York r ? ? to send a Philippine Trade 
Brigadier General James Dai ton e " te a Pass is renamed in honor of 
cerning collaborators dPi«i« Z"*' * serB ^J Ickes' cablegram con- 

S aeld ys action on election bill. 

PRESIDENT OSMENA cabled thP f^r* « 

mulo regarding collahn^ff ioiiowmg message to Commissioner Ro- 
presentltive^ even berore Sh^? and "The House of Re- 

statement on collaborationists r^^l SQGr t ta n r * Harold Ickes' 
m vplnqn qP ff^! it AJi:L0 ^ s - ts , refused to seat Congressman Jose 
Sol bv the TT t % h t P °i iCy that no Congressman lacking clear- 
SS2nSJp^?h ^ Counter-intelligence Corps and turned over to the 
Commonwealth for trial will be allowed to take his seat even 
though at liberty under bail. Speaker of the House Zulueta, con- 
curring completely in the views of Secretary Ickes of removing 
collaborationists from posts of political and economic influence, 
stated that the elections cannot be held and must be postponed 
until the task of investigation and trial of collaborators is fin- 
ished to- the mutual satisfaction of both the United States and the 
Philippines and that only then would the conduct of elections be 
free and untramelled 

. The House passes $51,500,000 budget bill.... 

* Also hastens amendment to People's Court 
T bill inserting the proviso allowing members 
__.--.» of the bar to be eligible as public pros- 
ecutors ... .Bills approved: Authorizing Government Insurance to pay 
nolicy holders; Organization of cooperatives; Special taxes on 
Wits under the Japanese; Suspension of real property taxes of 

■5 pending reassessment; Sharing of laborers in agricultural and 
industrial prof its ... .Resolutions : Empowering the President to fix 

prices on palav rice Senator Cuenco introduced, a resolution to 

le sent to President Truman asking to extend the terms of Philip- 
pine offi?iais!";!Eorests products cooperatives being proposed. 



CONGRESSIONAL 
NEWS 



EDITORIAL GIST OF 
PHILIPPINE PRESS 



Constitutional guarantees must be observed 
in dealing with treason cases.... rfe will 

ho iudeed abroad according to the way we 
handle Filipino collaborationists . . . .Trai- 

- — -------- 0 i rcn flv beine brought to stern ac- 

tors all over the world g^^L^Sfpas (Internment camp), 
counting, except in tne ^ Correeidor call for justice ... .Mere 

Fort Santiago, Bataan, and ^Slbbration. .Collaborationist is one 
service under the Japs not C A ^ mfnT t and sustenance to the enemy... 
who voluntarily gave aid ana jomiu ^ mllitant in order t0 sur . 
Filipino realizes ™^ eoSnomio and political interference 

vive and be free from Chine f®fL destroyed in the Philippines.... 

....Japan -must pay for Pj°P^^ ies for off icers ... .Manila should 

Bonus for men, retirement S ra ™ x ic6ntious sran t of commissions 

sanitary. should be given on the 

ential candidates should 
Tabor in the Philippines needs leader- 
Say what, they stand for :; ..LaDor ..Secretary Ickes' cablegram 
ship and should define its goal..;.* J_ nnr „ ostwar 3it - 

should not 



be made more clean ana *^^/ commissions 
to guerriUas^s unreasonable ^ ^ 

basis of the individuals recu ^ ph . 



deep concern for our postwar 



; alarm us for it shows a b 5 aok raarke t days are numbered 
ua?Sn.^!with supplies coming^n^^ _ ^ ^ ^ Re ^ blllta - 



.,~The "Philippines is a S -J° k f 
.ssion doing?.;.^ 



of reexamination with P aul V» 
President Truman has reiterated that 



Won Cornmission aoi^-^.- use resident iruman , — ^ am must 

MoKutt.s a PP 01 ^ m ^es'tion is settled..'* f ironists 
the. independence ques w proportion. • ..Accused coil Briones 
not distort our sense oi v £ innoo ence. . . .Bengson an 



not distort our sens* - innoc ence. .Bengson 

are entitled to vr^^^t Benoh# 
are nominated to bupr^u 



FROM THE 
PHILIPPICS 



^ m anti-alie 
lmptjrt mo' 6 



political prisoners are now 
P?^7_I^ Q nv, n ™hP.r of Commerce 



bo- 



JJJV ▼ w • • w • 

buses from the 



_jctfic Co. 
^United States. 



The President of the Philippines takes pleasure 
in presenting the Medal for Valor to 



FLEET ADMIRAL CHESTER WILLIAM NIMITi 



Z, UNITED STATES NAVY 



* * * 



******** 



********** 



2j( 5jc 5^ jjc jjc jjc 



CITATION: 



4 



"For exceptional valor and distinguished ser- 
vice to the Commonwealth of the Philippines as 
Commander-in-Chief ,. United States Pacific. Fleet and 
Pacific Ocean Areas, from December 7, 1941, to Sep- 
tember 18, 1945. Challenging the supremacy of the 
Japanese sea v and air power with the limited forces 
available following the Pearl Harbor disaster, 
Fleet admiral Nimitz placed the surface, submarine 
and air units of the Pacific Fleet in action, ac- 
cepting without loss of confidence the sinking of 
gallant vessels and the severe casualties in brave 
men and vital planes, and holding steadfast until 
ships, reinforcements and a mighty aerial armada 
swept the Pacific from the Aleutians to the co£st 
of Australia and from the Marshall s westward in a 
relentless surge of fighting strength. With these 
mighty forces welded into an indomitable weapon of 
destruction, Fleet Admiral Nirnitz hurled the power 
of ships, men and aircraft against the enemy in 
ceaseless bombardment and invasion; his daring 
submarines struck mighty blows at the Japanese life 
line of supplies; his mine sweepers cleared chan- 
nels for attack groups; his amphibious forces placed 
troops, supplies and ammunition on hostile beaches 
from the Solomons steadily northward and westward; 
and in October, 1944, his valiant command defeated 
the Japanese fleet in the historic Battle for 
Levte Gulf destroyed the sea power of the enemy 
^d thereby greatly aided in the liberation of the 
^iliDDines. Fleet Admiral Nimitz' service go the 
people of the Philippines has evoked their lasting 
gratitude and friendship. 5 ' 



EXTRACT FROM LETTER DESCRIBING MIRACULOUS CURE 

AT CANTON, 0« 1939 



Dear Father: 



that o!iLLl o f to write to you was because of a real miracle 
two" hSSSSSiSS ? f«w months a G o in canton, Ohio, which is about 
8X«t2 ?! X f C " il cleve land. The L: dy that wis cured miracu- 
™Tl¥+t^ Q lJ r *Z> 51 y* s « old - She was a Prot. all her life 
SJI J th Z Stoistian Church in Canton regularly. All her 
?« 5+vL? + 2 r h ^f bands s People were -Methodist. Her husband was 
an a-oneisx, lor him there was no God. She was sick with cancer 
in her abdomen for seven yrs., had fourteen operations, a tumor 
was taken from her weighing 39 lbs., for two years her bowels 
passed thru an incision made in her stomach. The flesh from hip 
to hip was all rotted away and every 24 hrs. a bushelbasket of 
pads were taken from her for she was draining all the time. As 
high as 36 packs of pads were used to fill out the flesh. Seven 
doctors treated her at different times, and they claimed there 
was not a case like hers in all the U. S. She was in different 
hospitals, mainly at Mercy Hospital in charge of the Sisters of 
Charity of St. Augustine 0 Here she was steady for two yrs, and 
two months. She also had fallen in a ditch and broke her :ight 
foot at the anklo on Dec. 3, 1936. The foot was in a cast 18 
mo. but never hea.led together, apparently due to her sickness. 
As her husband was out of work they had to mortgage their home. 
He also became sick and brought him to the hospital for months. 
As they oould not pay the mortgage nor rent the bank took the 
house. Then they put up a ' real shack in a gully with a few 
other unfortunate families. The little village of shacks reminds 
one of the stable of Bethlehem. And may be like Bethlehem some 
day as a beautiful Chapel may replace this humble cottage and 
be a place of pilgrimage. As a Protestant the lady mocked the 
Cath. Religion and surely believed in no saints. In July, 193 8, 
Sr. Clement at Mercy Hospital gave hey a statue of the Little 
IlowS! Someone had given it to Sr. as a ^uveni^fromjhe 
Shrine of the Little Flower in Royal Oak, Mich. Mrs. Wise 
l^ltt°lottU ^ it, sneered at ^^-jfg^g ££ lte 
short prayers to St Theresa and ^e.a feu lines forher^ 
every day. To satisfy Sr. the lady reco.^ ^ ±f ^ 
tell a lie when g^ 8 *®* 0 **® o£ victoria was at her bed she 
them. On Sept. 3, 1938 ? Pros^on the big rosary that 

just had a longing to pick up the Cross on Jhe Dig 7 

Sung at Sister's side i^^ d ^k^StS5F& Her whole body 
breast something got thru her craved to be a Catholic, 

was affected. From then on she just she was mocking* 

Sister always took the «o ^ °n J wl t hold of 

For a who; 3 month every ^l\fl e * utitxi l , Sister?" Sister 
the cross and Tjould say Isn * 1 u h pegged Sr. to teach her to 
would always take it away. Ogg. terrible^ of you to mock religion 
pray the rosary. Sr ; saia. n asking and finally 

all the time." For ten ^^ 7^ ^ to ray it also gave her 
Sister brought a ^-^osary 9 showea her h. ^ feen that will 

a book on it, and said. Y™ \ Ttlis was 5 p. m. The next 
be a sign you really mean *^^ at she ^ew. To her surprise 
dav at 7 p. nu Sr„ Came to see wu th she longed to be- 

the lady knew the rosary wellc For 3 mon n^ ^ d hQr 
come a Cath. She asked her husW^ ^ to believe in 
to do as she pleased, if sh . such ^ sh begged 

something. Dec. ?». T ^?°«; £ S t. Theresa, and then she really 
the Srs. to make a i.ovena 



\ 



w S « 

also prayed to her fen^i^ a 

are praying) 0 Tao ^eefct w leaf let is ' wliat *hey PW «tf still 
As St. Peter's church i« before she asked for a oath, priest, 
was called. He told h£S ?v??I ^° 13118 hospital Monsig. Habig 
be a Cath., but lust £«a he did not tnink she wa ^ted to 

tor called on her of+Sn a S2 me notion « Since the Methodist pas- 
She said: "Thev difl i-wS said ma y be ttie Srs. had coaxed her. 
account, I long to k ^fS ? encourage me to do so, it's my own 
in a day she hrd 1 a2wS ?! Monsig. left a small Cathecism and 
increasL her lesson^ . H ? brou S ht ^ one, and daily 

for the next lit!™ % * f 5 en hGlf «»a he gave her all the rest 
the :elu f ^ SJvASK , days she it, of course, with 

HI was a Po2S^f ad the Ll * tle Flower. On New Year's day 1939 
?J Wa n LS^i 0 ^ 10 ^ Jan ° 4 another operation was performed. 
5>S # Jto stomach was so swollen she could not see over it. 

2 5 ' CO i a there W£XS no hel P for he * ^d the cast was 
uc^cen tram, her foot, for she would never walk again. So why 
torture her with that. It was very painful, especially when 
they had to turn her body the flesh on her stomach just fell a- 
way, she was all raw up to her breast and very few nurses could 
change the bandages, on account of the odor and sight, they got 
sick. Nearing there was to be confirmation in St. Peter's on 
Mar. 7 she asked Monsig 0 Habig if she could be confirmed. He 
said it was hot necessary for they could not take her to Church 
with her bed, and even if they tried the doctors would not al- 
! low it. When the Monsig , told Bishop McFadden about it he said: 
"I really do not know of anyone that was confirmed in a hos- 
pital but there is a first time for everything and so we will 
make this the first time for this." The Sisters fixed up a room, 
he came with six priests. Mass servers, and 29 Sisters and had 
full services that lasted an hour, even Benediction. Before 
Easter she asked Sister to take her to the Chapel as she never 
was in a Cath. Churcho Doctors would not allow this, but she 
insisted telling them, "what is the difference to die a couple 
of days sooner or later, there was no cure for her anyway. So 
she was taken to the Chapel o And seeing ai other sister . going 
from picture to picture, she was wondering why and was told a- 
tout the Way of the Cross. So on Holy Thurs. she begged Sr. to 

Sr^B^-SSa f^e To S5T « Sly 

pihX *e r at lurt i: racing 

band, who slept opposite her ^droom g g & ^ 
i she was always web. She n-a nox x it d as shQ 

ing a light she t?ere 5^to her surprise by'her bed in 

turns to see if he wr - 3 H ^ e ^' d . folded on His breast, black eyes, 
a chair sat Our Lord ^Xn 't ml shoulders, thin curly 
brown hair that reached ^ut o Hi s sn ic ^ es sh0W) ... in 
beard same color, (and not loag or ** eone \fc t did not shave for 
to a point) round, ^ d ab0 ^ e ^erf penetrating, His voice soft 
a couple of months. His eyes very P e * ia dy thought Him to 
and gentle, more like a lady _s voice, a at 33) and said 

be about 38 yrs. old (she did not ^ ^ gQ ^ ? then 

He resembled the Jewish racee > s toew she was dyin g 

changeable as a rainbow colors,, Mrs. wx ^ 
so she said: "Dear Lord did cu .ome * & timQ ^ 

answered, "I did not come to go t y oa, ^ perform mira- 

I want you to trust and oonfx ^ asked „ Dear Lo rd 'where 
clos, I will com3 teok in ^ brother 25 yrs. old 
is my mother? /she died 7 yrs. ho Rnd another brother, Frank, 
died 4 yrs before 3 cne ^ j 



53 yrs. old died 9 yrs c 
two younger brothers are 
sailed and said 



igo) 
in 



Jesus answered: "Your mother and 
_ n heaven with Me 0 M Then Our Lord 

SS iLT+Jt 5"? ? ut your Mother, Frank, was not so good,. I 

L %K ib i e times witil him 9 it will' take may yrst yet. 
before he gets to your mother, there is much work for him bo be 
done. He does not seem to realize this, but one of these days 
Frank will get busy also „ In My homes t v . -?e is wsrk for every- 
one, none is idle The lady called to L~r husband: "George, 
Jesus is sitting at my bed - come here." The man answered". 
"Shut up, you are crazy as hell." The lady thought Our Lord was 
offended but He paid no attention to that, and was very pleasant, 
told her also that in Canton and all over' the world Catholics 
are very lukewarm in their faith e He was patient with them but 
decided to give the grace of faith to Protestants, and said she 
should stay poor, because most of the sins committed in those 



;ay poor, 

times were on account of money ? all people do is to look for 
luxuries and earthly pleasures. Their hearts are far away from 
God. The lady was going to touch His garments, but just then He 

When she told her husband in the morning he just 
she was* Monsig. Habig told her people 

Drs. said the 



disappeared, 
laughed at how crazy 

before death have those illusions and visions, 
same thing so no one believed it was true, 



crown 
5 in. 
stood 



tall, as 

' the or: 



and 



5 again at 2:45 a. i, she sees a bright 
light /andas she looks, there in the doorway of h ??. bed ^ m rnofl 
stood Our Lord, in sparkling white garments, resembling the Good 
Shepherd. His'arms outstretched, on His forehead marks of the 
>.rown of thorns showing like Dirt hma r ks . He i s ab ou t 5 f t • 4 or 

afterwards she showed on the doorsill how h.e 
est measured it. She did not seem to notice 
K. a w a h-nrlc; He said "I am here as I have promised." 

Chants s£. 4 £sr o/r srg g^^^nss^cir 

was as she was on f^'f^SLoe so beaut if ul that one just 
'can describe that heavenly f^^|» t f tll e bod and said "I am 
wonders at that Doaut J° ^ ^ to cure you. People of today 
the Little Flower and have come tojmr 7 more mirac ios if 
are of little ^\th the food^d w ouia P your b dages 

people trusted ^d believe mor. to do so, and even If I do I 
The lady thought, "I am not able to ao^ , q h&m that, the 
can never put them back ^--^ * them at the foot of the bed, 
Little Flower ^^^f" f thf lady^s stomach - she did not even 
placed her little hana on .^ b Xher she would just scream with 
feel-it, if someone else touched her ^ ^strust me- 

pain. St. Theresa said "You are >„ (Tae foot was not 

so; keep on trusting I w.ll co^c ^ „ ^ ^ ^ d .s- 

healedK Our Lord said "I J^ 1 f s | eet dream and fell as- 
appeared. Mrs. Wisa thought the first thing she always 

leep, got up at 5 a^m., upon ^ ^t This 

did P wo?ld be to touch her d! sto ^ ^ed andTer 

time she found oux x at the to ox oi there, 

looked and saw the bandag a'soar li |f fell her hus-' 

stomach completely u ^ slie ■ tries o u dau gh- 

her bowels P^^^sten? thought she ff^Jhf a^'her imagt 
band, he ^uld not li|^ , ei ther, only -Uughs au n g 
ter 17 yxs, old aid no^ j- wo rk at his PWA Job. f 

fW*.S'X^* her ?° pray 



M 



writes her a 



le d 



te?and asks hor 



; one to know oi w»t - — 
to the Little Flower ^o she 
daughter to take it to her rigni, 



SSt rlSt awav 'T he ??, is not ^g so important, that Sr. must 
voS are not ^ofn e . J * Ll1 go tonight," Mother said: «22 

SS Hab?s he Y0U Wil1 go tonight. Also oall Men- 

Slfnaiff 1L ^ should come." The gi?l went and came hack saying. 
™?£ 6 >US ^..homo, he is on his way to Cleveland and will 

«L« m™S Unt «rrv 6 . Po mo " Before sheftnishcd talking., in 
comes Monsig. "?fhat is wrong here, I did not intend to come 
today, out my steps lead me here, somehow I cannot take any 
other steps but towards this place*" The lady just laughed, 
how happy she was, Monsig 0 looked all over himself, thinking 
something was wrong with him 0 The lady just asked her daughter 
to step out. She did c She then called Monsignor to t he hod 
and showed him her " stomach, all cured the minute the Little 
Flower touched hero "My God, what a miracle 0 " He himself took 
the message to Sister Clement andcalled the doctor. The Sisters 
could not get "there quick enough by auto so they hired a cah e 
The neighbors, seeing the sisters coming and knowing that Mrs 0 
Wise was on her deathbed got together. One of them went to 
find out when Mrs* Wise had died,,- As she came in Mrs. Wise was 
just telling the sisters about the miracle 0 The lady ran out 
to tell the others e In 15 minutes the cottage was full of peo- 
ple who 'were with joy (they were all Methodists! 9 they wore 
singing," crying and jumping and dancing as out of their wits, 
July 14, the doctors announced her stomach as cured hut had to 
put her foot in a cast again for 3 to 4 months. She would he 
a cripple but it is better to walk on crutches than lie in Dec. 
all the time e August 9th the foot twisted about and pained 
terribly. The doctor prescribed a thicker cast, four incnes 
above tne knee and 3 beloWo Aug* 15 at 2:45 a. m. the foot 
nas all swollen, the cast was cutting into the flesh ^|^ as 
bleeding! Mrs/ wise was rubbing *b crying and saying "My 
God what will I do before I get a doct There at ood tn . 
Little Flower saying "This is only ^ l^^Jf • Something 
take the cast from your 1©*. L if cut with a knife, 

like a rip was heard the cast looked as if ^| ™£ Q bed fJust 

The Little Flower took it of ^cSg) and said: "Get up and 
as though she haa taken off a st oo king^ an it 

walk and go to Mass ^^^^^^^ this latere) She made a 
was a feast day she w ^^J?ShfiaB diking. She went to 
step, then another, and really she wxs^ g ave her dress on 

the closet to put on her d ^f s f b ^ ile « ho V they will fit", 
for three years, think, , * 1X ™° gj only a 59 rf dress) but the 
"well, it will be all right, (she had o^ ^ on ir al , . 
people in the Cat no lie Church na ^ about to see how 

they would look up to Him ana noxx ^ hour and 15 mm, to 
the People were dressedo ^ r c stoc kings everywhere but on her 
dress She was putting °^ e £4£iness. When she was dressed 
fee?!' She was overawed ^"^ P ^t her at the door he fell 
she called her husband . When no net ^ J have n0 ^ 

on\?f£ees ^^"^^'mSy no^Catho^cs -braced the 
believed in him-" Since Antics have returned to their 

faith and many f alien away Ca* ho lies b instrac tions with a 
Pother's house. Her husband is no <=> a Qur Lor 

has promised to come. b 

' iS * „ told Mrs. Wise when she visited him: 

ArchM f OP schremhs g» » • ^ ^ ^It 

great miracle , 



» 



tionso God wil] be H,H„ n 

more yon will bv> tn 5§ your faitl1 211(1 love f or Him. The 
reward. God never loV^S!^? 10 more fitful will be your 
place their full confidence ^Hi n ° neS QS ^ M th ° 7 



M-rc, uT^t that wrote this is a personal friend now of 

n^-rli?^' SeCn her at least six times, so the above notes 

are reliable 0 J 



Continuation of the Canton, Ohio miracle 



Cleveland, Ohio, Jan. 3, 1940 



Dear Rev e Father: 



Lest 
if I would 
visit Mrs. 



Sun 0 Dec. 31 at 
be so kind to go 
YJise, her son would 



1 a.m. a boy came to my home asking 
with his mother to Canton, 0* to 
take us there in his car at 1:30 



p c m. For three days I had 
thought of taking a bus to 
Sat 0 I gave it up* So you 
I am sure the Sacred Heart 
me. 



just longed to see Mrs. Wise, even 
get there, but duo to the cold weather 
can imagine how happy I was to go. 
has prompted this good lady to take 



and at seeing 
I wanted you 



months -since her cure of 
a She had a box with rosa- 
by the nuns and others to 



appear 
there 



again 



as He had pro- 



also a letter ask- 



When we got there Mrso wise opened the door, 
me just screamed, "what a surprise for me. Just as 
so much I was going to write, but could not get to it P " Her 
eyes sparkled liko stars., she was so happy. All she could say- 
was: "Our Lord was here." She said that she somewhat expected 
Him on Thursday the 28th as it was 6 
her abdominal ailing since Juno 28th 
ries, medals pictures etc, given her 
be blessed by our Lord when He would 

S- e ^/s ha Ho"r"1ta \fe S V£T Sndfoi'aiTiy friends (you 
SfSj^ursrsheVfno rest fill she too, this *os out, and 
put it on her cedar chest which is only 
covered with clothe 

. i /-v/ri-y^ fl, 1T .iri7 nishts, at times only a few hours 
She does ^t sleep during nights ^ ^ > 

then she either prays or Yi, our Lord appeared to her about 
Friday Dec, 29th at 3:30 a.m. ^^J^robos as at the first 
6 feet away from ^ b ed, H e wo re go ia Qf ^ Qf 

time when He appeared to hor^na aiso^ „ you havo stood tho tefl - 
thorns on His face head. 



a common wooden box 



thorns on His foreheacU *®trnt ions and sufferings patiently, 
suffered all the trials P^cub ions and suix g^-waiting 
Still greater trial P^s cu ion^ ^t thro&h your devotion 
you for My sake* You will w ^ t ^ y FlaBro go to the head of 
to the Sacred Hoart and the Little ^ ^ 

your church (Magrv mbig) ana ^^^™ d H eart and the Little 
shrine erectedhere in ^nor p Gared and had the same ap- 

Flower" Then-the Little Flower pp turnofi blessed 

pearance as at the the lirs * raised up His thumb and two 

the articles sent for J^fukvator Mundi". Thus He mad* 
forefingers as on the picwxu 



e 



6 



the sign of the ci?no*a Wr- 

He was giving the Si p xco and then with the whole hand 0 As 
His hands at the- wW=? s ^ n S'Mrs 6 wise noticed the wounds' on 



Flower walked a^fl+fS t: ? e ^lyShroud show's. The Little 

statues of the ^3- Keo^t %? 1 ? ff r ^ s - Wise hado There i 
Jesus of Prague i-^P B l\ Moth ^> St. There qe 2 ft, gfant 
h^d rut nut n.*- " . •* La -ger picture of Sale M. which 1 

framed Othe* ^l? T ^ Qlc ana ^'^gatory and which she had 
-here also j1C± Z' 3 as sfflaX1 candles and pictures were 

^PL a i?°: V' IG PHlj h^lu r.n this altar smile a at our Lord 
So + * Bless ?'.:' lt tola Mrs: wise wherever she wouia visit 

mai5 aay would be doubly blossod. Little T&erese said she 
would return on ha* birthday Jen. s and then they disappeared, 



I was to stand in the almost 



I thought how privileged was uo eromiu. xii uua axmuou 
fresh foot stops of. Jesus „ Many travel to the Holy Land where 
His foot steps are worn off by the ages, and here on a bare 
rough floor He stood a few a aye ago-,, 



I wrote up the ease in the Bohemian weekly "Coska gena" 
"about my visit to the humble home where our Lord visited* That- 
time I mentioned that it reminded me of Bethlehem of the .-table 
Jesus was bom In and that I was positive some aay in these 
slums outside of the City of Canton there wouia be a chapel 
and it would become a real place of pilgrimage „ A lady, whom 



I had never met 



reading this let - 



same 

wa-i 



to mo and 



the 



before, 

brought me |5 0 .She mentioned that whilst she was reading 
article it appeared as -hough some one was whispering she 
should do this and thus start a fund for this chapel , l told 
her that I may not be doing right, by accepting this aoney. 
before asking Msgr 0 Habig 0 She however, insisted saying *M 

^^ic^^t 1 ^? took nrzM™^^ » 

Iff 8 ** 8 &M£ 1-o tof a moating o,- of mam^rs 

Slello Deco 27 ,11 tfisgro , ffain 0 to M rSe v/iso since Ke 

and said should our Lord appoa i again to Mrs ^ ^ ^ b ,, started., 

— ™ hlS ,ni S paris5 :h5Sa? £2 .ust then my letter 

and said; "well, wo will not continue 
is &5 for a fund for 



said 
always keeps 
The meeting was 
rivedo Msgr c rea< 
its all settled. 



ar 



.s it 
here 



the 



29 
of 



HP 

veri f i 



Our Lord appears and 
your church and tell him 
in honor of the So 
mentioned this -co the 



Heart 



es 
that 
u.nd the 
lady that g 



chapel <, 
Go to 



crying for joy that uoa 



lit 



d 



On Dece 

this by saying: Go to the head 
this place is to be a shrine 
T-sttlo Mower o The next cay „ 
.ve mo the $5 and she was 
Heard her prayer c 




-£hty God. 



3 <?ne, pride 



- our nation, this day have 

j UTiJl^J^X 6 to 'O^'CSCI'YP OUT* RftnrMi^ 

^igions and ofe ~~ ■ • ' • ' •; 



forces* 



Success may not. c kth rushing speed, but We shall return 
again and again; and v/e' knctv that bv * ' •' flfc 



. tited b 




- 3 - 

My husband, my children, and all our companions 
fl are and all the Filipinos in America Join me in sending 
you a hearty greeting at Easter. We send you our 
most heartfelt affection. *• do not forget you. Day 
and night we pray to Uod that you may bo spared from 
danger, and that you may be blessed with peace. 

We live in the hope and the wish that soon the 
day should come when we oan be together again, and that 
we may once more partake of the common table, of the 
same aspirations and faith. 

On this day I greet my brothers and sisters. Good- 
bye to you all. This Jrs your countrywoman who lives 
in continued affection and thoughts of you all. 

Megino: You have just heard the fcoice of the first 
lady of the Philippines, our own Dona Aurora Aragon 
Quezon who has joined his Excellency, Manuel L. 
Quezon, President of the Philippines, in sending 
Easter greetings to the Filipino people, 
liusio: Philippines My Philippines. 




My friends and ffO 

fellow-countrymen: 

By order of hi** rio 

doctors., my husband, much to his regret, 

is unable to be present «vs \ 

^ ent) shak e your hands, and greet you. 

I am therefore taking his place and on his behalf as well 
as on my own I extend to you a most hearty welcome. 

The President of the Philippines with his war cabinet 
has come here, upon the invitation of President Roosevelt, 
I might say against his own will, for his personal preference 
would have been to remain in the Philippines and share with 
our people all the hardships that they are suffering now 
as a consequence of the Japanese invasion. But it was his 
plain duty to save the Government of the Commonwealth, which 
he represents, from falling into the hands and being under 
the control of the enemy, and so he had to leave and trans- 
fer the seat of S£e government to Corregidor when Gen. Mac- 

V. ' t n + „ withdrew to this fortress and take- 

Arthur was compelled to witnarsw uu 

his command to Bataan and Corregidor. 



When later Gen. MacArthur had to go to Australia, he 
asked President Quezon to join him in this island continent 
for the same reason that three months before he had asked 
him to go to Corregidor. At last, seeing that he could do 
more in Washington than if he remained in Australia, Presi- 
dent Quezon took advantage of the invitation previously 
extended to him by the President of the United States, and 
which at that time he courteously declined in order not to 
leave the Filipino forces that were fighting in Bataan. 

As you all know, since his arrival here, President 
Quezon has signed the Atlantic Charter, thus formally joining 
the United Nations, and has become a member of the Pacific 
War Council. The significance of these two events, I am 
sure, is clear to everyone of you. In effect, it means that 
the Philippines has been welcomed into the brotherhood of 



partaking i n the councils of U 

uncus of the nations that are in the 



means the 



Pacific area. I n other ^ u praeticall | 
recognition of the independence of the Philippines. 

President Quezon and his war cabinet are doing every- 
thing they can to promote the cause for which the United 
Nations are fighting. He is certain that the Axis will be 
defeated, and the freedom and independence of our people 
redeemed and protected, as pledged by President Roosevelt. 
He wishes me to tell you, and through you all the Filipinos 
in the United States, in Hawaii, in Alaska, and wherever 
they are, including those in our own beloved Philippines, 
that he is proud of, and grateful to you for your patriotism 
and steadfast loyalty to your government and your country. 
He hopes that he will soon be in sufficiently good health 

a ~r>A vH si t vou in the respective 
to be able to go around and visit you 

hp also wishes me to congratulate 
cities where you live. He aioo 



the winners of the p 



rizes, in which congratulations I join. 



For my part, I should like to tell you, that my children 
and I are helping our President in every possible manner 
within our power, quietly, but nontheless determinedly. We 
have shared his anguish, his hardships, his moral and phy- 
sical tortures since the war has been extended to our unhappy 
Fatherland. May our Divine Lord grant that His mercy may 
soon be felt by the beloved ones we all have left behind. 
May He also bless you all. 

In conclusion, I want you to know that now, more than 
ever before, you can count upon the President and our family 

to help in any way we can. 
Thank you. 



* CONTENTS - 



1. Office of ip e tl ri ] Servioo, Commonwealth of the Philiimiaes - 

July 12, 1943 

2. Department of Information end Public Relet ions, Corccnwealth 

of the Philippines - 1943 - Oct, 15| Nov. 11, 12, 15, 17. 

19, 27} Dec. 4, 6, 7. 

1944 - Jan. 1, £6. 29, 31} ?eb. 4, 7, 25j Zferoli 13, 18, 

20, 29; April 1, 3, 6} l£iy 17, 19, 26, 27, 29j June 6, 
7, 14, 1S| July 8, 21| Aug. 7, 10, 11, 24, 26, 29; Sept. 
7} Oot. 80, 21. 25, 26, 2* # 3l| NOT. 8, 14, 15, 16, 17, ' 
29, 30} Dee. 24. 

1945 • Tan. 10} Feb. 1, 5, 15, 19, 20, 27. 

3. Deportaent of Information end Public Relatione, Conaonwealth 

of the Philippiaeo (Delivery of £res, Quezon's Address) - 
Oct. 15, 1945 

4* Deportaent of Information end Public Relatione, Coamonwealth 
of the Philippine* - (Voice of Freedom) - 1944 * Hot. 8, 
19, 14, 16, 27, 29. 
f : lecelianooue) 

3. Office of special service (Enemy Radio Digest) 1943 - July 12} 
■ Alg. 28. 

b. Office of war Information (LSanila Broadcast), 1943 « July 9, 23, 

7. TJ. 8. Office of war Inforaatloa (She Philippine Hour) Aug* 8, 1944 

8. The 4th War Loan Heat Desk - Feb. 2, 1944 

9; Address of mm, iraaklin Reosevelt delivered Deo. 4, 1945 

10. Philippiae ;:ar Relief • Aug, 29, 1942 

11. Congressional Reoorl (The Jones Act) Sept. 1, 1942 

12* N. o. w. c, Ness service - Aug, 29, 1942} sept, 1, 1942 

13, Office of Resident Comaiesioaer of the Philippines to the United 

States, )« Oct. 6, 1940 

14, Department of Interaction and Public Relations (Pedro l&palan) 

15, office of Philippine Resident Cosadssioner (Phil, news Digest) 

Sept. 24, 1948 

16, Presenting of the Medal for Viler to Fleet Admiral Chester Uiaitz 

by the President of the Philippines 

17, Extract from letter describing Mlreoulous cure at Canton, 1939. 



