OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT 
OF THE PHILIPPINES 



November 7 » 1944 

The Provincial Governor 
, Tacloban, Leyte 

D,ear Governor Kangleon: 

By virtue of executive order No. 23 the President of the 
Philippines has created a Board of Inquiry to investigate 
charges of disloyalty to the Commonwealth of the Philippines 
and the United States of America in the province of Leyte. 

The following have been appointed as members of this Board: 

MaJ. Gen. Basilio J. Valdes, Chairman 
Col. Mariano A. Erana, 

Mr. I. Mathay, 

Mr. Emilio Benitez, 

Mr. Bernardino Demeter io 

At the first meeting of the Board it was decided to ask 
you to present, or cause to be presented, written charges 
against the persons whose names are listed in the attached 
list and who have been committed to the Leyte Provincial Jail 
pursuant to your authority. 

You are hereby requested to present such charges in writing 
as soon as possible, but in any event, on or before November 14, 
1944, The charges should briefly set forth specific over acts, 
but should avoid any evidentiary matter. You will be notified 
promptly after receipt of such charges as to the date set for 
hearing. 

In case there are any persons against whom you do not 
prefer charges within the time limited or such extended time 
as may be determined by the Board in any specific case in the 
interest of Justice, upon your request, the case of such per- 
sons will be immediately called before the Board for disposi- 
tion. In case any person is released from custody pursuant to 
recommendations of the Board, because no charges have been 
preferred against him, it will be without prejudice to any 
charges which may be preferred later. 

Yours sincerely, 



BASILIO J. VALDES 
Major General P. A* 

Chief of Staff 

Secretary of National Defense 
Chairman Board of Inquiry 





Dear Governor ftangleon t 

By virtue of executive order No 9 23 the President of the 

pi ilippines has created a ±5 ard of inquiry to investigate charges 

of d.isl<byalt_ to the (Jommonwe&ltja of the Philippines Ind the 

united atates of America in the province of Leyte. The following 

have "been appointed as members of this Boards 

M»j. Gen. Basilio Valdes, chairman 
Col. Mariano A. Eraha, -jMotor 
Lari I, jiathay, Mte 
Mr. Emilio .Benitez, 

Mr. Bernardino ilemetrio 

At the first meeting of the Board it was decided to ask you 
to present, -or cause to he presented, written charges again; t the 
persons whose names are listed in the attached list and who have 
been committed to the. Leyte Provincial jail pursuant to your 
authoritv. 



e are any persons against whom you do not pre- 
fer charges within the time limited or such extended time as 
may be determined by the Board in any specific case in the in- 
terest' of justice, upon your request, the case of such persons 
will be immediately called before the Board for disposition. ^ 
in case any -person is released from custody pursuant to recom- 
mendations of the Board, because no charges have been preferred 
against him, it will be without prejudice.^ to any charges which 
f may be preferred later. 

/ j iou are hereby requested to present such charges in writ- 
ing as soon as possible, but in any event, on or before 
November 1944, The charges should briefly set forth specific 
overt acts, but should avoid any evidentiary matter. You will 
V^be notified promptly after receipt of sue:. charges as to the 




1 



- 2 - 




V. 



I date set for hearing. 



xours sincerely, 



lA JOR- GENERAL BASIMO VALDES 
Chief of .Staff, Philippine Army 
Secretary. of Rational Defense 











