SPEECH TO 3E I®I7ERED BY THE SECRETARY OlAsALTH AND PUBLIC 
WELFARE AT THE MEETING OF PHYSICIANS LITTNG IN AND AROUND 
MANILA UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE PHILIPPINE MEDICAL 
ASSOCIATION AT THE SOCIAL HELL, NERSES’ HOME, 

SAN LAZARO HOSPITAL, ON JUNE 8, 1945 AT 

4 P. M. 



Comrades: 

Allow me to call you my comrades because all of us have 
suffered much from the Japanese occupation of the Philippines, and 
our hearts now beat in unison calling for justice and redress. Let 
us hope that in the not distant future, the Japanese people, who 
have already felt the might and determination of the fighting 
forces of America, will see the complete destruction of their 
island Empire, and the elimination of their military overlords 
responsible in carrying on this abominable war. 

We are gathered here today for the purpose of renewing old 
friendships and making new ones, and to discuss among ourselves 
the problems affecting the medical prof ession in the Philippines 
during these trying times. You will agree with me that most, if 



not all, of the practicing physicians here have lost their means 
* • 

of livelihood. Many of them, having lost their property and other 
belongings, are now living only on their small reserves. I want 
you to know that I realize their predicament and I shall only be 
too glad to extend to them such assistance as may be in my power 
to give. But positions in the Government service are limited in 
number and in remuneration, and naturally I am not well in a 
position to accommodate all of them in the Government service. 

I shall, however, be happy to help as many of them as I oan to 
obtain positions where their training and experience may be needed. 

A few days ago, upon the request of several medical private 
practitioners, I took up with the. Civil Affairs Section of the 
TJSAFFE the necessity of releasing at an early date from the control 
of the PCAUS the private hospitals in the City of Manila so as to 
enable the private practitioners to bring their patients to these 



3 



O 



# 

hospitals. I was informed that the FCAUS would release these 
private hospitals on or about July 1st, subject, of course, to 
certain regulations which they will issue regarding the purchase of 
medical supplies and other necessities. 

The United States Army is organizing a labor battalion to 
handle its many construction projects in the Philippines. Physicians 
will be needed to take care of the health of the members of these 
battalions and I am mak ing arrangements for the employment of 
Filipino physicians who may wish to apply for positions in these 
Army projects. 

Many young physicians havs applied for commission in the 
Philippine Army Resbrve to be called to active duty later, and I 
have invariably told them that their applications will be given 
careful consideration. 

With all these opportunities for public service, many of our 



needy fellow physicians will be able to obtain some means of 
livelihood which although not very remunerative could and should 
serve to help them stand on their own feet again. 

I would like to take this opportunity to draw your attention 
to the difficulties encountered by the Health Department with 
regard to the sanitation of the City of Manila and its environs. 
There is difficulty in securing a sufficient number of laborers 

4 

to collect the garbage as quickly as is necessary. I feel that 
it is our duty as members of ths medical profession, to assist 
the Bureau of Health, and especially the United States Army 
authorities who have been helping our Government in the sanitation 
of Manila. May I appeal to you to give them our undivided support 
and cooperation? In our talks to our neighbors and friends, we 
must impress upon them the importance of cleanliness and the 
necessity of proper handling and disposal of garbage. The United- 



r 



o 



- 5 ~ 



o 



States Army officials, in who3© hands the sanitation of the City 



drums for the people to throw in garbage and refuse. However, I 
have observed in some places that people do not place their garbage 
into these empty drums. Instead they just dump them on the streets 
and around the drums, resulting thereby as convenient breeding 
places for flies and other vermin. Let us appeal to the people 
that they should observe the rules as regards proper disposal of 
waste. Let us teach our neighbors and friends how to provide and 
maintain an incinirator in the yard where garbage could be burned 
every day. If only every house owner would take the trouble of 
burning their garbage daily, the garbage disposal problem in the 
City would be very much simplified. 

An incinirator can be easily built out of an empty drum by 
making little holes in the lower third section of the drum so as 



of Manila has been placed, ha fumade available on the streets empty 




© ... * 

• 

to create a draft. The drum can either be placed on the ground 
or over some stones in a conveniently located place in the yard 
where the garbage may be burned. If the holes in this part of 
the drum are sufficiently large, there will be enough draft to 
keep it burning. This procedure will do away with the odor and 
the garbage will not become a breeding place for flies and other 
insects. 

I would also like to take this opportunity to express my 
appreciation to the United States Army officials who have done 
so much for the sanitation of the City of Manila. I would like 
to express also my thanks to Mr. Atienza, Administrative Officer 
of the City of Manila, and to Mr. Reyes, City Engineer, for their 

i 

generous offer to cooperate with the Department of Health and 
Public Welfare in maintaining the City streets of Manila clean 
and tidy. 



§> - 7 - # 

In closing, may I remind you that the medical profession can 
render valuable service to the country irrespective of whether its 
members are in or outside the government service. I urge you, 
therefore, to keep yourselves ever alive to the growing needs of 
our people, more specially those who have had the misfortune of 
contracting ill-health or impoverished physical condition. I am 
confident that you will do your very best to help alleviate their 
suffering. That ought to go a long way in assisting the Government 
which, although sparing no effort and employing, all possible 
resources at its oommand to safeguard the health of the people* 
has to depend much on the help and cooperation of such men as you 
for attaining success in the various health projects it pas set 
out to accomplish. Servioe rendered thus fey you to your Government 
is service to the people — to humanity. In the course of our 
doing what we oan to serve ourselves and our families, I hope that 
we would not neglect also to find sufficient time to help those in 
need of our professional skill and assistance. 



