Aq uino 

MANAGEMENT 



Of The 



PRESIDENCY 




InTheFaceOf Crisis 



Aq uino 

MANAGEMENT 



Of The 



PRESIDENCY 




InTheFaceOf Crisis 



Published by the 
Presidential Management Staff 
Office of the President 
Manila, Philippines 
June 1992 



Project Director 

Executive Secretary Franklin Drilon 



EDITORIAL ADVISORY BOARD 
Chairman 

Secretary Aniceto Sobrepefia 
Members 

Asst. Secretary Mary Ann Fernandez 
Asst. Secretary Demetrio Ignacio 
Asst. Secretary Narciso Inlong 

Production Manager 

Director Nicanor Torres 

Production Support 

Felicitas Estrella 

Office of Special Concerns - PMS 
Writers/Researchers 

Atty. Jose Emmanuel Caral (lead writer) 
Gloria Georgina Jota 
Minerva Generalao 
Merci Biluan-Tabafunda 

Editorial Consultants 

Hugo Yonzon III 
Guia Tecson Prado 
Minerva Quemuel 

Book Design 

Fusion Media 

Special Thanks 

Resource Persons/Institutions 

Senator Rene Saguisag 

Secretary Renato de Villa - DIC 

Executive Director Maria Montelibano - RTVM 

Director Ida Vargas - RTVM 

Col. Voltaire Gazmin - PSG 

Director Rafael Ileto - NSC 

Director Manuel Gaite - PMS 

Atty. Joker Arroyo 

Atty. Catalino Macaraig Jr. 

Dr. Emmanuel Soriano 

Photos 

Photo Lab - Office of the Press Secretary 
Undersecretary Lourdes Siytangco 
Logo 

Philippine Information Agency 
Editorial and Visual Office - PMS 

Printing 

NEDA Secretariat- APO 



Foreword 



"OURS IS A government that came to power borne on the shoulders of our 
people; we must, therefore, govern on the basis of that same people power". 

These were the very words of President Corazon C. Aquino - words that 
laid the foundation of the highest office of the land. For six years and four months, 
her people-powered presidency reflected itself in the very nature of the executive 
branch and on the implementation of several projects closest to the President's 
heart; closest, because they touched the warp and woof of our people's aspira- 
tions. 

To document in part her people-powered presidency, we have compiled this 
series of volumes titled The Aquino Management of the Presidency. The first 
part of the series attempts to outline the evolution of the support offices and the 
various management tools and technology employed in the decision-making and 
decision dissemination processes in the Office of the President. The second part 
of the series, to which this volume belongs, provides a chronicle of some specific 
undertakings initiated by the Office of the President which, now, constitute part 
of the legacies of the Aquino government. The third part of the series is a summa- 
tion of the Aquino government's performance during its six years in office. 

This volume, "In The Face Of Crisis", seeks to shed light on the various crisis 
situations faced by the Aquino administration, particularly those that were posed 



by rebel forces from the left and the right. It illustrates how the President, as 
Commander-in-Chief, dealt with them. Also, by telling their stories, this volume 
pays tribute to the unsung heroes who stood alongside President Aquino against 
those who sought to derail the complete restoration of democracy in the country. 

This series of volumes, The Aquino Management of the Presidency, is by 
no means a complete coverage of the legacies of the Aquino presidency. Some of 
those not documented here are contained in materials better covered by other 
line agencies or academic groups. 

Some of President Aquino's legacies, however, will find no archive to pre- 
serve them for posterity. One would have to look at the faces and listen to the 
hearts of the people she touched in order to find them. 



Aniceto M. Sobrepena 

Cabinet Secretary 
and 

Head, Presidential Management Staff 



"Arm-chair critics and destabilizers have asked - 
can we survive despite all the problems that we 
suffer? My answer is definite yes! Yes, we will 
survive despite natural calamities, destabilization 
campaigns, insurgency, international crises and 
scathing criticism from those who should be 
talking less and working more. With full 
confidence in our peoples resolve to sustain this 
freedom, we will survive. And we will grow". 

President Corazon C. Aquino 

Philip-pine League of Councilors 
First National Congress 
September 7, 1990 



Introduction 



THIS VOLUME OF The Aquino Management of the Presidency series seeks 
to document how President Corazon C. Aquino, the members of the Cabinet, and 
her closest advisers managed the crisis situations that confronted the Aquino gov- 
ernment. Not all the crisis situations are covered. The focus is on the seven putsches 
and related events which threatened the existence of the government or the unity of 
the armed forces. 

Chapter 1, entitled 'The Coup Attempts That Failed", covers crisis situations 
which started with the takeover of the Manila Hotel by the Marcos loyalists on July 
6 to 7, barely four months after President Aquino assumed office, up to Black Satur- 
day, April 18, 1987, when a band of rebel soldiers took over the Philippine Army 
headquarters. These were the jabs, as in boxing. 

Chapter 2, entitled 'The Military Putsches That Almost Succeeded", covers the 
punches: the bloody August 28, 1987 and the near fatal December 1989 coup at- 
tempts. It also touches on the escape of renegade Col. Gregorio 'Gringo' Honasan in 
1988. 

Chapter 3, entitled 'The Gulf Crisis", covers the crisis situations during the Gulf 
War in late 1 990 to February 1 991 which the military rebels could have exploited to 



The Aquino Management of the Presid 



ency 



go in for the kill, were they not too weak to do so, having spent their strength and 
credibility in coup attempt after coup attempt. 

The tragedy of a coup d'etat is that it is planned and executed by military 
° 1Cers who hav « pledged loyalty to the Constitution, the duly constituted govern- 
ment and the Commander-in-Chief. It was difficult enough that the Aquino govern- 
ment inherited a three-pronged insurgency led by the Communist Party of the Phil- 
ippines - New People's Army (CPP-NPA), the secessionist movement in Mindanao 
ed by the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF), and the insurgency in the 
Cordilleras led by the Cordillera People's Liberation Army (CPLA). 

When we look back at the crises that confronted the Aquino government in the 

had b* there ^ n ° d ° Ubt that transition from dictatorship to democracy 

pow 6611 3 difficUlt ° na Theretum of democratic processes meant the loss of wealth, 
Power, and privilege to those who, at every possible opportunity, opposed its rested 

However painful the experience was, we can put it in perspective with what is 
a Ppening in the newly restored democracies of the world. The key elements are the 
same: a new and inexperienced government; the deposed ruling elite attempting to 
m power; and, a powerful military in an uneasy partnership with its former 

don" 1165 ^ ^ P resum P tuous to sa y so ' but we wiJ l say it nonetheless: we have 
e as well, if not better than many of the newly restored democracies. 

It is tempting to be revisionist and to just gloss over some of the more unpleas- 
ant aspects of the events that happened. The truth is that yes, there was tension 
e ween the highest civilian and military officials of the land. And yes, it was not 
a ways well among the President and members of the Cabinet. The conflicts stemmed 
not only from clashes of personality or struggle for power, but from fundamental 
disagreements on policy issues affecting national security and the economy. 

It would be hackneyed to say that those who do not learn from the past are 
ondemned to repeat it. But this volume was written not just to record historical 
acts nor to just entertain. This volume was written in the hope that future leaders of 
this country might pick up a lesson or two in crisis management. 



In the Face of Crisis 



5 



Finally, we pay tribute and dedicate this work to the woman who was at the 
center of the storm for six years, Her Excellency Corazon C. Aquino, President of 
the Republic of the Philippines. 

It is supreme irony that one of the failed coup attempts was codenamed "God 
Save the Queen". That is precisely what He did. 



The 
Coup Attempts 
That Failed 



AFTER THE EDSA revolution in 1986, the Aquino government began the work 
of consolidating power, democratizing, and reviving the economy. It was not an 
easy task. The Marcoses had left as legacies a prostrate economy, a large foreign 
debt, a serious insurgency problem, and a politicized military that would have much 
difficulty finding its proper place in a newly restored democracy. 

The mission of surmounting these problems and leading 60 million Filipinos 
was suddenly thrust upon the widow of the late Senator Benigno "Ninoy" Aquino Jr. 
She had no experience in government. So did many of her advisers and Cabinet 
members. Rene A.V. Saguisag, former Presidential Spokesman (later Senator), de- 
scribes the situation best: "One day we were in the barricades, the next we were in 
power". 

Within the President's close circle of advisers were lawyers who fought Presi- 
dent Marcos. There were Saguisag, Executive Secretary Joker P. Arroyo, and Deputy 
Executive Secretary Fulgencio S. Factoran Jr. Their reputation and predisposition 
as human rights lawyers had put them in constant collision course with the Marcos 
administration, particularly the military. To the Reform Armed Forces Movement 
(RAM) and its godfathers, Arroyo et al were communists, period. 



In the Face of Crisis 



7 



The events that unfolded soon after the EDSA Revolution seemed to justify the 
knee-jerk accusations. 

Two days after assuming power on February 27, 1986, President Aquino or- 
dered the release of 51 7 pol itical detainees. Those released included Jose Ma. Sison, 
former Chairman of the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP), and Bernabe 
"Ka Dante" Buscayno, former Supremo of the CPP armed group, the New People's 
Army (NPA). 

On February 28, 1986, President Aquino created the Presidential Commission 
on Good Government (PCGG). She appointed former Senator Jovito Salonga as 
Chairman. The mission of the PCGG was to recover the ill-gotten wealth of the 
Marcos family and their cronies. 

On March 1 8, 1986, the President created the Presidential Commission on Hu- 
man Rights (PCHR). Former Senator Jose W. Diokno headed it. The PCHR was 
tasked to investigate complaints of forced or unexplained disappearances, torture, 
hamletting, and other violations of human rights. 

On March 25, 1986, President Aquino promulgated the Freedom Constitution. 
In one bold stroke, she repealed the 1973 Constitution, assumed lawmaking pow- 
ers, and abolished the Batasang Pambansa which had proclaimed Ferdinand Marcos 
as the winner in the 1986 presidential elections. 

President Aquino appointed Aquilino Pimentel Jr., former Mayor of Cagayan 
de Oro City and erstwhile political detainee, as Minister of Local Governments. 
With the President's approval, he began a purge of governors, mayors, and other 
local officials perceived to be loyal to the ousted President. He appointed officers- 
in-charge (OICs) in their place, until regular elections could be held. His choices as 
to who to remove and who to appoint as OIC were not necessarily popular with 
some segments of the military. 

On April 23, 1 986, President Aquino issued Proclamation No. 9 calling for the 
convening of a 50-member Constitutional Commission to write a new Constitution. 
Political parties, civic organizations, cause-oriented groups, and various sectors 



8 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



sent in more than 800 nominations to the President's office. On June 2, 1 986, Presi- 
dent Aquino formally opened the sessions of the Constitutional Commission at the 
Batasang Pambansa building in Quezon City. 

In the course of implementing these initial reforms, the Aquino administration 
made enemies. There were cronies whose assets were sequestered. All sorts of politi- 
cians closely identified with the Marcoses were booted out of power, including Cabi- 
net members, members of the Batasang Pambansa, governors, and mayors. Within 
the military, there were groups which remained loyal to the Marcoses. At the same 
time, segments of the military led by the RAM had fundamental disagreements with 
the new government's reconciliation policy with regard to the insurgency problem. 
Executive Secretary Joker Arroyo explains why President Aquino pursued a policy 
of reconciliation instead of pushing for a hard-line approach: 'The problem with the 
military was a recurring one. It was actually a policy of conflict. The military in- 
sisted on crushing the communists militarily. So we raised the question, if you could 
not defeat them during Marcos' time, how can you defeat them now? 

But more important is the fact that the military never understood the differ- 
ence between the Marcos military and the Aquino military. They thought that the 
Marcos military and the Aquino military are one and the same, that it is a continua- 
tion. That since the Marcos military was committed to destroy the communists 
militarily, ergo, the Aquino military must also destroy the communists militarily. 

Remember that President Aquino released the leaders who were in prison, two 
days after she assumed office. She released them for one simple reason: she had 
sympathy for almost all incarcerated political prisoners. Because Ninoy was like 
them. Many think their release was at my suggestion. It came from her. 

Any incoming President must extend the olive branch. When a new President 
assumes office, he is President of the entire Filipino people and he must try to recon- 
cile them and not to fight or kill them. The military wanted a continuation of war. 
The President herself did not want it". 

In a matter of months after President Aquino took over, the RAM started to lay 
the groundwork for overthrowing the newly-installed government. Phil ippine Con- 



In the Face of Crisis 



9 



stabulary (PC) Chief Renato de Villa recalls: "As early as May 1986 or barely three 
months after the Aquino administration had taken power, there were already indi- 
cations that certain personalities in the armed forces were preparing for a coup. We 
knew about the silent recruitment that was going on". 

The Manila Hotel Incident 

The first major challenge to the legitimacy and the existence of the Aquino 
government came from the Marcos loyalists, although later sources would indicate 
the involvement of the RAM. On July 6, 1986, a Sunday, some 490 soldiers and 
5,000 Marcos loyalists took over the Manila Hotel and swore in former Senator 
Arturo Tolentino, the running mate of Ferdinand Marcos in the snap elections, as 
"acting President". 

At that time, President Aquino, along with most of her Cabinet and key mili- 
tary officials, was in Cagayan de Oro City. Joker Arroyo looks back: 'The entire 
government was in Cagayan de Oro". Luckily, I went to the office even if it was a 
Sunday afternoon. Nobody was there. 

A reporter called me up from Manila, Hotel, There are troops here . . / 'What 
kind of troops?' I asked. They are rebel troops, Marcos loyalists/ he answered, then 
asked me for my reactions. 'What is the strength?' I asked. 'About five thousand/ he 
replied. I told the reporter, 'Never mind asking me about my reaction. I want infor- 
mation on what is happening. Every time you call me, I will give you one thousand 
pesos. But I do not have the money now. I will pay you later.' He agreed. 

Another reporter of another paper called, asking me the same thing. Before 
long, I had five reporters from print and radio giving me information. I knew ex- 
actly what was happening through them because the Marcos loyalists were butter- 
ing up to the media and wanted to use them for propaganda". 

Arroyo made several more phone calls after that. He called Defense Minister 
Juan Ponce Enrile: he was playing golf. Then he called Commander Jesus Regala, 
Deputy Commander of the Presidential Security Group (PSG), ordering them to 
secure Malacanang. 



10 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Next, he called Vice Chief of Staff Salvador Mison. "He was a fellow Bicolano, 
but I did not know him then", Arroyo says. Mison asked him for orders and Arroyo 
told him what he told the PSG. Then Arroyo called Gen. Rodolfo Canieso, the Com- 
manding General of the Philippine Army. Canieso also asked him for orders. "Elimi- 
nate any hostile force", was Arroyo's quick retort. Canieso said that he could use 
howitzers and wipe out the loyalists in three minutes. "Just give me the order, Sir", 
Canieso said. Arroyo did not. 

Only then did Arroyo call the President in Cagayan de Oro and informed her 
of the situation, but told her that "everything was under control". 

On the same day, late in the afternoon, Arroyo and bosom buddy Jejomar 
Binay (then Makati OIC Mayor) got in a car with Noni Pineda of the Malacanang 
Motor Pool and proceeded to Rizal Park. They did not see many troops, but they 
saw people buying ice cream and people lolling on the grass in Luneta. 

Arroyo got in touch with Mison and they compared notes. Mison told him that 
they had already made contact with the rebel officers. "They will retire little by 
little", Mison assured. 

The former Executive Secretary learned a lot of things from this first 'inci- 
dent'. First is that the military expected to be given orders and not to be asked what 
should be done. Second, it was easy to purchase information. Arroyo claimed he 
spent P19,000.00 for his reporter - spies. 

Early m the evening, Arroyo got in touch with the President and told her that 
there was no reason for her to come to Manila right away. But later, the President 
called back and said that upon Gen. Ramos' advice, she was coming back that same 
evening. The President was not able to, however. The runway lights in Cagayan de 
Oro were not functioning. 

Maria V. Montelibano, Executive Director of Radio Television Malacanang 
(RTVM), was among those who accompanied the President in Cagayan de Oro: 
"We had a serious communications problem because of lack of facilities in the area. 
The President wanted to come out on television to give a statement, but this was not 
possible. We held a press conference and the best we could do to transmit the Presi- 



In the Face of Crisis 



11 



dent's message to the Metro Manila stations was in bits and pieces by radio. We had 
videotaped the President's message and we looked for a plane that would fly me 
out to Manila. But the runway lights were out and no pilot would risk it. 

We learned the hard way, but since then, we always made sure that communi- 
cation linkages were available wherever the President were to go". 

Col. Voltaire Gazmin, the PSG Commander, recalls what took place after they 
received news of the Manila Hotel takeover: "We secured the President in the house 
of Dr. Lazo. The location was kept secret even from Gov. Emano. The only ones who 
knew were the PSG and the military units deployed to secure the entire subdivision. 
Later, after an assessment of the situation as reported from Manila, the President 
decided to fly back". 

President Aquino flew back to Manila the following day, after finishing her 
original schedule of visiting military camps and receiving rebel returnees in Cagayan 
de Oro. She conferred with Cabinet members and senior military officials at her 
office in the Guest House. At 2:00 p.m., she held a press conference and issued a 
statement giving the loyalists 24 hours to give up. 

Rene Saguisag recalls events that Sunday afternoon and the days that 
followed: ". . . July 7 . . . Monday, I reported for work in the Guest House early. I 
advised my staff that despite all the rumors and commotions we should not panic 
and go on with business as usual. Before, during and after my stint in the Guest 
House, there are two fixed stars that I have gone by. One, you can waste a whole 
lifetime worrying things that may never happen. Two, don't let terrorists dictate the 
tempo of your life. 

The President arrived in her office later that morning, having flown back from 
Cagayan de Oro. She noted that everything was normal save in that small pocket 
that is the Manila Hotel, where the 'rebels' were having a hard time persuading 
people to take them seriously. Traffic was normal in the Malacanang area and no 
barricades were even put up. Our staff reported for work. 

The President said in jest that she would like to discipline Joker for insubordi- 
nation. He had disobeyed her order the day before to call the Cabinet to an emer- 



12 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



gency meeting. We thought it was totally unnecessary as he was in constant touch 
with the military and the police. Indeed, the Cabinet was not to meet until the bi- 
zarre affair was over. 



Key civilian and military officials (led by Defense Minister Juan Ponce Enrile) 
were summoned to Malacanang that same morning. Ramos, Mison, Navy Chief 
Serapio Matillano, Air Force Chief Ramon Farolan, and PC-INP Chief Renato de 
Villa briefed the President on the situation. 

There was discussion on the setting of a deadline, one week, three days or 24 
hours. I then suggested that, for starters, to give the putsch ists 24 hours to give up. 
My idea was to divide the leaders and the followers of the caper. I had the gut 
feeling that many of them would just want some excuse to go home. This was 
adopted and it was somehow interpreted as an 'ultimatum'. As it happened, every- 
one took advantage of the opportunity to leave. 

As a lawyer, I had been used to negotiating in my cases as well as in rallies and 
in discreet secret meetings. One lesson I learned in Prof. Roger Fisher's seminar at 
Harvard Law was for one always to think of making 'yes-able' propositions to the 
other side in crisis management situations. Do not humiliate or embarrass your 
opposite number. Give him a gracious way out. Do not rub h is nose into the ground". 

The President went about her day with her usual calm and followed her previ- 
ously set schedule. She addressed the Association of Major Religious Superiors and 
met with the press. 

Defense Minister Enrile's Deputy, Rafael 'Rocky' Ileto, was assigned by Presi- 
dent Aquino to lead the negotiations with the group of Senator Tolentino which 
included former Batasan Speaker Nicanor Yniguez and loyalist military officers 
like General Jose Maria Zumel, Bgen. Jaime Echevarria, and Bgen. Antonio Palafox. 

Ileto was Commanding General of the Philippine Army in 1972 and was re- 
moved for opposing the declaration of Martial Law. He was Ambassador to Thai- 
land when Senator Benigno Aquino was assassinated on August 21, 1983. From 



In the Face of Crisis 



13 



then on, he developed linkages with business leader Jaime 'Jimmy' Ongpin and his 
circle and silently worked for the downfall of the Marcos administration. At the 
height of the EDSA revolution, he was given the task of negotiating with then AFP 
Chief of Staff Fabian Ver. 

Ileto recalls the negotiations with the loyalists who had taken over Manila Ho- 
tel: "I got in touch with the group of Senator Tolentino and I was able to convince 
them to go to the conference table. The negotiations were held in neutral ground - 
the Army and Navy Club. 

The negotiations were done at two levels: first, with the political leaders and 
second, with the military group that was supporting them. Eventually, both gave in 
and agreed to pull out". 

The President called a Cabinet meeting on Wednesday, July 9. At issue during 
that meeting was the government's policy on the participants in the caper. Presiden- 
tial Spokesman Rene Saguisag reflecs on the debate that took place, and the impli- 
cations of the decisions made in that meeting: 'There were hawks and there were 
doves. The President was the wise owl. In hindsight (Minister of Local Govern- 
ments), Nene Pimentel was correct about removing the incumbent local chief execu- 
tives and replacing them with OICs. Had the duly elected Mayors of Metro Manila 
been retained, they would have been able to mobilize in support of the Marcos 
loyalists. There would have been a greater likelihood that the government would 
have fallen". 



Implementing The Reconciliation Policy 

By the time the Marcoses fled to Hawaii, the NPA had grown to a force of 
^ore than 20,000. The next serious threats came from the MNLF advocating seces- 
sion in the south and the CPLA in the north. Despite these threats from all sides, 
President Aquino was not inclined to continue the traditional hardline approach to 
countering insurgency. She believed that the long-term solutions were political, eco- 
nomic, and social; not military. 



14 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



In August 1986, the government began implementing a policy of pursuing 
peace talks with the CPP-NPA, MNLF, and CPLA - with the aim of arriving at initial 
agreements to a ceasefire. The efforts towards a ceasefire, especially with the CPP- 
NPA, were not popular with the military establishment which had been bred mainly 
in the "find-fix-and-finish" school of thought insofar as fighting insurgency was con- 
cerned. The RAM accused the Aquino government of being "soft" on the commu- 
nists and of being infiltrated by communists at the highest levels. 

Rene Saguisag responds to some of the issues raised by RAM: "The claim of 
RAM that the government is soft on the CPP-NPA is an excuse for their inefficiency 
against the insurgency. The hardline approach during the Marcos years just made 
the insurgency bigger and bigger. 

There was tension in relating with the military because we were pushing for 
civilian supremacy On the other hand, the RAM subscribed to the school of thought 
advocating power sharing, on the theory that the government assumed power be- 
cause of the military". 

The Aquino government continued its policy of pursuing peace talks despite 
resistance from some segments of the military. 

On September 5, 1986, President Aquino flew to Jolo, Sulu under tight secu- 
rity. There, she signed a ceasefire agreement with Nur Misuari, Chairman of the 
MNLF. The following week, on September 13, President Aquino flew to Bontoc, 
Mountain Province and signed a ceasefire agreement with Fr. Conrado Balweg, 
leader of the CPLA. In both cases, it helped that the draft Constitution being pre- 
pared at that time by the Constitutional Commission explicitly provided for a mecha- 
nism by which autonomous regions could be created. In the meantime, negotiations 
with the CPP-NPA continued, with a ceasefire agreement being eventually signed 
on November 27, 1986. 

On her sixth month in office, President Aquino began a series of state visits 
start.ng with Indonesia and Singapore which she visited from August 24 to 27. It 
was as much to set the tone of her foreign policy as to underscore her government's 
confidence that it would not collapse even in her absence. 



In the Face of Crisis 



After Indonesia and Singapore, the President visited the United States, from 
September 15 to 23, where she gave a much applauded address to the US Congress. 
By the time her third trip that year had been scheduled - to Japan on November 10 
to 13 - rumors of a coup that would attempt to topple the Aquino government were 
rife. 

God Save The Queen 

The coup rumors were accompanied by increasing public criticism of the 
Aquino government from its very own Defense Minister, Juan Ponce Enrile. Demon- 
strations by Marcos loyalists and a series of bombings compounded the situation. 

On October 21, 1986, in an effort to resolve the growing rift, President Aquino 
met with Minister Enrile. The meeting was held at the home of then University of the 
Philippines (UP) President Edgardo Angara, a friend of the President and the Defense 
Minister's fraternity brother. Vice President Salvador Laurel, Minister Jose 
Concepcion, Press Secretary Teodoro Locsin Jr., and Chief of Staff Gen. Fidel Ramos 
also attended the meeting. Among Enrile's demands: abolition of the Freedom Con- 
stitution, restoration of the Batasang Pambansa, the removal of some Cabinet mem- 
bers and other government officials, and a hardline policy on the insurgency. In a 
Cabinet meeting the following day, the President informed the Cabinet of what had 
taken place. 

While the 'God Save the Queen" plot was runnning its course, President Aquino 
appointed her first National Security Director, Dr. Emmanuel V. Soriano. He was 
former President of the UP and a member of the Convenor Group which had drafted 
and supported the President's candidacy in the snap elections. 

Soriano was summoned to Malacanang. He remembers that when he met her, 
one of the first questions she had asked was: "Do you know Eddie Ramos?" 

When Soriano replied that he knew Ramos but had not worked with him, the 
President explained that she needed to have another channel to the military and that 
Soriano should develop links with Ramos. Soriano says that her parting words 
were: 'Tell Eddie that, come what may, we should be together". 



16 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



"A couple of months later, Eddie Ramos, as Chief of Staff, became one of the 
seven members of the Cabinet Crisis Committee (that had been created). As Chair- 
man of the Committee, I was able to work with and observe Eddie at close range - 
during relaxed discussion sessions and while under intense pressure - and I am 
convinced, as I was even then, that he is for the people and will respect Constitu- 
tional processes", states Soriano. 

Joker Arroyo relates how the President decided to proceed with the state visit 
to Japan and how the "God Save the Queen" crisis was resolved: "We knew that the 
military top brass were meeting among themselves to resolve the "God Save the 
Queen" crisis; but they were not reporting to the President. It was only in the last 
meeting that Gen. Ramos gave a direct order to abort "God Save the Queen". Per- 
haps it was for tactical reasons that he gave the order only at that time. There were 
dialogues with the RAM. Well, maybe that is the military way of doing things, I 
don't know. But what went on, the President was not told. She was told only after 
the last meeting". 

But the President did have quiet supporters within the military. Joker Arroyo 
tells of "... a Reserve Colonel in the Army, Carbonell. 'He's Bicolano' Mison ex- 
plained ... He shared the same barracks as Gringo Honasan, another Bicolano. 
Honasan, who is good at symbolism and show, parked his armor face to face with 
Carbonell's armor. At Mison's urging, I asked Carbonell to see me at the office. 

To make a long story short, Carbonell had confronted Honasan, saying: 'Hoy, 
paisano, the fight will start and end here'. Carbonell made sure that Honasan un- 
derstood that he would get opposition if he tried to pull a coup. 

I asked Carbonell what would happen if fighting started. He said, 'It won't 
start without us knowing. The moment they start loading their shells, we load. The 
moment they start their motors, we start ours'. . . After that meeting, I told the 
President, 'There are units very loyal to us' ". 

The President and her immediate staff, however, knew all about the plot. Press 
Secretary Teodoro 'Teddy Boy' Locsin, Saguisag, Gazmin, Factor an, and Arroyo 
met with the President. Together, they decided to let the military know that the 



In the Face of Crisis 



17 



Executive knew. It was agreed to be done through a 'leak' to a newspaper. The 
President chose the Inquirer. She said that the one to write the article should be the 
daughter or wife of a military officer. 

Arroyo was assigned to talk to Inquirer editor Eugenia Apostol and journalists 
Letty Jimenez-Magsanoc and Belinda Olivares-Cunanan. In the name of "public 
service", the article exposing "God Save the Queen" appeared in the Inquirer on 
November 6, 1986. 

Locsin, in the meantime, was asked by the President to include the plot in her 
speech before the World Dental Congress at the PICC, scheduled on the same day 
the article came out. The President said, "Make a speech telling the rebels to do their 
worst, that we are prepared and that I am going to Japan". 

President Aquino left for Japan on the very next day, November 19, 1986. 
Before leaving, she called in key commanding officers to ensure their loyalty. Col. 
Gazmin put the PSG on red alert. The RTVM prepared and secured back-up broad- 
cast facilities. 

The visit to Japan resulted in a package of grants, loans, and other economic 
assistance. But President Aquino's triumphant return to Manila on November 13 
was greeted with the news of labor leader Rolando Olalia's violent death. The Chair- 
man of the left-leaning Kilusang Mayo Uno (KMU) and President of the Partido ng 
Bayan (PnB) was obviously tortured and killed along with his driver Leonor Alay- 
ay. An investigation of the National Bureau of Investigation (NBI), then under Di- 
rector Antonio Carpio, would later link the RAM to the murders. 



The Night The President Could Not Sleep 

At 5:00 a.m., Sunday, November 23, 1986, Arroyo was roused by a phone call. 
The President was on the line. She said that she could not sleep the night before and 
that she wanted him to call for a Cabinet meeting "except Enrile" at 6:00 a.m. With 
sleep still in his eyes, Arroyo bargained for 6:30 a.m. He needed time to get in touch 
with the others. 



18 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Her Cabinet gathered, the President informed them that she had made up her 
mind to fire Enrile: "I want your support", she told them. She got it. 

By mid-morning, Enrile was called to Malacanang and in a one-on-one meet- 
ing with the President, was asked to go. All he asked for was that his security con- 
tinue to be assigned to him which the President granted. 

During the Cabinet meeting, Ramos had told of troop movements that were 
detected on Saturday mid-morning. He had also said that an attempt to reconvene 
the Batasan was to be held by disgruntled KBL MPs and a faction of the military. 

Ramos had been invited to join the coup plotters. In fact, a Colonel and a 
Major had boldly come to him and complained about how President Aquino was 
allegedly mishandling practically everything - human rights issue, appointment of 
Cabinet members, peace negotiations, etc., etc. 

Ramos had refused to join them. Instead, he ordered all camps shut and flights 
prohibited. Middle-level officers, not only enlisted men, were ordered to man the 
entry gates and patrol borders, if need be. 

The die was cast. Ramos issued an order to all commanders: "Disregard any 
orders from MND or Col. Honasan and MND staff. 

Saguisag says: "On the basis of . . . the directive of Gen. Ramos, clearly it would 
have been untenable to keep Minister Enrile in office . .. It was a principled' disagree- 
ment. There was some question as to the timing. But, the President, cool and re- 
laxed, obviously had made up her mind that early Sunday morning. She listened 
patiently to all those present, weighed what they had to say, but was not swayed. 
She directed that we all resign and we did on the spot. That afternoon, the President 
relieved Manong Johnny of his post. 

I have always admired her gut instincts and gut feel and maybe that was the 
right time to do it . . . But clearly, she did the right thing, at the right time, in the right 
way, and for the right reason. 



In the Face of Crisis 



19 



It was past 3:00 p.m. She stood up to leave the Guest House to walk to the 
Palace and address the nation on TV. All the Cabinet members stood up and clapped, 
and clapped, and clapped. For a moment I thought she showed some softness and 
hesitation. She made the statement with a touch of class and a dash of humor, 
following many hours of toughness and steel, determined to get and do what she 
wanted. 



Like the rest who would like to be reappointed, I applauded, too. She was 
every inch President and Commander-in-Chief. Her morale needed no boosting. It 
had never been higher. And we had never been more proud of her. We were hailing 
the Chief". 

Unknown to the public, 'the Chief wept when it dawned on her that she also 
had to fire her friends in the Cabinet, among them Aquilino Pimentel. In a televised 
interview she gave towards the end of her term, President Aquino looks back: "Let 
me tell you about when I was going to ask Nene Pimentel to resign, remember after 
the 'God Save The Queen' incident? Then there was a cry for removing some mem- 
bers of the Cabinet. And I called Nene Pimentel in. I think I was more sorry and 
sadder than he, you know, as I was telling him this. And I really had to get some 
tissues because the tears were coming out. And Nene was saying, 'No, it was al- 
right, I understand that this is something that you have to do'". 

Maria Montelibano remembers it as the beginning of the toughening of the 
President - her first real test to go beyond the personal. 

The President named Deputy Defense Minister Rocky Ileto the successor of 
Minister Enrile. Deputy Minister Ileto says of his new assignment: "Minister Enrile 
left behind a large security force in the Ministry with 600 men and 10 armored cars. 
It was led by Gringo and was considered a powerful group. My first task as Defense 
Minister was to dismantle that group because of the danger it posed. I had to do it 
softly because I was treading on dangerous ground. If I acted harshly, they could 
easily get me. It took a long time before I was able to disperse them by assigning 
them to other areas. Gringo Honasan was the son of a good friend and classmate. 
They told me that if I had not been the one who dismantled the group, it would have 
been more dangerous". 



20 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



On November 27, 1986, four days after the removal of Minister Enrile, repre- 
sentatives of the government and the National Democratic Front (NDF) signed a 
ceasefire agreement which took effect on December 1 0, 1986. The Aquinogovern- 
ment stepped up its campaign for the ratification of the proposed Constitution. 
Registration of voters for the plebiscite and expected elections in 1987 began on 
December 7,1986. 



President Aquino began implementing a policy of attraction with regard to the 
insurgency. She launched the National Reconciliation and Development Program 
(NRDP) on December 24,1986 with an initial budget of P300 million. The program 
included an intensive information campaign to attract NPA or MNLF rebels to sur- 
render. A package of social and economic benefits were made available to the rebel 
returnees - consisting of grants, housing, livelihood, and other assistance. 

In its December 28, 1986 issue, TIME magazine named President Aquino its 
"Woman of the Year". Meanwhile, there were forces which continued to plan, re- 
cruit, organize, and build alliances in order to remove President Aquino from power. 
She would not last one more year, they said. 



The Mendiola Incident 

In January 1987, the President mobilized the entire Cabinet to campaign for 
the ratification of the new Constitution. The new Constitution restored a presidential 
form of government, asserted the supremacy of civilian rule over the military, and 
emphasized social justice. It also contained controversial provisions on the US mili- 
tary bases, nuclear weapons, agrarian reform, and the removal of the Philippine 
Constabulary from the AFP. But the marching orders from the President to her allies 
in and out of government were clear: all must work for an overwhelming "Yes" vote. 
Ratification would pave the way for regular elections at the national and the local 
levels, and lay the foundations for political and economic stability in the long run. 

In the afternoon of January 22, 1987, a Thursday, militant farmers led by Jaime 
'Ka Jimmy' Tadeo marched to Malacafiang to demand the immediate implementa- 
tion of an agrarian reform program. Riot police blocked them at Mendiola bridge. 



In the Face of Crisis 



21 



Because the rally was bigger than usual, two companies of Marines were sent to 
reinforce the riot police. Provocation from the marchers led to a clash which left 12 
shot dead on Mendiola. Later in the evening, the President, Joker Arroyo, Secretary 
Ileto, and Ching Escaler watched a videotape of the incident. The mood was somber. 
Ching Escaler cried. Secretary Ileto offered to resign, but the President did not ac- 
cept it. Gen. Ramon Montano's offer to go on leave was accepted - he was Com- 
mander of the CAPCOM charged with Securing the Malacanang perimeter. 

The following day, January 23, the ceasefire agreed upon by the government 
and the NDF collapsed. The President and her staff immediately implemented dam- 
age control measures in the wake of the tragic incident. 

Ileto reflects on the lessons that were learned the hard way that day: "I learned 
about the incident at Mendiola almost as soon as it happened. The Ministry had 
been covering the rally. The incident started due to the actions of provocateurs 
coming from within the ranks of the marchers. 

We implemented certain changes in our crowd control methods after that. 
First of all, we minimized the use of force and firearms. Secondly, I began to advo- 
cate more strongly the separation of the police from the military. 

Soldiers are trained to shoot and kill. Putting them to work in crowd control, 
directing traffic, and rehabilitating criminals - it's not in the ballgame. Soldiers are 
trained to destroy the enemy - the people are not the enemy". 

The Aquino government was put on the defensive as media and various groups 
announced a plan to hold an indignation rally the following Monday, on the very 
spot where the marchers had been killed. There was no guarantee that this indigna- 
tion rally would be peaceful. In fact, with tension high on both sides, the potential 
for more violence was very high. 

Saguisag started to look for contacts on the side of the marchers to defuse the 
tinderbox. On Friday, January 23, he found Tadeo in, of all places, "Street Pulse", a 
TV talk show on Channel 9. They were both guests on the show which had devoted 
that night's episode to discussing the previous day's unfortunate event. 



22 



The Aquino Management of the presidency 



The weekend saw frantic talks between the side of the government and the side 
of the marchers. People who used to walk elbow-to-elbow together against Marcos 
were now divided into camps. 

On Monday morning, the President met with Tadeo, Crispin Beltran of KMU, 
student leader Lean Alejandro and others to discuss the manner by which the indig- 
nation march was to be conducted. A timetable agreement was reached wherein the 
marchers would cross the Mendiola Bridge (now Chino Roces Bridge) and then turn 
left at Concepcion Aguila St., the street that separated San Beda College and the 
College of the Holy Spirit. 

Saguisag relates: 'After the meeting with the President in the morning, we 
quickly called in the Ministers and our friends who used to march against the de- 
posed regime, to 'welcome' the marchers led by Sen. Tanada. Street protesters like 
Raffy Alunan, Maring Feria, Dick Powell, Lulu Teodoro, Bea Zobel, a gaggle of 
nuns, and so many, many others carne. Mita Pardo Tavera and Joe Concepcion, 
among other ministers, marched with the protesters. Even with a scorecard, one 
would have difficulty determining who was on what side". 

Arroyo, on the other hand, had his misgivings: "Without enthusiasm, I briefly 
joined the indignation march . . . more to satisfy the old man Tanada who was there. 
I was the Executive Secretary. How could I demonstrate against the very govern- 
ment of the President?" 

"What mattered was that we were all Filipinos, solving a problem the Filipino 
way, which would drive a foreigner crazy. It was a happy reunion of sorts. Nostal- 
gia was in the festive air ...but nail-biting anxiety was never far away", Saguisag 
concludes. 



In the end, the marchers were allowed to reach up to J.P. Laurel and turn left to 
Sta. Mesa. The petition of the protesters were turned over at the Malacanang gate. 
Then the tension vanished. Everybody went home relieved. Nobody picked up a 
stone. Nobody swung a piece of wood. Nobody pulled a trigger. 



In the Face of Crisis 



23 



The GMA-7 Incident 

Military rebels saw a window of opportunity in the wake of the tragic incident 
at Mendiola. Apparently, they expected the January 26 indignation rally to be an- 
other violent affair. In the first hours of January 27, military rebels aligned with the 
Marcos loyalists launched a coup attempt. 

Their targets were the GMA-7 television station, Villamor Air Base, Sangley 
Point, and Fort Bonifacio. Rebel units successfully took over GMA-7 at about 1:30 
a.m. Government forces under the command of Col. Loven Abadia defeated rebel 
units that tried to take the Villamor Air Base at 1:45 a.m. Rebel units took over 
Sangley Point for seven hours and then surrendered. Government forces preempted 
rebel action in Fort Bonifacio. A raid on a house inside the camp led to the arrest of 
11 army soldiers, 5 marines, one patrolman, and 21 civilians, all of whom were 
heavily armed. Government forces intercepted rebel reinforcements coming from 
Nueva Ecija before they reached Metro Manila. 

Col. Oscar Canlas, with around 100 men, arrived at 5:00 a.m. to reinforce the 
rebel force that had taken GMA-7. Later that day, he issued statements asking Presi- 
dent Aquino to step down and asking for the return of Ferdinand Marcos. Govern- 
ment forces under the command of Gen. Fidel Ramos withheld an attack against the 
rebel forces in GMA-7 and pursued negotiations for their surrender. A peaceful 
surrender would minimize bloodshed and damage to property. The rebels finally 
surrendered at 9:00 a.m. on January 29. 

President Aquino had called a Cabinet meeting in the morning of January 28 
wherein General Ramos briefed the Cabinet on what had happened in GMA-7, 
Villamor Air Base, Sangley Point, and Fort Bonifacio. Among the decisions made by 
President Aquino in that meeting was the creation of a Cabinet Crisis Committee to 
be headed by Dr. Emmanuel Soriano. Dr. Soriano, who had been attending Cabinet 
meetings as early as November 1986, was also formally appointed as National 
Security Director that day. 

The members of the Cabinet Crisis Committee included Ileto, Ramos, Health 
Secretary Alfredo 'Alran' Bengzon, Finance Secretary Vicente 'Ting' Jayme, and 



24 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Trade and Industry Secretary Jose Concepcion. In the Committee's first meeting, a 
week after the GMA-7 incident, they defined its functions and responsibilities. They 
agreed that its role was to assist the President in anticipating crisis situations or 
flashpoints, and having identified them, to decide what actions were to be taken. 

Among the possible flashpoints identified were: assassination of the President; 
the sudden appearance of Marcos or Ver; bombings; hijacking; kidnapping of Aquino 
children; enlargement of the Gulf crisis; proliferation of private armies; and many 
more. 



Meanwhile, the plebiscite for the ratification of the Constitution pushed through 
on February 2, 1987 with an 87 percent voter turnout. The "Yes" votes prevailed 
with 78 percent, as against 23 percent voting "No", On February 1 1 , President Aquino 
led the highest civilian and military officials of the government in taking the oath of 
allegiance to the new Constitution. Pursuant to the new Constitution, the elections 
for the Senate and the House of Representatives were held three months later on 
May 11, 1987. 

After the unsuccessful coup attempt in January of that year, the next move of 
the rebels was an assassination attempt on President Aquino. She was scheduled to 
attend her first Philippine Military Academy (PMA) graduation on March 22, 1 987. 
On March 18, four days before graduation day, a bomb planted in the grandstand 
prematurely exploded, killing four and wounding 43 people. On March 22, under 
tight security, the President addressed her first PMA graduating class with AFP 
Chief of Staff Gen. Fidel Ramos at her side. As if to stress again her victory, the 
President wore yellow, the same color as the flowers on the dais. 



Democratic Transition Keeps On Track 

In the meantime, the election campaign for legislative positions throughout the 
country shifted into high gear. Like the plebiscite for the Constitution, there was a 
high voter turnout on May 11, 1987 with 87 percent of 26.6 million registered voters 
participating. Candidates, supported by what was then called "Cory Magic" swept 
an overwhelming majority on both houses of Congress. The opposition Grand Alii- 



In the Face of Crisis 



ance for Democracy (GAD), composed mostly of former KBL members, complained 
that there was massive fraud. 

As provided in the new Constitution, Congress was to convene on July 27, 1987 
and President Aquino would lose her lawmaking powers. The Malacanang staff 
worked feverishly to finalize vital proposed legislation that the President could is- 
sue as Executive Orders. Among the major pieces of legislation issued by the Presi- 
dent between July 1 and July 27, 1987 were: the Family Code of the Philippines (EO 
No. 226); and EO No. 229 providing the mechanism for the implementation of the 
Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program (CARP). 

On July 27, 1987, President Aquino opened the First Regular Session of the 
First Congress under the 1987 Constitution and delivered her first State of the Na- 
tion Address. Slowly but surely, and under the worst possible circumstances, the 
foundations of a democracy were being laid. 

But the RAM had other things in mind. There was a spate of bombings in Metro 
Manila, and on August 2, 1987, the whole country was shocked by the news that 
Local Government Secretary Jaime Ferrer had been killed in an ambush. Higher oil 
prices in the world market and limited government resources for subsidy forced the 
government to impose an unpopular oil price increase which took effect in August. 
In protest, cause-oriented groups under the BAYAN umbrella launched a "Welga 
ng Bayan" which involved coordinated mass actions in major cities throughout the 
country. There were marches, barricades, bonfires; public transport was paralyzed. 

By the book, it was the right time for a coup. At about 1 :45 a.m. on August 28, 
1987, military rebels led by Gringo Honasan launched an attack against Malacanang. 



The 

Military Putsches 

That 
Almost Succeeded 

THE WALLS SPOKE even before the August putsch struck. First of all, the 
government enemies were so steeped in arrogance that they would always announce 
the fall of the Aquino administration. Hotel lobby habitues gulped these predictions 
with their brewed coffee. 

In the early morning of August 26, 1987, Arroyo got up because he was told 
Senator Tanada wanted to see him. Thinking that it was Bobby (the young Tanada, 
by then Senator, too), he was surprised to see the old man, Senator Lorenzo Tanada, 
in his sala. Without any fuss, Tanada told him that the RAM was going to strike on 
the 29th, the same day that the jeepney drivers scheduled their strike. He got it from 
reliable sources and he thought he would want the President to know about it. Then 
Tanada left quickly. 

Actually, intelligence reports had been trickling in for days. The number of 
information were checked against each other. 

The President, the Executive Secretary, and the PSG knew about the August 28 
coup attempt days before it happened. Arroyo explains: "There had just been an oil 
price increase, the jeepney drivers were restless and wanted to strike. 

Intelligence information came that there was a buildup of forces in Central 
Luzon ... You know, when you have this information, you have to get it from several 



In the Face of Crisis 



27 



sources so you can check. My sources told me that RAM would strike on August 29, 
to coincide with the announced date of the jeepney strike. I checked with Col. Gazmin 
and he said, 'My own intelligence reports say August 29'... Then (the jeepney driv- 
ers' group changed its plans and moved the planned jeepney strike to August 28. It 
was reported that RAM also moved back the planned coup to August 28 - sinabay. 
This was fatal to RAM because they were not yet prepared. I informed the President 
about this". 

The RAM came to Manila, nevertheless, and went straight to Malacanang. The 
PSG was waiting for them. 

The rebel units came from San Miguel, Bulacan; Soliven, Isabela; Cabanatuan 
City; Palayan City; and Fort Magsaysay in Nueva Ecija. In many cases, the rebel 
officers withheld the true nature of their mission from most of their troops. Lt. Col. 
Melchor Acosta, for example, a classmate of Gringo and commander of the 14th 
Infantry Battalion told his troops that they were going to Manila to protect 
Malacanang from an impending attack. 

The rebel forces closed in on Malacanang from all the possible approaches: 
Nagtahan Bridge, J.P. Laurel St., and Concepcion Aguila St., and Ayala Bridge. 



Malacanang As Battleground 

Arroyo says of the battle: "Every military man will tell you that Malacanang is 
not a good place to fight, for both the attacker and the defender. There are so many 
houses and civilians around and the streets are narrow. Looking back, the error of 
RAM is that they did not pursue the attack after taking initial casualties. Instead 
they turned around and went to Camp Aguinaldo. In the meantime, their reinforce- 
ments could not come. The reinforcements were not prepared because the attack 
had been moved a day earlier". 

PSG Commander Voltaire Gazmin recounts the attack on Malacanang: "The 
PSG armor had been deployed. A PSG Scorpion tank was stationed inside of Gate 4. 
I ordered the tank officer to move outside the gate and park right on J.P. Laurel St. 



28 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



I was right there at Gate 4 when the rebel soldiers tried to enter Malacanang. The 
rebel troops moved in on several trucks and shooting started. The car of the Presi- 
dents son, Noynoy, was intercepted by attacking rebel soldiers near St. Jude Church. 
Noynoy was injured, and three of his security men were killed. The other PSG troop- 
ers were killed during that clash. 

During a lull in the shooting, I ran to the President's residence on Arlegui St. 
The close-in security were already deployed around the residence. I went up to the 
President's room on the second floor. She was very calm. I asked the President and 
everybody on the second floor to go down - the windows in the Arlegui residence 
were not bulletproof. The President agreed and we started bringing down her fam- 
ily to the first floor. I started a head count. When I finished, there was one missing. 
The President was still upstairs! I rushed back and Boy Gonzales, one of the close-in 
security, told me that the President was dressing up and fixing her hair. That's how 
calm she was. 



The President did not want to leave Arlegui at that time so the PSG simply had 
to take extra precautions. It was only during the daytime that the President trans- 
ferred to the Palace to meet with key officials. The attack on Malacanang being 
unsuccessful, the rebel soldiers went to Camp Aguinaldo. At that time I knew the 
battle was over for them, they had failed in their principal objective of seizing 
Malacanang. Had the rebels succeeded, I do not discount the possibility that the 
President would have been killed. 

After that failed coup, Louie Beltran criticized me for not having troops de- 
ployed at Sta. Mesa. That would have been ideal. The problem was that PSG forces 
had been deployed to Bulacan, Pampanga, and Zambales in preparation for a visit 
by the President. Since I had fewer troops, I had no choice but to pull back my 
defense positions". 

The attack on Malacanang was a failure. Jeering civilians in Sta. Mesa com- 
pounded the humiliation of the rebels. Before withdrawing to Camp Aguinaldo, the 
rebels went on a savage orgy to vent their frustration - they killed 1 1 and wounded 
54 unarmed civilians. 



In the Face of Crisis 



29 



But the RAM forces succeeded in capturing the Philippine Military Academy, Camp 
Olivas, Basa Air Base, Channel 7, and in the wee hours of the next day, Channel 4. 

PC Chief de Villa relates his experience prior to and during the coup attempt: 
"I tried to stop it before it could happen. There was an intensive intelligence effort 
which included day-to-day monitoring. We determined the personalities involved, 
their organization, the course of action they wanted to take, and their time frame. I 
talked to the people whom I believed were involved and tried to dissuade them 
from getting deeper into the mess that they were trying to create. We were aware of 
their movements from the very start. 

General Ramos, Dr. Emmanuel Soriano, and Teddy Boy Locsin were with me 
in the PC Headquarters in Camp Crame. I had mobilized my men and we prepared 
for counteraction. 



General Ramos wanted to go to his office at the AFP General Headquarters 
inside Camp Aguinaldo. I advised him against it. 

Teddy Boy Locsin wanted an immediate counteraction against rebel forces 
that had taken over Channel 4 and wanted it razed to the ground. We told him that 
we would operate according to certain priorities. 

Our first priority was to retake Camp Aguinaldo. It was intolerable that Camp 
Aguinaldo - the seat of military power - would remain in rebel hands. It is very 
symbolic. More than that, there were officers who were with us who were trapped 
in the headquarters building, which the rebels set on fire. They had poured gasoline 
in one of the offices in the first floor. Among those trapped were General Eduardo 
Ermita and General Ramon Montano". 

As de Villa recounts, he formed a Task Force to retake Camp Aguinaldo. Colo- 
nel Rene Dado of the Philippine Army was to lead troops to enter Gate 3 of the 
camp, while Major Nicholas Pasinos, commander of the Special Action Force of the 
CAPCOM, was to enter Gate 2. They were ordered to head straight for the burning 
headquarters. 



30 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The Marines who had earlier reinforced the PSG in the defense of Malacanang 
were asked to go to Camp Aguinaldo to beef up the forces. 

Retaking Aguinaldo 

The counterattack was set at 9:00 a.m. But at 10:00 a.m., there was still no 
action. General Ermita, who probably was feeling the discomfort of being broiled to 
death, called up de Villa and half-complained: "Pare, bakit walang nangyayari?" 

De Villa checked his commanders and found out that they were still preparing. 
Finally, at 11:00 a.m., the counterattack began. A 90 mm recoilless rifle was fired 
through the gates of the camp. The troops under Major Pasinos engaged the rebel 
forces in a f irefight. General Cesar Nazareno was wounded in the initial exchange. 
But soon, the rebels near Gate 2 were waving their white flags. 

However, Colonel Dado and his group had not entered their assigned gate. De 
Villa bawled out the officer. One account has it that Dado encountered resistance 
from a group led by Colonel Javier Carbonell of the Pasig Brigade. Both sides appar- 
ently were not clear as to each other's loyalties. By the time they found out that they 
were on the same side, Dado had been shot in the leg. 

At 1:00 p.m., the marines from Malacanang arrived. They were ordered to 
take over the assignment of Dado and his men. 

Soon after, the rebel troops under Ochosa surrendered. Honasan, meanwhile, 
fled aboard a helicopter - leaving 12 officers and a disoriented band of soldiers to 
their means. 

The next target was to retake Channel 4, which was being held by the rebel 
forces under Colonel Eduardo Matillano. Matillano was one of the RAM officers 
who secured the government station during the EDSA Revolution. 

During the first hours of the rebel attack, the President ordered that the police 
be detached from the constabulary. She wanted a special force under General 



In the Face of Crisis 



31 



Alfredo Lim to safeguard broadcast facilities. The EDSA experience had taught 
everyone that the control of television was pivotal in the warfare. 

Maria Montelibano of the RTVM actually had a fallback position in case the 
rebels were able to capture all the stations. An emergency broadcast system was 
ready to air any message from the President. But that had not been necessary. 

De Villa recounts: "Fred Lim arrived at Camp Crame with 200 men, in all sorts 
of vehicles, attire, and weapons. It looked like a ragtag army". Lim and his men 
were issued armalites. Then they were combined with the PC Special Action Force 
under Major Avelino Razon. 

Lim led the attack on Channel 4. The SAF went in first with its armored vehi- 
cles. Several SAF men were wounded. A policeman, Sgt. Octavio Esguerra, was 
killed. The rebels retreated to the nearby Camelot Hotel but, in the end, they too 
surrendered. 

Soriano, along with Teddy Boy Locsin who served as the President's eyes and 
ears in the camp, was with Ramos and de Villa at the Camp Crame Operations 
Center: "I joined frequent caucuses conducted by General Ramos and de Villa as t e 
situation evolved. My main concern was to assess if there was sincerity and deter- 
mination in defeating the rebels. 

The Operations Center was filled with subdued excitement and, I suppose, 
subdued fear of the unknown. 

When a report came in that flags were being turned upside down in various 
military camps, it was decided to postpone recapturing Camp Aguinaldo unti all 
such camps were identified. It paid off: about 140 camps and their commanders 
were identified for future investigation". 

After the government troops had retaken Camp Aguinaldo and the television 
stations, the regional commands which were overrun by the rebels became easier to 
retake. In the aftermath of this unsuccessful coup attempt, all the regional com- 
manders who proved ineffective were relieved of their commands. 



32 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Despite the fall of various camps into military rebel hands, reinforcements from 
outside Metro Manila under the command of officers loyal to the duly constituted 
government remained on full alert. 

Soriano reports: "Sometime during the day, I phoned the President to update 
her and to assure her that I thought General Ramos, the officers, and the forces 
under his command were loyal and doing their job as best as they could". 

In the wake of the failed coup, PSG Commander Gazmin adopted additional 
security measures to ensure the President's safety: "One of the first things we did 
was to limit the President's visits to the regions to only one province at a time. This 
helped to ensure that PSG troops were not deployed too thinly. Preferably, she flew 
out of Manila and was back on the same day. 

I also stopped accompanying the President on her state visits. I would go with 
the advance party to finalize security arrangements. But on the date of the Presi- 
dent's visit itself, I always stayed behind in Malacanang. The only exceptions were 
the visits to Singapore and Indonesia". 

De Villa also implemented changes in the security system after the August 
1987 coup attempt: "First, we strengthened intelligence. Second, we improved the 
command structure by selecting more determined commanders. We reshuffled. 
Third, we improved our weapons. We got heavier stuff and got more armor. 

We went on a massive information and indoctrination campaign among our 
officers and troops, the whole theme of which was to support the Constitution and 
to protect the duly constituted government. 

At the same time, we had to investigate and prosecute those who were cap- 
tured or surrendered. We had a lot of them". 



Convulsions After August 

The August 1987 coup ended with a total of 53 dead, 200 wounded. Up to that 
point, it was the most powerful challenge against the 1 8-month old Aquino govern- 
ment. 



In the Face of Crisis 



33 



Looking at the events in the months that followed, it seemed that the country 
was being torn apart. 

The CPP-NPA complemented the efforts of RAM in running the country to the 
ground by going on a bridge-blasting binge in Bicol, destroying millions of pesos 
worth of infrastructure. First to go was Baraca Bridge on September 7. This was 
followed by Tara Bridge in Camarines Sur on September 8; Comapukapo Bridge in 
Pilar, Sorsogon on September 1 6; and, Del Gallego Bridge in Camarines Sur on Sep- 
tember 20. President Aquino flew to Bicol to see the damage herself. 

On September 9, President Aquino asked the whole Cabinet to resign. On Sep- 
tember 1 6 and 1 7, the President accepted the resignations of Vice-President Laurel 
as Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Finance Secretary Ongpin, Executive Secretary 
Arroyo, and Press Secretary Locsin. Two and a half months'later, Jaime Ongpin 
would commit suicide. 

Two days after the Cabinet revamp, on September 19, former UP Student 
Council President and BAYAN stalwart Lean Alejandro was shot dead. On Octo- 
ber 28, NPA hitmen killed three US servicemen outside of Clark Air Base. On the 
same day, NPA hitmen killed Eduardo Mediavillo, a decorated police officer. 

Soriano remembers the period that followed the failed coup as especially diffi- 
cult for the President and the Cabinet: "In the weeks after the August 28, 1987 coup 
attempt, the Cabinet Crisis Committee which I headed conducted a series of work- 
shops to determine where the government was caught unprepared and what net- 
work should be set up to prevent a successful coup attempt by military rebels and 
their supporters. When the Committee was ready with an updated ~nhngency 
plan and implementing network, an emergency meeting of the key] W *™™ Ve 
in the Cabinet, the military and intelligence agencies was called in C o 

Assignments were discussed, given, and accepted: the Department of Agricul- 
ture, under Secretary Sonny Dominguez, the Department of Health, under Secre- 
tary Alfredo Bengzon, and the Department of Trade and Industry, under Secretary 
Joe Concepcion were given monitoring responsibilities to supplement that of the 
Department of Defense and the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency (NICA); 



34 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



the Department of Tourism and the Press Secretary's Office were to assist in public 
information and psychological warfare; certain key individuals were assigned to 
handle demonstrations and mobilize people power; liaison was established with 
both houses of Congress; and the site of the Operations Center, in case of emer- 
gency, was determined but kept secret. 

In the three weeks after the key resignations were accepted, those of us who 
remained in the Cabinet, whenever we gathered in small-group meetings, expressed 
great concern about working as a team: there was a new Executive Secretary; there 
were new Cabinet members; and even those who remained felt that we had not been 
working effectively enough as a team. 

Thus, some of us, who were perceived to be close enough to the President, 
were asked to suggest to her that a Cabinet workshop was badly needed. 

The President agreed. A whole day workshop was scheduled on October 10. It 
was held in the lobby of the Guest House. Cabinet Secretary Jose 'Ping de Jesus and 
I were asked to be facilitators of the workshop. 

The main objective of the workshop was really team-building. But the work- 
shop was designed to attain the objective without delivering the message that the 
Cabinet had therefore failed to work as a team. 

Therefore, the focus of discussion was on how to work together should another 
emergency arise. Policy issues discussed included when to declare a state of emer- 
gency, how to relate with media, how to safeguard public utilities, how to liaise 
with legislators, how to deal with certain key opposition leaders, how to handle 
strikes and demonstrations, the setting up of a Central Command and correspond- 
ing Regional Commands, psychological warfare operations, field monitoring, mobi- 
lizing people power, mobilizing local government leaders and minding close liaison 
with key and friendly governments. 

Cabinet-related matters included such questions as the role of Cabinet mem- 
bers as advisers to the President and implementors of the policy, the problem of 
Cabinet "superstars", the relationships among Cabinet members, how to help Cabi- 



In the Face of Crisis 35 

net members in trouble, what Cabinet members expect from the President and the 
other way around, how to relate with the President and vice-versa and how to play 
the 'game'. 

It was the first Cabinet workshop since the Aquino government assumed lead- 
ership; just about everyone agreed it should be the last". 

On a quieter note, President Aquino strengthened alliances with Congress and 
the Judiciary. The very foundations of constitutional government had been shaken. 
It was no time to be hesitant to ask for help. 

In the middle of September 1987, the President invited all the Senators to a 
meeting in Malacanang. She told them of contingency measures adapted t°P re ^ 
a successful coup attempt. The legislators agreed to move around their respec iv 
constituencies, conduct dialogues, and mobilize the people's support. 

On October 8, the President met with some justices of the Supreme 
the house of her sister, Terry Lopa, in Pasay City. Former Chief Justic e ^ 
Teehankee, Marcelo Fernan, and Roberto Concepcion were there. She as 
opinion about emergency rule. If the fragile stability of the governme 
rated, the President felt a stronger hand would become necessary. 

lates - -J vvas pleas- 
Soriano, who was present at the meeting with the justices, re • ^ kjng 
antly surprised to witness how spontaneous and open the justices w ^ ^ ^ 
their minds. It seemed like hearing them say 'Go for it, Mrs. 1 res 
support your move should it be questioned before the Supreme Cour 

a prpcident Aquino delivered 
Amidst the difficulty, there appeared rays of hope. u» 0ctober 20 1987 
a well-received major policy speech to the business commum yo ^ 
at the Manila Hotel. The military captured a hig^* 1 ^ inCTeasing the sala- 
(Kumander Juaning), on November 15. Congress enacted and ^ 

nes of military and civilian personnel of the Armed Forces oi u rr 
Department of National Defense (Republic Act No. 6637), and mcreasing tte mini- 
mum daily wage (Republic Act No. 6640). These were signed into law by Pres den 
Aquino on November 26 and December 10, respectively. The campaign for local 
elections which were to be held on January 18, 1988 was also under way. 



36 

The Aq uino Management of the Presidency 
on De^ernberr" 5 ^ ^ AqUin ° S ° Vemme ™ was the capture of Gringo Honasan 

Aquteoe™ 8 Tr 68 T 3 Si § nal of c -«dence and support for the 

tZZ ^ZZ ^ r * e ^ ASEAN Su <™ it Meeting in Manila pushed 
Tak^h> f fr ° m DeCemb6r 14 to 15, 1987. Pr.me Minister Noboru 

semT Came 3 ViSU attende d the ASEAN Summit as an ob- 

The capture of Honasan and the successful ASEAN Summit was not a bad 
way to end the year. Twenty-two months after EDSA, the Aquino government had 
weathered through several attempts to overthrow it and crisis situations that could 
nave made such attempts successful. 

Lull Before A Storm 

It would take more than two years before the RAM could muster enough 
strength to launch a major strike against the Aquino government. The government 
ad suffered major setbacks in 1988 and 1989, prior to the near fatal December 
1989 coup attempt. 

Honasan escaped from detention on board a Philippine Navy ship on April 2, 
1988. Captured high-ranking CPP-NPA leaders Romulo Kintanar and Gloria Jopson 
escaped on November 12, 1988. The Executive branch encountered difficulties in 
relating with Congress. In 1989, increasing oil prices in the world market resulted in 

igher prices of basic commodities. Inflation steadily climbed from 3.8 percent in 
1987 to 8.8 percent in 1988 to 10.6 percent in 1989. Workers, jeepney drivers, stu- 

ents, and even government employees took to the streets to demand wage increases, 
fare increases, and price rollbacks. Opinion surveys showed a drop in the Presi- 
dent s popularity rating and increased dissatisfaction with the government. 



But there were also positive developments in the same period. Local elections 
were successfully held on January 18, 1988 and on March 29, 1989. The peace 
efforts in Mindanao and the Cordilleras were intensified, culminating in the drafting 



In the Face of Crisis 



37 



of the Organic Acts for Autonomous Regions which were to be subjected to plebi- 
scites. 

Despite the increasing prices, the economy looked good in 1988 when some 1.1 
million jobs were created. It was still not so bad when this number fell to 700,000 
new jobs in 1989. 

The President had laid down her priorities and had asked the Cabinet to sup- 
port them. First was employment generation. Second was to improve peace and 
order. Third was to have a more honest and efficient bureaucracy. 



The Great Escape 

Three months after the August 1987 putsch, the military had captured Gringo 
Honasan and had kept him detained on board a Philippine Navy ship, BR1 
Bonifacio, docked in Manila Bay. 

At dawn of April 2, 1988, on Black Saturday, Gringo Honasan escaped with 14 
Navy men who had been assigned to guard him. 

The President was in La Union for the Holy Week break with her ^^J^_ 
being told of the escape, she immediately flew back to Manila and sum 
ecutive Secretary Catalino Macaraig, Soriano, Ramos, and de Villa. 

"I knew it wouldn't last", she told Soriano and Macaraig as soo ^ as she S3W 
them. She was smiling, but it was the smile of a very disappointed pers 

•.v. i *> ™iir>le of days earlier ... a 
Soriano reflects: "The supreme irony was that a- coup ■/ 

senior officer had assured Defense Secretary Fidel Ramos that the guar 
had been doubled precisely to prevent his escape. 

I had this sick feeling inside thinking that the Aquino government and our demo- 
cratic institutions were seriously in danger because the military was thoroughly 
infiltrated by supporters of the military rebels. After the Manila Hotel incident in 



38 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



July 1986 ... and after the failed August 27, 1 987 coup attempt, there was much talk 
that the military was incapable of disciplining its own ranks. 

I began to believe this line of thinking, but was at a loss on what to do". 

The President was given a brief update, after which she gave instructions on 
what had to be done. 



Sword And Shield 



In 1988, AFP Chief of Staff Gen. Fidel V. Ramos reached 60, the mandatory 
retirement age. On January 21, 1988, President Aquino appointed him as Secretary 
of National Defense and named Gen. Renato de Villa as the new AFP Chief of Staff. 
These were men, the President believed, who had proven themselves and could be 
trusted to remain loyal to the Constitution and to the Commander-in-Chief. 

The new Chief of Staff stepped up the counterinsurgency drive. The military 
scored against the CPP-NPA on March 29, 1 988 with the arrest of three of their top 
leaders: Rafael Baylosis, CPP Secretary General; Romulo Kintanar, CPP-NPA Cen- 
tral Committee Chairman; and, Benjamin de Vera, Central Committee member. 
Two other CPP-NPA members were captured- Gloria Topson Asuncion and Marco 
Palo. r ■ r 

Seven months later, on November 7, 1988, President Aquino announced the 
capture of Ignacio Capegan, the no. 3 man in the CPP. On July 27, 1 989, the military 
captured Saturnino Ocampo, Chairman of the National United Front Commission 
of the National Democratic Front (NDF), and his wife, Carolina Malay Ocampo, 
Vice Chairman of the NDF. 

Computer files and documents seized during the raids revealed a movement 
in increasing disarray. 



Defense Secretary Fidel Ramos pushed for the passage of a bill creating the 
Philippine National Police (PNP). Under the bill, the Philippine Constabulary (PC) 



In the Face of Crisis 



39 



would be abolished and its officers and men given the option of joining either the 
Armed Forces or the new PNP. The new PNP was to be under the Department of 
Interior and Local Government. The PNP was to be oriented primarily to public 
safety and, after a transition period of two years, it was to have primary responsi- 
bility for counterinsurgency. The primary role of the Armed Forces was for external 
defense, although it was to continue to play a major role in counterinsurgency dur- 
ing the transition period. On May 4, 1988, President Aquino certified the bill to 
Congress to help ensure its early passage. 

Gringo Honasan was not recaptured, but the government made steady gams 
against the military rebels. On May 11, 1988, a six-man general court martial con- 
victed 35 military personnel, including seven officers, and sentenced them to 12 
years imprisonment at hard labor. 

The military captured two ranking officers involved in the August 1987 putsch 
Col. Eduardo Matillano, who had earlier escaped, was recaptured on Septem er 
27, 1988 and Lt. Col. Francisco Baula was nabbed the following month, on Octo e 
3. Two weeks later, Baula was shot dead by prison guards while trying to escape. 

The hard work and sacrifices were paying off. The military was slowly -to 
surely exorcising its own ranks, at the same time breaking up the leadership o 
communist insurgency. 



Hard Times 

Due mainly to the falling prices of oil in the world market, President Aquin 
was able to roll back prices of gasoline three times in 1988. It was too good to as . 

The handling of the foreign debt problem inherited from the Marcos 
tration was a source of bitter debate. Academics, some legislators, and ca ^ °* 
ented groups, including National Economic and Development Secretary o i a 
Monsod, pushed for a policy of selective repudiation. But the President's other ad- 
visers favored a more conservative approach, meaning cooperation with the IMF- 
World Bank. 



40 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



On May 23, 1989, the IMF agreed to grant the country US$1 .7 billion in new 
loans over the next three years. A debt rescheduling agreement involving US$2.2 
billion had also been reached with the Philippines' creditors. 

But there was a price to be paid for these resources which the Philippines needed 
badly. The trade-off was that the government would have to implement an auster- 
ity program. 

Government spending would have to be curbed in order to reduce the budget 
deficit. Support prices for palay would have to be reduced. Prices of petroleum 
products could no longer be subsidized. Demands of government workers for wage 
increases would not be fully met. The bottom line was that, in the short term, prices 
of basic commodities would increase. This was bitter medicine. But the Aquino 
administration took it, in view of a pay off in terms of a stronger economy in the 
future. 

Midway into 1989, the economic situation became more difficult. The price of 
crude oil in the world market began to rise. The Oil Price Stabilization Fund, used to 
subsidize the prices of petroleum products, had become nearly depleted. The Na- 
tional Power Corporation would have to increase power rates. Prices of basic com- 
modities increased and interest rates escalated. 

In May, the President and her Cabinet met to identify events that could culmi- 
nate into a serious political and national security situation. They identified the events 
to watch as: mass actions from the labor sector, the traditional student protests 
against tuition fee hikes, transport strikes, and increased activities of the State's 
enemies in light of the other events. Wild cards were: the return of Marcos, possible 
escalation of RP-Malaysia conflict over disputed waters, effect of passage of the 
PNP Bill, and other destabilization efforts of the left and the right forces. 

In the administration's mind, the difficult decisions it had to reach were neces- 
sary for long term and sustainable growth, increased employment, lower inflation, 
and an improved economy. They knew things would get bad before they got better. 
The more difficult task was managing the security and political implications of the 
short-run costs. 



In the Face of Crisis 



41 



The Gathering Tempest 

As expected, the brewing political and social unrest began to percolate. 

Alleged overpricing of lands sold to the government under the Comprehensive 
Agrarian Reform Program blew up in a major scandal that badly damaged the 
administration's credibility. At the risk of further labor unrest, the President en- 
dorsed a bill increasing the minimum wage to Congress with an appeal that it should 
be the last. Even the government workers joined in the fray by demanding for the 
promised wage increases. 

In light of the increasing economic hardships being felt by the people, the situa- 
tion was ripe for a crisis. A public opinion survey conducted by the Ateneo e 
Manila and Social Weather Station showed an 18-point drop in the President's popu- 
larity. There was also a 50-point drop in the margin of satisfaction over the same 
period. 

On November 24, 1989, Marcos crony Eduardo 'Danding' Cojuangco J r ;^ 
denly arrived in the Philippines, ending three years and nine months of exi e m 
US. On November 29, 1989, President Aquino ordered Solicitor General Francisc 
Chavez to personally prosecute the criminal cases against Cojuangco. 

On November 30, 1989, the Energy Regulatory Board announced price in 
creases for gasoline, kerosene, diesel, and liquefied petroleum gas. 

Just after midnight of that same day, rebel military units took over Fort 
Bonifacio, Villamor Air Base, Sangley Point, and Channels 2 and 4. 



The December 1989 Putsch 



In the evening of November 29, 1989, a team of Scout Rangers sabotaged 
military communications facilities in Tagaytay, in preparation for a coup d etat. 
After destroying the facilities, the team proceeded to Fort Bonifacio. It turned out 
that the commanding officer of the rebel unit had made a mistake. He had acted one 
day too early. 



42 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



By morning of November 30, the AFP GHQ was aware that there was an im- 
pending coup and Metro Manila was placed on alert. In Malacanang, a concerned 
Col. Gazmin put the PSG on alert. By 10:00 p.m., PSG troops were at battle stations. 

At about the same time, Chief of Staff Renato de Villa called a news confer- 
ence. He reported what had taken place in Tagay tay the day before and confirmed 
that a coup plot led by Gringo Honasan had been uncovered. 

Executive Secretary Catalino Macaraig started getting phone calls at his home 
in Makati: "Before the December 1989 coup attempt took place, we were getting 
rumors of an impending coup every week. Even my son-in-law in Butuan was tell- 
ing me that there would be a coup in December. As it turned out, Jojo Binay was the 
first one to inform me of the outbreak of the December 1 989 coup. He called me up 
at home at about 10:00 p.m. I started receiving and making calls for the next hour. 

I called up the President in Arlegui. 'You better come over/ she said". 

In the first hours of December 1, rebel forces took over Fort Bonifacio, Villamor 
Air Base, Sangley Point, Channel 2, and Channel 4. 

Macaraig hajd told Presidential Legal Counsel Adolf Azcuna, Presidential Man- 
agement Staff Head Elfren Cruz, and Director Joaquin 'Jake' Lagonera to come to 
his house where they were picked up by a PSG vehicle with security escort led by 
Capt. Liwanag. The PSG had already planted mines around Malacanang. 

Maria Montelibano and her staff started setting up for a television broadcast. 
It was critical that the President should go on the air immediately. Otherwise, the 
government would be vulnerable to psy-war tactics of the rebel side. 

The hook-ups with the major television and radio networks were on, waiting to 
tape the President, when Maria thought that a little make-up on the President was 
needed. "Ano? Coup d'etat na coup d'etat, mag-me-make-up pa tayo?" the Presi- 
dent reacted. "Never mind. You take now", she ordered, then calmly taped her 
message in the Guest House with the Cabinet at her back. 



In the Face of Crisis 



43 



At 3:45 a.m., the President was heard all over the country assuring the people 
that the government was in control. The painstaking work of Maria and her staff 
had paid off - as early as two years before, they had been building up alliances in the 
broadcast media in view of such eventuality as a coup attempt. Maria tells of their 
preparation: "We studied and mapped the communication links of the entire Philip- 
pines: municipal, provincial, national and international, all the way up to the satel- 
lite links. Then we studied how all the friendly forces could network. If you look at 
the map, NBC covers northern Luzon all the way down to Visayas. The RMN cov- 
ers Metro Manila all the way down to Visayas. The RMN covers Metro Manila all 
the way down to Mindanao. The radio network of the Catholic Church has a wide 
reach and is better funded than the government radio network. It is the Catholic and 
government-owned stations that reach the most remote areas, like Kalinga-Apayao 
orTawi-Tawi. 

Remember the Manila Hotel incident in July 1986? We were trapped for some 
time in Cagayan de Oro, and we could not get the President on the air. v\ . 
'Never again'". 

The Presidential Broadcast Staff were kept busy. It was ^P^*^ 
President was heard on the air from time to time. Speaker Ramon Mitral ^ 
to Malacanang and, upon direct instruction of the President, went on t • ^ 
staff recalled with awe and amusement how the President even directed 
was to be taped: "Aba, importante na nakukuha siya with me". 

Mitra expressed support and reported to the people that, acco ^^° ^ 
congressmen, everything was normal in their areas. Mitra also air ^ rnment . „ We 
the other congressmen all over the country to rally 'round the g ^ ^ ^ 
cannot afford to squander this second chance that h^ W 8 ^ 
democracy work in our country ... stay with your const. Wen - ^ ^ ^ 
sources and collaborate with the loyal military. Bear in ntuna 
Hon against only a handful. Our people still support the Presiden . 

The rebels had captured Channel 2 and Channel 4 so that they could broadcast 
message to the nation from Gringo Honasan. They were never able to - the station 
anagers already knew what to do in case of a coup attempt. 1 hey had disabled 
their stations' transmitters. 



a m 
m 



44 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Of Tora Toras And Moro-Moro 

At 6:45 a.m., three Tora Tora planes (T-28s) from rebel-held Sangley Point 
bombed and strafed the Malacanang complex. Armored Infantry Fighting Vehicles 
(AIFV) of the PSG, equipped with 25mm anti-aircraft guns, fired back. 

For Col. Gazmin, the aerial attack on Malacanang was the worst point of the 
December 1989 putsch: "A rocket from a T-28 hit one of a convoy of vehicles parked 
near the golf club at Malacanang Park ... this convoy of vehicles would have been 
used to evacuate the President. Among the contingency was that if the PSG had not 
been able to hold the Palace, the President would have been brought across the 
Pasig river to Malacanang Park. From here she could be evacuated by land or by 
air. A second rocket landed ... shattering the car of Justice Secretary Sedfrey Ordonez. 
A third rocket landed on golf course. A T-28 tried to go after one of the PSG tanks, 
but missed ... (it) was the worst point of the December 1989 coup. I felt that the 
President's life was in the most serious danger. The effect of the aerial attack on the 
morale of my troops was devastating". 

During that time, President Aquino and Executive Secretary Macaraig were in 
constant contact with Secretary Ramos and Gen. de Villa who were busy in Camp 
Crame. Communications were good and were never cut off. 

The Philippine Air Force Base in Basa, Pampanga was ordered to send F-5 
jetfighters against the Tora Toras. Ileto reflects on the bombing of Malacanang: "We 
saw our Philippine Air Force F-5s come in and chase the Tora Toras away. Execu- 
tive Secretary Macaraig wondered why the jet fighters were not firing at the smaller 
planes. I explained that if the jet fighters fired at the Tora Toras which were flying at 
a lower altitude, there would be civilian casualties on the ground". 

After the bombing, the President went on television to deliver her second state- 
ment for the day: "... We make this appeal to the misguided rebel forces. Lay down 
your arms and it will be better for you. You have no prospects of reinforcements. In 
a short while, it will be daybreak and the start of major offensive operations against 
you. 



In the Face of Crisis 



45 



You have brought dishonor to the Armed Forces and destroyed the image of 
stability and progress our people have taken such pains to build. Your timely sur- 
render to the government is the least you can do in restitution for the damage you 
have inflicted on our country ... 

To the officers ... I have this to say: you will regret the day you conceived this 
evil plan to destroy our country and our freedom. When will you learn that I cannot 
be moved by threats or violence? When will you learn the futility of challenging the 
duly constituted government of our country? When will you learn the futility of 
fighting our people? 

I have ordered the Secretary of Defense and the Chief of Staff to smash this 
mutiny with all the force at hand". 

That same morning, Tora Toras and Sikorsky helicopter gunships °n*erebej 
side struck Channel 4, Camp Crame, and Camp Aguinaldo. Four bombs i 
Gen. de Villa's quarters in Camp Aguinaldo at 9:45 a.m., just half an hour ar 
family had been evacuated. 

But the rebels did not have complete control of the air. In the mornin ^ ^J," 
the afternoon, Air Force F-5 jetfighters and Sikorsky helicopter gunships on 
ernment's side pounded rebel positions at the Logistics Command m Sang y 
Camp Aguinaldo, and White Plains subdivision at the back. 

An integral part of the psy-war against the rebels was broadcasting *^^. y 
ments of support coming in from the international community. Foreig ^ ^ 
Raul Manglapus, who was in the Guest House with other Cabinet me ' ^ 
tively solicited statements of support. Among the first countries to strong y 
their support for the Aquino government were Spain and France. 

At around 1 0:00 a.m., Ambassador Nicolas Piatt of the United S ??^^* 
Macaraig at his office in the Guest House and informed him that the supp 
the Aquino government and was willing to extend assistance. Ambassa or a 
wanted to know what assistance they could provide. Macaraig then phoned the 
President who was at her Arlegui residence at that time. 



46 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



President Aquino instructed Macaraig to get in touch with Ramos and de Villa. 
After being informed of Ambassador Piatt's query, Ramos told Macaraig that they 
needed persuasion flights to scare away the Tora Toras. 

When told of Ramos' request, Ambassador Piatt asked Macaraig if the Presi- 
dent could confirm it. Calling from her house in Arlegui, the President did. The 
President expressed thanks and informed Ambassador Piatt that Secretary Ramos 
would get in touch with him. 

At about 1:00 p.m., the rebel planes at Sangley were destroyed by Philippine 
Air Force F-5 jets from Basa Air Base. Persuasion flights by US F-4 Phantom jets 
from Clark Air Base began at 2:00 p.m. and ended before nightfall. 

In the afternoon, the PSG, assisted by police units, moved against rebel units 
that were assembling near Malacanang. Col. Gazmin recalls: "We gained the upper 
hand and morale improved after PSG armor took out the rebel positions in Sta. 
Mesa, blockading one of the major approaches to Malacanang. I was very relieved 
when I learned that rebel-held Sangley Point had been neutralized by Air Force F-5 
jets". 

But there had been no doubt in Macaraig' s mind that a land attack against 
Malacanang would be defeated by the PSG. It was the aerial attack which worried 
Col. Gazmin for a while. 

Government forces took Sangley Point out of rebel hands. But at the cost of 
the life of Major Danny Atienza, after whom the military post is now named. 

Senator Rene Saguisag, who was among those who joined President Aquino in 
Malacanang, sums it up: "The Tora Toras seemed more Moro Moro in the air for a 
while. But nothing could take away the glory of the Filipino soldier (Major Atienza) 
who knocked out the Sangley-based air power of the rebels, and died in the process 
that afternoon". 



In the Face of Crisis 47 
Desperate Moves 

With Sangley Point lost to them, the rebels quietly took positions near the camps, 
unchallenged, and unmolested. In the morning of December 2, rebel forces moved 
out of Fort Bonifacio and took over 22 high-rise buildings in the Makati business 
district. 

That same morning, government forces retook Channel 4 while rebel troops 
regrouped around Camp Aguinaldo. Government forces subjected them to con- 
stant air strikes. Meanwhile, two battalions under Gen. Marcelo Blando, who was 
supporting the rebels, had arrived from Nueva Ecija and stationed themseJ ^ ed 
the nearby Greenhills Commercial Complex. The two battalions, however, re 
to attack Camp Aguinaldo. 

Just after midnight, in the first hours of December 3, rebel forces 
regrouped around Camp Aguinaldo launched another attack. Thebatti 
til 6:30 a.m. with the rebels unsuccessful. 

While the battle for Camp Aguinaldo was going on, President 
vened the Cabinet at noon in Malacanang. Secretary Ramos was abse ' ^ 
still in Camp Aguinaldo coordinating the efforts against the rebels, uur * ^ cqV 
mg, National Security Adviser Ileto reported that the coup a PP e ^ ident AqU ino 
lapsed, with the majority of the rebels having already surrendered. bers regU . 
assigned then Cabinet Secretary Jose de Jesus to give all the Cabinet ^ Soda , 
lar updates on the actions taken by the President and other deve > j ]9 evacu . 
Welfare Secretary Mita Pardo de Tavera reported that they had ac ^ 
ation centers for residents fleeing from the vicinity of the mm gQvernment 
fighting was still raging. Health Secretary Bengzon reporte ^ distri . 

hospitals had been instructed to treat all casualties. He had a JS^ ^ ^ 
bution of blood, intravenous fluids, anesthesia, and antibiotics ^ 
and shrapnel wounds. After some discussion, it was agreeu *_ resume 
definitely. It was also decided that government offices and banks would presume 
operations the next day, December 4, a Monday, except in some areas wnere secu- 
rity was still a problem. 



48 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



But by that Monday, rebel forces were still in control of portions of the Makati 
business district and Mactan Air Base in Cebu. President Aquino met with senators, 
congressmen, and Cabinet members. Macaraig recalls the meeting: 'The President 
called the meeting to marshall support for certain measures that the administration 
wanted to take. Senate President Jovito Salonga informed the President that the 
Senate was forming a special committee to investigate the December 1989 coup. 
One of the members would be Senator Juan Ponce Enrile, as majority floor leader. 
The President objected. She did not really raise her voice, but I knew that she was 
angry". 

On December 5, President Aquino declared that she was ruling out the imposi- 
tion of Martial Law. However, she imposed price ceilings on nine basic commodities 
to prevent unscrupulous traders from taking advantage of the panic buying. 

In the meantime, negotiations with rebels still holed out in the high-rise build- 
ings in Makati were pursued. PMA Superintendent Arturo Enrile took the lead for 
the government side. 

At the Cabinet meeting on December 6, President Aquino announced that she 
was going to create an independent commission to investigate the most recent coup 
attempt. Hilario Davide, Chairman of the Commission on Elections, would be asked 
to head it. 



Secretary Ramos, who had by that time been able to attend the meeting, briefed 
the President and the Cabinet on the latest developments. He announced that 
stranded tourists and foreign nationals in Makati would be able to leave before the 
day was over. Government negotiators led by then Tourism Undersecretary Rafael 
Alunan III, Makati Mayor Jejomar Binay, and Gen. Alexander Aguirre had worked 
out a ceasefire agreement to start at 3:00 p.m. that day. Ramos also reported that 
the surrender of the remaining rebel units and their transfer to Fort Bonifacio was 
being worked out. A detailed report on the circumstances regarding US assistance 
to the government during the coup attempt was also given. 

After the report of Ramos, President Aquino called on Ping de Jesus to present 
a list of measures that needed to be implemented immediately by the government. 



In the Face of Crisis 



49 



The list included: securing Makati and Mactan Air Base, conducting loyalty checks, 
securing captured rebel officers and men, assistance to military casualties, and safe- 
guarding against all possible NPA or MNLF attacks that would try to take advan- 
tage of the situation - care of the Department of National Defense; physical clean-up 
of Metro Manila - care of the Metro Manila Commission and the Metro Manila 
mayors; taking measures against possible outbreak of looting - care of the PC-INP 
and local governments; and, provision of assistance to dislocated civilians - care of 
the Department of Social Welfare and Development. 

The Department of Agriculture and the Metro Manila Commission were to 
ensure adequate supply of food in Metro Manila and to coordinate the free flow of 
goods and fuel. The Department of Trade and Industry was to take measures to 
stabilize prices of food. The National Power Corporation was to coordinate with 
MERALCO in ensuring adequate power supply. The Department of Transportation 
and Communication and the Metro Manila Commission were to take immediate 
steps to improve transport and traffic conditions. The Department of Finance an 
the Central Bank were to take measures to prevent bank runs and flight of capita . 



Mopping Up 

On December 7, 1 989, rebel troops which had retreated to Makati finally re- 
turned to barracks" in Fort Bonifacio. President Aquino issued Administrative r- 
der No. 146 creating a Presidential Commission to conduct a fact-finding investiga- 
tion of the failed coup. 

Business establishments in Makati resumed normal operations on December 8. 
By December 9, Mactan had been cleared of rebel forces and blockades north and 
south of Metro Manila had been removed. 

On December 11 , the NAIA and the domestic airport resumed normal opera- 
tions. The Cabinet Assistance System, with minor revisions, endorsed to the Presi- 
dent a draft bill by Congressman Raul Roco granting her emergency powers. The 
President certified the bill to Congress, which acted expeditiously. President Aquino 
signed the bill into law, Republic Act 6862, on December 20, 1989. 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



On December 28, 1989, the National Bureau of Investigation (NBI) filed rebel- 
lion charges against Senator Juan Ponce Enrile, former Energy Minister Geronimo 
Velasco, Gringo Honasan, Makati Councilor Roberto Brillante, and Silahis Hotel 
President Rebecco Panlilio and his wife Erlinda. 

On December 31, 1989, the President again revamped her Cabinet. 

The December 1989 putsch was a near fatal blow, not only to the government 
of Corazon C. Aquino but to the fragile democracy and modest economic gains so 
painstakingly nurtured by her and the Filipino people. The country had to begin 
convincing the international community again, especially the business and financial 
sectors, that it could sustain democratic processes without threat of disruption. 

Succeeding events as a result of this putsch, particularly the economic crunch 
felt largely by ordinary citizens, would be placed at President Aquino's doorstep. 
The Aquino government had weathered through crises made by human protago- 
nists. Its strength and stability would be further tested by natural forces. 



The 
Gulf Crisis 



THE DECEMBER 1989 putsch left 99 dead and 570 wounded, including av- 
ians. The Armed Forces lost P469 million worth of facilities, equipment, and ot er 
property. Foreign investments and tourist arrivals declined due to doubts ot 
country's political stability. 

In 1 990 and 1 991 , a series of events reminiscent of the 1 0 plagues of Egypt as 
told in Exodus, confronted the Aquino government one after another: a WJiere ^ 
quake, a war in the Persian Gulf, the 20th century's largest volcanic erup ion, ^ 
typhoons and droughts brought about by the global weather phenomenon ca 
Nino". 

In this chapter, we focus mainly on the Persian Gulf War (August 1990 to 
February , 991) and how President Aquino made 

implications on the country, as well as the manner by which sne stee j 
through crises in the final two and a half years of her term. 



Picking Up The Pieces 



The recent putsch and the perceived erosion of the President's prestige and 
political clout thereafter, alarmed many of her advisers and supporters. They were 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



concerned that conditions were building up favorable to a return to power through 
elections by political forces identified with the Marcoses. They informed the Presi- 
dent of their apprehensions. 

A series of informal discussions generated consensus that there was a need to 
reconsolidate the forces behind the President. Recognizing the critical importance of 
such a move, she encouraged the group to pursue the discussions. 

On May 27, 1990, a Sunday, the rainy season manifested an early start by a 
drizzle that lasted the whole morning and steadily got worse in the afternoon. It 
should have been a lazy Sunday, but it was a workday for eight Cabinet members 
and two governors who met that morning in the Board Room of the National Irriga- 
tion Authority (NIA) office along EDSA, Quezon City. 

Present in this meeting were Presidential Coordinating Assistant Vicente Jayme, 
Presidential Coordinating Assistant Jose de Jesus, Health Secretary Alfredo Bengzon, 
Finance Secretary Jesus Estanislao, Public Works and Highways Secretary Fiorello 
Estuar, Environment and Natural Resources Secretary Fulgencio Factoran, Trans- 
portation and Communications Secretary Oscar Orbos, Cabinet Secretary Aniceto 
Sobrepena, Immigration Commissioner Andrea Domingo, Bulacan Governor Roberto 
Pagdanganan, and Negros Occidental Governor Daniel Lacson. Three papers cov- 
ering organizing support for the President, economic measures, and feedback from 
political leaders were read. After lengthy discussion over cups of coffee, the group 
came up with a series of recommendations to the President. 

The recommendations were summed up in a paper titled "Project Katipunan" 
which was submitted to the President the next day, May 28. In essence, the paper 
stated: "... the government needed to build alliances and networks with key sectors 
outside of government or the traditional political structures, in order to more fully 
ensure the survival of democratic institutions and processes". 

The President's announcement that she would not run in 1992 had weakened 
her political position, especially in Congress. It was thought that this may adversely 
affect the implementation of the administration's program. Congress and the local 
chief executives had to be convinced that the President would be a relevant factor in 



In the Face of Crisis 



53 



1992, if the administration were to work effectively with them for the remainder of 
the term. The paper proposed to do this in several ways: "First ... create a doubt as 
to the President's political plans for 1992; Second ... strengthen the system of re- 
warding and punishing political leaders, on the basis of their support to the Presi- 
dent's program; Third ... preserve and enhance the value of the President's endorse- 
ment of candidates for public office in 1992... achieved if... successful in restoring 
political stabil ity and confidence in the economy; (Fourth) ... mobilize the silent ma- 
jority who are supportive of the President, especially from the middle class ... exist- 
ing linkages with non-government organizations (NGOs) ... strengthened further". 

Among other things, the paper set the stage for the launching of the KABISIG 
Movement on June 1 2, 1 990, when the President made her Independence Day Ad- 
dress. In her speech, the President denounced the ways of "trapos" or traditional 
politicians. Some political leaders took offense at the President's speech and as- 
sailed the "unelected and unelectable" Cabinet members who they thought were 
behind her statements. 

Despite these irritants between the Executive and the Legislative, the President 
continued to forge a common minimum legislative agenda with the leaders of Con- 
gress. On July 11,1 990, President Aquino and the Cabinet approved a draft com- 
mon minimum legislative agenda. The following day, President Aquino met wit 
Speaker Ramon Mitra and key leaders of the House of Representatives. 

It was already the typhoon season and, in the afternoon of July 16, 1990, the 
skies over Malacanang were overcast. President Aquino was meeting with the Sen- 
ate leadership to craft a common minimum legislative agenda. Most of the bills in 
the President's agenda were meant for small farmers and countryside entrepre- 
neurs. A week before, the President had met with the Lower House leadership on 
the same matters. 

The Senators proposed their own bills. Sena-tor Jovito Salonga asked for the 
inclusion of the bills that he authored, namely: a bill penalizing the crime of plunder 
and a bill penalizing the crime of coup d'etat. 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



In the middle of the discussion, at 4:29 p.m., the tremor struck. Nine cities and 
30 municipalities in 15 Luzon provinces were devastated. 

Seven days later, on July 23, President Aquino delivered her fourth State of the 
Nation Address. Added to the common minimum legislative agenda was the re- 
quest for the appropriation of P10 billion for aid, relief, and rehabilitation of the 
people and areas affected by the July 16 earthquake. 

She did not know it then, but as she spoke, an event that would profoundly 
affect her country and countrymen was unfolding. Men and arms were preparing 
for battle in a desert halfway around the world. 

,T When It Rains, It Pours" 

On August 2, 1990, Iraqi military forces overwhelmed tiny but oil-rich Ku- 
wait, plunging the whole world into a new economic and political crisis. 

The invasion had very serious economic and security implications for the Phil- 
ippines. The country imports 20 percent of its oil requirements from Iraq and Ku- 
wait and, as a result of the invasion, world oil prices had shot up from US$15 per 
barrel to US$21 per barrel. A new round of oil price increase was sure to be taken 
advantage of by extremist groups. 

Aside from the financial worry that the invasion triggered off, the government 
was concerned about the safety of Filipino overseas contract workers in Kuwait and 
Iraq. If a full-scale war broke out, the government would have to repatriate these 
workers and help them look for new jobs. It was also recognized that the dollars 
that these contract workers remitted had been keeping the Philippine economy afloat. 
The loss of these remittances would affect the country's fiscal stability. 

The concerned Cabinet members met to assess the situation and made their 
recommendations to the President. Among the recommendations was a plan of ac- 
tion for economic managers which covered: a temporary suspension of the policy to 
deregulate oil prices, a shift of the tax system for petroleum products from ad 



In the Face of Crisis 



55 



valorem to specific, and the implementation of large-scale repatriation to the Philip- 
pines of overseas contract workers only as a last resort. Considering the resource 
constraints, it was thought best to simply move the workers out of the battle zones 
and for them to take refuge in neighboring countries where they could be 
reemployed. 

In a Cabinet meeting on August 8, the major items in the President's agenda 
were: the diplomatic implications of the crisis, the protection of affected overseas 
workers, and the problem of ensuring a stable supply of oil, hopefully at affordable 
prices. Manglapus stated that the Philippines could turn to Saudi Arabia, Mexico, 
and Thailand as alternative sources of additional oil supply. 

According to the Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE), there were 
some 60,000 Filipino contract workers in Kuwait and 3,000 in Iraq. Labor Secretary 
Ruben Torres had immediately flown to the Middle East to assess their situation 
firsthand and to lay the ground work for their evacuation and other contingency 
plans. 

But there was more bad news. Philippine National Oil Company (PNOC) Presi- 
dent Manuel Estrella reported that the price of crude oil had climbed to US$25.60 
per barrel and that there would be no choice for the government but to increase oil 



prices. 



There was an awkward silence in the room. This was like winding a tight string 
further. To some Cabinet members, the bad news that was to be expected after an 
oil price increase would be that of strikes. After that, the communists or the military 
putschists would swoop down. 

In view of the political and economic implications, the ^f^^jcted the 
Cabinet to begin immediate consultations with Congress. She also directed the draft- 
ing of an Executive Order imposing energy conservation measures and the study of 
the possibility of having only four schooldays a week. 

The Cabinet Cluster E, which was in charge of national security matters, spent 
several sleepless days to come out with a new set of political and security scenarios 
with corresponding government responses. 



56 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



On top of all these, the Cabinet still had to attend to the rehabilitation of the 
earthquake affected areas and the results of the latest debt negotiations. 

The country had pressing financial needs made more urgent by the recent ca- 
lamity and the Gulf War. The President had asked Finance Secretary Estanislao to 
get the best terms possible from the country's creditors. She was informed that the 
core group of the country's donors and creditors, composed of the governments of 
Japan and the United States, the World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF), supported the Philippine government's request for additional assistance. The 
President's policy of not repudiating debts had proven to be propitious. Now that 
the country needed emergency loans, the creditors were more amenable to granting 
them. 

Estanislao reported that the commercial bank creditors decided to accelerate 
the release, without conditionality, of the second tranche of new money for the Phil- 
ippines. He expressed concern, however, over a move in the Senate pressing for 
waiver or suspension of all foreign debt payments for the next two years. He thought 
it would be counterproductive in the light of the support being given by the coun- 
try's creditors. President Aquino assured Estanislao that she was taking the matter 
up with some senators. 

Meanwhile, the evacuation of Filipino workers from Iraq and Kuwait pro- 
ceeded without incident. The Iraqi Foreign Minister in Baghdad had assured 
Manglapus, who had gone there to personally meet with him, that Filipinos wishing 
to leave Kuwait would be allowed to do so. 

At about the same time, complaints also started to pour in regarding the per- 
ceived breakdown in the delivery of basic services in Metro Manila. There was a 
shortage of public transport and traffic tied up commuters for hours. Garbage piled 
up in many places. Crime, too, was in the upswing. The war, although miles away, 
somehow heightened the feeling of helplessness. 

But the President did not buckle. Executive Secretary Drilon was directed to 
call a multisectoral meeting on September 14, 1990. She wanted the senators, con- 



In the Face of Crisis 



57 



gressmen, businessmen, media , labor, and the NGOs to be there. She was banking 
on People Power solutions. 

The multisectoral meeting started with an assessment of the situation in the 
Middle East and how this was affecting energy supply and prices. Contingency 
plans for the affected overseas contract workers were outlined. Gas rationing was 
considered. They were updated on the peace and order situation as well as on gov- 
ernment efforts to rehabilitate earthquake-affected areas. 

The government took quite a few hits as the participants complained about its 
inability to deliver basic services, its inadequate communications program, and t \e 
scarcity of foreign exchange for the business sector, among other things. 

Two days after the multisectoral forum, President Aquino launched 
wide energy conservation program. On September 19, she signed Repub ic 
shifting the taxation system for petroleum products from ad valorem to speci 

On September 21, exactly a week after the multisectoral forum, a ^™^ 
of price increases for premium and regular gasoline, kerosene, diese , an 
announced. 

The Cabinet braced for a storm. 

As expected, strikes and demonstrations erupted after P™*f B n< But 
KMU, BAY AN, PISTON, and affiliated groups organized a we g 
the government had been prepared. 

Dialogues by government officials with ^^^ff^^^^ 
reduce the number of people marching in the streets. ™^ drive on the 

DECS suspended classes at all levels. The government mfcn» 
repercussions of the Middle East crisis helped generate puoiic 
inevitability of the price increases. It also clarified the governmen s actions - that 
they were not arbitrary moves. The Welgang Bayan, this time, failed to get wide- 
spread support. 



58 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



But the administration knew this Welgang Bayan would not be the last. It would 
just be a matter of weeks before protest actions demanding wage increases and 
unrest due to price increases of basic commodities would follow. Ileto suggested 
that the government absorb the next round of oil price increase in order to sof tpedal 
the discontent. 

But it was out of the question. Estanislao had prepared a tight budgetary pro- 
gram for 1991. Subsidizing oil prices simply did not fit into the harsh realities of the 
country's finances. 

There was more to come. Although manufacturers and traders had been hold- 
ing back prices as much as possible, they gave notice through Trade Secretary 
Concepcion that they could no longer do so for long. Aside from the oil price in- 
crease as a result of the Iraq-Kuwait conflict, the peso-dollar exchange rate had 
been steadily falling. 

The government's hands were tied. In a delicate balancing act, on October 4, 
1990, it imposed price ceilings on rice, milk, sugar, chicken, pork, cooking oil, and 
flour. 

The old debate on the effectiveness of price control had been revived. Price 
control could lead to scarcity over the medium- and long-term as low prices would 
not encourage manufacturers and producers. On the other hand, government had 
to address the growing clamor from the lower and middle class to alleviate their 
plight. The demand of the labor sector for wage increases compounded matters 
further. 



Threats From The Right 

As the President and the Cabinet were grappling with the economic crunch 
and the political difficulties that came with it, rebel soldiers in hibernation for the 
past 10 months thought that it was time to strike again. This time, their strategy, 
based on the 'enclave concept', was to stage pockets of rebellion in different parts of 
the country so that the government's forces would be stretched thinly when it at- 



In the Face of Crisis 



59 



tempted to contain them; thus, leaving the seat of power in Manila vulnerable to 
attack. 

Based on their own assessment that there was a wider base of rebel supporters 
in Mindanao, the rebel soldiers agreed that the launching point of this operation 
would be in Agusan. 

On October 4, at the same time that price ceilings were imposed, renegade Col. 
Alexander Noble led a convoy of rebel soldiers and tribal followers from Agusan to 
Cagayan de Oro. They occupied Camp Evangelista in Cagayan de Oro without 
firing a shot. But Noble, in later interviews, said: "I was alone". 

No other rebel units came to join. No civilian supporters sent prayers. Noble 
was a victim of miscalculation, like the others. In two days, he quietly surrendered 
to civilian leaders led by Senator Aquilino Pimentel. Noble was a disappointed man. 



Threats From The Left 

Twenty days later, the KMU launched another Welgang Bayan. To minimize 
its effect, the government again suspended classes and mobilized AFP vehicles to 
transport stranded commuters. The Alex Boncayao Brigade of theNPA, however, 
assisted the KMU by burning buses of transport companies which had fielded their 
units in defiance of the declared strike. It is to the credit of these bus companies that, 
in the interest of the public and in answer to the appeal of the President for solidar- 
ity, they had to suffer losses at a most difficult time. The strikers burned a total of 1 6 
vehicles. Police arrested 50 strikers. 

On the same day as the Welgang Bayan, President Aquino signed Republic Act 
6968 making rebellion and coup d'etat punishable with life imprisonment. Authored 
by Senate President Jovito Salonga, this had been part of the common minimum 
legislative agenda of the Executive and Congress. It was hoped that the new law 
would help deter coup attempts in the future. 



60 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Meeting The Challenges 

As the Oil Price Stabilization Fund (OPSF) was nearly depleted, the govern- 
ment was left with no choice but to impose a second round of price increases. The 
Energy Regulatory Board (ERB) announced it on December 5, 1990 - premium 
gasoline increased from P8.87 per liter to PI 5.95; regular gasoline, from P8.50 per 
liter to PI 5.00; and diesel, from P6.24 per liter to P9.35. The following day, new 
rates were again announced - premium gasoline became P20.70 per liter, regular 
became P19.56 and diesel, P7.75. There was a massive public outcry at these dras- 
tic increases. 

The government backtracked and on December 1 0, premium gas was pegged 
at PI 5.95, regular gas at PI 5.00, and diesel at P7.75. 

On December 15, President Aquino appointed Transportation and Communi- 
cations Secretary Oscar Orbos as the new Executive Secretary. That same day, a 
210-member medical contingent, all volunteers, left for Saudi Arabia. 

The troika of the Presidential Coordinating System, set up after the December 
1 989 putsch, was abolished. President Aquino then appointed Jose de Jesus as the 
new Public Works and Highways Secretary. Tourism Secretary Peter Garrucho was 
named the new Trade and Industry Secretary, while Tourism Undersecretary Rafael 
Alunan was promoted to Secretary. Transportation and Communications Under- 
secretary Herminio Coloma became the new head of the Presidential Management 
Staff. The revamp had not been as sweeping as that after the December 1989 putsch, 
but it helped quiet down the 'mob clamoring for blood outside the gates of 
Malacanang'. 

The United Nations Security Council gave a January 15, 1991 deadline to Iraq 
to withdraw from Kuwait If there was no withdrawal by then, it was assumed that 
shooting would start between the Allied Forces and Iraq. As the deadline approached, 
the Aquino government stepped up its efforts to prepare for the economic and po- 
litical effects of an actual outbreak of war. It helped immensely that the new Execu- 
tive Secretary was outgoing, telegenic, and effective in relating with the media and 
the public. 



In the Face of Crisis 



61 



Orbos launched the very popular free telephone calls to the Middle East. Tel- 
ephone booths, courtesy of the Philippine Long Distance and Telephone Company 
(PLDT), were set up inside Malacahang grounds by the Presidential Action Center. 
Thousands came to Malacafiang to benefit from the service which enabled families 
and friends of the overseas contract workers to communicate with them at the height 
of the war. Criticisms were raised against this program, but there was no doubt that 
it contributed to easing apprehensions of the general public as to the severity of the 
situation. It was a grand move of the Aquino administration. 

In a two-day multisectoral workshop at the Asian Institute of Management 
senior government officials and leaders from business, labor, academe, and the s 
finalized plans to ensure that the country would survive the actual outbrea o war 
in the Persian Gulf. On January 5, 1991, President Aquino ordered the crea io^ 
six Presidential Task Forces that would implement the recommendations o^ 
lated in the multisectoral workshop. The following day, Labor SecTet ^.^ oi the 
Torres left for the Middle East to personally coordinate the implementa ion 
contingency plans for the overseas contract workers still there. 

1 1 

President Aquino also convened the National Security Council on J 3 ™^^ 
This was only the third time that the President had convened the ^ 
ruary 1986. The difficulty arose from the strained relations between es^ 
and Vice President Salvador Laurel and Senate Minority Floor Lea ^ ^ 

Enrile. Over the past two crisis-ridden years, the Cabinet Cluster ^ conv i nce 
facto National Security Council. Ileto explains: "It * ook me f tance t0 do so 

(the President) to convene the National Security Council ... ttne re 
was perhaps) because of the presence of the opposition in the mem e 

••..-„« ic that vou do not take for 
The advantage of having members of the °PP^ tX ° n * *^ ^and theoretically, 
granted the disadvantages of certain actions. You seeboth^ s ^ ^ 

you would have a better understanding of theprob fan. Jf» ^ ^ fe 

opposition in the Council, decision-making will besmootner ai 
no guarantee that the decision will be better". 

In the meeting, President Aquino and the representatives of Congress commit- 
ted to set aside differences and to work together to ensure the implementation of the 
national contingency plan. 



62 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



On February 28, Allied Forces rolled into Kuwait. It was swift and sweet - 
much more fascinating than Phantoms and Tora Toras. Many Filipino homes stayed 
glued to the CNN news. Each missile or smart bomb that punctured the enemy 
fortress was cataclysmic to the weary Filipino. This meant no more lost jobs, no 
more worries about lost dollar earnings. This meant no more fear of gas price in- 
crease. 

Indeed, oil prices in the world market gradually softened. On April 1 9, 1 991 , 
the government announced the first of a series of price reductions for oil products. 



'MY SOLDIER.' On preceding page, 

President Aquino gives a snappy 
salute to new graduates of the Philip- 
pine Military Academy on February 17, 
1991. 



THE COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF poses with 
newly-inducted Brigadier Generals of the 
Armed Forces of the Philippines in 
Malacahang on Dec. 16, 1991. In photo 
(first row, from left); PA Commanding 
General Arturo Enrile; Flag Officer-in- 
Command Mariano Dumancas; Defense 
Secretary Renato de Villa; Chief of Staff 
Gen. Lisandro Abadia; PAF Commanding 
General Loven Abadia and Presidential 
Assistant on Military Affairs Admiral 
Carlito Cunanan. (Second row, from left): 
Irig. Gens. Rodolfo Dimmano, Federico de 
loya, Donato Quintos, Jr., Daniel Delgado, 
rancisco Atayde, Alfredo Pajarillo, Miguel 
Hinlo, Samson Mahimer, Guillermo Ruiz, 
Rodolfo Estrellado, Arnulfo Acedera, Jr., 
and Jose C. Lapus. 



Epilogue 



FOR THE PEOPLE in Malacanang, the last 1 8 months of the Aquino admins 
Nation rolled by at a fast clip - with bumps on some stretches, but as 
high note. 

On June 5, 1991, President Aquino named Gen. Lisandro A ^f^^ t 
AFP Chief of Staff. The General had beaten more senior ^ida^ Alexa nder 
h is appointment triggered off a minor controversy involving The choice 

Aguirre, another candidate with strong political and military advisers . But 

was a mystery to all, except perhaps to the President and her ^ cqMELEC, 
there was wisdom in her choice. In 1992, the military, alo "S ever held . Gen. 
Husbanded what was considered the cleanest Philippine e e ^ ^ 

Abadia, on the President's order and beholden to no one, had kep 
noses clean. 

Mt Pinatubo in Za.ba.es, after months oi M 
and lava. 

The continued presence of the U.S. military installations in the country had 
been a hotly contested issue ever since cause-oriented groups stepped up their cam- 



64 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



paign to throw them out way back during the ratification of the 1987 Constitution. 
A draft of a new treaty extending the Bases' presence in the country for another 10 
years was signed on August 27, 1991 . It only awaited the Senate's concurrence. 

The issue of ratification of the Bases Treaty was a potential time bomb. Both 
pros and cons had valid reasons for their stands and it seemed that there was a tight 
fight in the offing. The devastation of Clark and the damage to Subic Naval Base by 
subsequent Mt. Pinatubo emissions settled the matter. The Americans wanted out. 
On September 16, 1991, the Senate rejected the treaty, and one more crisis had been 
weathered. 



On July 31, 1991, the government announced that it would allow the former 
First Lady, Imelda Marcos, and her family to return to the country, but the permit 
did not include the return of her husband's remains. 

On August 5, 1991, the military recaptured NPA Chief Romulo Kintanar and 
his wife Gloria Jopson. And on November 1,1991, Gringo Honasan's partner in the 
past coup attempts, renegade Lt. Col. Red Kapunan, surrendered to military au- 
thorities. 



Predictions of an impending power crisis in Luzon finally came true on Janu- 
ary 9, 1992 when a 250 MW coal-fired plant in Calaca, Batangas broke down. Two- 
to four-hour brownouts hit Metro Manila and Central Luzon. Red tape, opposition 
from environmental groups, and lack of financing had stalled the government's 
energy development program. Eleven days later, on January 20, President Aquino 
reorganized the National Power Corporation. 

El Nino continued to exact its toll on the Philippines. On March 18, 1992, a 
state of calamity was declared in Iloilo, Bukidnon, Davao del Sur, South Cotabato, 
Maguindanao, and North Cotabato. The drought, on its sixth month, had destroyed 
around P2.0 billion worth of crops in these provinces. 

President Aquino dealt a blow to traditional politics when she gave her much 
sought-after endorsement to the candidacy of Gen. Fidel V. Ramos for President. 



In the Face of Crisis 65 



Keeping to her independent stance, which meant lack of a powerful party machin- 
ery, she successfully brought him the Presidency on May 11, 1992. Conventional 
wisdom had it that the votes that won Ramos the Presidency were votes for Corazon 
C. Aquino and what she stood for. 

On June 1 8, 1 992, outgoing President Aquino delivered a speech at the UP as 
part of a lecture series to assess the performance of her administration. At the close 
of her speech, she said: "I have not always won, but to the very end, I never shirked a 
fight; and did not lose the last one. For these successes, I thank God and not myself 
for them ... In the end, all was accomplished by prayer". 

On June 25, 1992, President Aquino said her good-bye to the Armed Forces of 
the Philippines in ceremonies at Camp Aguinaldo: "Your duty and devotion during 
the worst trials of the government is a memory I shall cherish. It is the glory o e 
past six years that they were the story of the battle for freedom. A battle we thoug 
had ended, but which really only began at EDSA. 

It is easily forgotten, but that battle was waged mostly by the military; and the 
story of those years was more of loyalty than of betrayal. When the smoke c e w 
the disloyalty of the few will be seen against the backdrop of the great majon y 
held fast to their oath of duty". 

Choking back emotions, Gen. Abadia had said: "We have com ^°^^ 
marched with you, Mrs. President, for six trying years, along a pat i a 
obstacles of every sort. Together we confronted extraordinary problems unae 
most challenging conditions. After more than twenty odd years of serving m a ro!e 
that, under the dictatorship, only tended to dramatize the conditions of those times, 
it was no easy task to transform the Armed Forces. 

In reflecting upon the pre-EDSA past, there could not have been illusions about 
the profound and deleterious effects of Martial Law on our ranks - the intrusion of 
politics, the decline of discipline, the emergence of factions, the denigration of val- 
ues and ideals and, perhaps worst, the stirrings of what would surface as an inter- 
ventionist syndrome. Adventurism by misguided military rebels exemplified how 



66 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



far some of us had been in fact infected by the virus, with the series of coup attempts 
aimed to grab state power by force in order that they can install themselves under 
their own brand of dictatorship, that they have always failed underscored one sim- 
ple fact - few Filipinos, civilian or military, would support such change in govern- 
ment through violent means... 

With our candid appraisal, we wish to claim that, indeed, Aquino leaves us 
with a legacy that warms our hearts. Mrs. President, it inspires me to make public 
the ledger of achievements under your firm and wise leadership ... It shows tremen- 
dous strides in the counter-insurgency drive, the stabilization of the separatist move- 
ment in Mindanao and the neutralization efforts of the ultra-rightist military group 
still in the underground ... Finally, it shows a soldier of renewed professional spirit, 
discipline and competence who, most importantly, is dedicated to his Constitu- 
tional duty, respectful of the rule of law, mindful of human rights and confident of 
the future". 

The Filipino soldier has come home. At last. 



