To N. B. Q. 

without whose encouragement and 
inspiration this book would 
not have been written 



QUEZON 

MAN OF DliSSTINV 



By 

CARLOS QUIRINO 




MANILA 
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



All rights reserved 



Copyright, 193S. Philippine Islands 
Copyright. 193S, United States of America 

By 

Cablos Quiring 



trintei and bound by the 
McCULLOUGH PRINTING CO.. INC. 
Manila, Pbiucpinb Islands 



PREFACE 



N an original work of this sort, where some twenty living con- 
temporaries of President Quezon were consulted for biograph- 
ical facts about his life, errors are bound to creep in. This 
biography does not pretend to be exhaustive, conchisivc, or final. 
In writing about any living person, much that could be said cannot 
be printed; there are numerous facts surrounding recent and current 
events which, when disclosed at some future date, may modify 
judgment on the man. 

Desiring to make this brief biography as historically accurate 
as possible, the author submitted the original manuscript to Presi- 
dent Quezon last August 16; but for some reason or other, most 
likely because he has been too busy with affairs of state, he has not 
had time to read it through. The author therefore wrote to the 
President on September 24, partly as follows: 

"You have told me that I have made some errors in fact, and that my con- 
dusions and interpretations were worse. I'm always willing to be corrected, and I 
change my point of view according to facts, as I'm only human and subject to 
error. If you will excuse my frankness — and I know that that is a quality you 
possess and admire in others— biographies and articles which have been written 
about you in the past fall into two definite classes: those that deify, and those 
that vilify. This biography of mine does neither; it presents the greatest political 
leader in the entire history of the Philippines as I sec him; it presents his achieve- 
ments as wdl as his misukes. It is my intention to strike a happy balance be- 
tween the two extremes, and, if I may humbly say so, my position as an obscure 
young newspaperman qualifies me best for the task; for then I have no position 
to lose, or a desire to curry favor. My only desire is to write for history and 
posterity." 

President Quezon took the manuscript with him to Hongkong 
on September 25 for perusal, but his sudden return to Manila, and 
the numerous demands made upon him in his new position, pre- 
cluded any possibility for a criticism of the manuscript. Hence, 
the opinions expressed in these pages are my own— untrammcled, 
uocensored, and unocporgated. 

i 




QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



In offering this modest volume to the public, the author was 
mainly motivated by a desire to be of some help in furthering our 
national ideal of independence. To qaote President Quezon: "In 
the past we have been speaking about Philippine independence 
always in glowing terms. . . . Now the time for talking on this 
matter is past. This is the time for 'iurtloa, for doing something 
to make that independence not only a reality, but a happy reality 
for our people. " To explain the many problems facing our country, 
and in that way lighten somewhat the heavy load upon the shoul- 
ders of our President, is the primary aim of this book. 

This little volume is primarily addressed to the Filipino young 
men and women, for it is upon their generation that the burden 
will fall most heavily in the years to come when the Philippine 
Republic will have become a reality. My sincere hope is that this 
book may prove to be a constant source of inspiration to the youth 
of our land, so that they may imbibe fresh courage to face future 
difficulties from the example of continuous self-sacrifice for counCcy 
set before them by our beloved President and First Lady. 

Manila, October 15, 1935. 



CHAPTER I 



Early Life, As Student And Soldier 

T the head of the polished hardwood stairway in stately 
Malacanan Palace, there hangs a painting called "The 
Blood Compact," showing Don Miguel Lopez de Legaspi, first 
governor-general of the Philippines and Chief Sikatuna of the 
island of Bohol scaling a treaty by drinking a mixture of wine and 
their own blood. That painting is curiously symbolical. For today 
dwells in historic Malacanan Palace the first president of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines, Don Manuel Luis Quezon y Mo- 
lina, in whose veins runs the blood of the Spaniard and the Malay. 

Persuasive of speech, shrewd in thought and clever in compro- 
mise, charming but resolute, affable but capable of grim earnestness 
where the rights of his people are concerned — such is President 
Quezon, one of the most able, magnetic, and colorful personalities 
among world notables. 

What is the future of the Philippines: will she be another Latin 
American republic torn by internal revolutions? Will she become 
a second Manchukuo? or will she secure the envied security of a 
Switzerland in the Far East? Momentous questions all these, but 
it is futile to speculate on the future— of one thing we are certain: 
the man who will guide the destiny of thirteen million Filipinos is 
a seasoned statesman who, with his right-hand man Vice-President 
Sergio Osmcfia, has taken turns iti successfully guiding insular 
affairs for the past three decades. 

Credit must go to these two men and their followers for check- 
ing the transformation of the archipelago into a puppet country 
controlled by the capitalists of a world power. The total amount 
ofAjaidricjuaCl8.3%) sod IbreigaktisfQilait isiiisufficieat to create 

f 




QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



a strangle hold on the affairs of the country; at present, the Phil- 
ippines cannot be said to be a second Cuba, Venezuela or Egypt'. 
The Filipinos have always realized that foreign capital was neces- 
sary to develop their natural resoturces, but at the same time they 
were mortally afraid that this same capital would later prove a 
hindrance to complete independence. With the sad example of the 
banana republics of Central America before their eyes, the Filipino 
leaders were exceedingly pleased when Congress passed a law 
limiting holdings of public lands to 1,024 hectares. No corpora- 
tion, or group of individuals, could thus own or lease huge tracts 
of fertile agricultural or forest lands. This law eventually jare- 
vented rubber interests from coming to the archipelago. 

Filipinos wanted foreign capital, but under certain restrictions, 
which foreign capitalists would not tolerate. Hence, Filipino 
leaders were forced to embark upon a series of government-owned 
enterprises: a form of socialism even at a time when the theory of 
laissez-faire was at its height in the United States. With the 
approval of Governor Harrison, Quezon and Osmeila started the 
Philippine National Bank, firms to exploit native coal, cement and 
other resources; the insular government furthermore owned the 
largest hotel in the archipelago, an ice plant, and also the only 
extensive railroad company in the Islands. 

Still dreading the influx of foreign capital which could extend 
octopus-like tentacles on the economic and political life of the 
nation, the Filipinos further provided in their Constitution the 
following paragraph: ' • 

Article XII, section IV. All agricultoral, timber, and mineral lands of the 
public domain, waters, minerals, coal, petroleum, and other mineral oils, all 
forces of potential energy, and other natural resources of the Philippines belong 
to the State, and their disposition, exploitation, development, or utilization shall 



FilipinoapiulIaTutauati total 62.7%, bat oalf 14.3% if inTutmena on real utatetnd apiculture are es- 
clndcd. In tht latter cue, AmcricancapiMl InTcstmcnta Jamp to first place with a 49.6%, while Chioeae come next 
with 17% or twoperceotahead of Filipinos. American capiul iDTestmenUin the Philippines, other than those of 
the U, S. gowDment, was estimated in 1930 at about $200,000,000. Of thla figure, $63,472,000 were Inrested in 
PbilippiacjoTeramcntlx)nds,$38383,000 in nierehandisingenterprIses,J30,000,OOOinsngar centrals, »nd$19J47,000 
in an electric light plant. 

2 



EARLY LIFE, AS STUDENT AND SOLDIER 



be limited to citizens of the Philippines, or to corporations or associations at least 
60 per centum of the capital of which is owned by such citizens, subject to any 
existing right, grant, lease, or concession at the time of the inauguration of the 
Government established under this constitution. Natural resources, with the 
exception of public agricnltoral land, shall not be alienated, and no license, con- 
cession, or lease for the exploitation, development, or utilization of any of the 
natural resources shall be granted for a period exceeding 25 years, renewable for 
another 25 years, except as to water rights for irrigation, water supply, fisheries, 
or industrial uses other than the development of water power, in which case 
beneficial use may be the measure and the limit of the grant. 

Section 2. No private corporation or association may acquire, lease, or 
hold public agricultural lands in excess of 1,024 hectares, nor may any individual 
acquire such lands by purchase in excess of 144 hectares, or by lease in excess of 
1,024 hectares, or by homesteads in excess of 24 hectares. Lands adapted to 
grazing, not exceeding 2,000 hectares, may be leased to an individual, private 
corporation, or association. 

The economic dependence of Philippine products on the Amer- 
ican market began in 1909 with the passage of the Payne tarifF 
act by U. S. Congress. The Philippine Assembly, led by Osmeiia 
and Quezon, opposed -such a move partly on the gromid that it 
would make the archipelago dependent on the United States, so 
that independence would be harder to secure. Two decades and a 
half have passed since then, and during this period the Islands 
have prospered tremendously under the artificial stimulus of free 
trade with America. Although Filipino political leaders knew 
that this condition would not last forever, they neglected to change 
the economic life-stream of the nation, they failed to re-orientate 
Philippine economic development. They took the blind attitude 
of depending on the American market to the last minute, then 
hoping for the best that somehow or other the Philippines 
would make the necessary painful adjustments in search of other 
markets. They were so engrossed in securing political independ- 
ence, in jockeying for supremacy in insular politics, that they 
overlooked the paramount importance of economic independence. 

Though Filipino leaders have zealously guarded the archi- 
pelago from the invasion of rapacious foreign capital, they have over- 
looked the welfare of the common man— the humble tao or farmer 

3 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



of the field and the poor working man, who form the great bulk 
of the population. It is true that with prosperity under the Amer- 
ican flag, the lot of the common tao has been improved; roads have 
been built, educational and health facilities greatly extended, and 
the standard of living raised. But evils such as usury, relations 
between tenants and landlords, between manufacturers and wage 
earners, Japanese land holdings in Davao, and other problems, still 
exist. With the economic depression, these evils have been ac- 
centuated, and left the masses open to the exploitation of radical 
agitators. The Sakdal uprising last May was an example. 

How successfully these problems will be met will depend largely 
on President Manuel Quezon himself and his followers. 

* * * 

In the sleepy town of Baler, that scarcely had a population 
of 2,000 souls, Manuel Luis Quezon y Molina was born on August 
19, 1878, to Don Lucio Quezon and Dona Maria Molina, humble 
townfolk. Don Lucio was a schoolteacher and, though he 
earned a small salary, commanded the respect of the ignorant 
barrio people because of his position. Nothing much has yet 
been brought to light of Don Lucio, except that he was a native 
of Penafrancia, Paco, and that he went as a young man to Baler and 
settled down there. Whatever records Don Lucio and his fore- 
fathers must have left in the Paco church are lost to posterity, for 
With the Revolution of 1896-98 all the church documents and papers 
were burned and destroyed. Baler, located on the eastern shores 
of central Luzon, largest island of the Philippine archipelago, was 
then the cabectra or capital of the district known as El Principe, now 
called the province of Tayabas. The town had been founded in 
1609 by Fray Bias Palomino and six other priests of the Franciscan 
order, or 11 years before the Pilgrims arrived at Plymouth on the 
Mayflower. The river San Jose winds its way from the mountains 
to the west, past the little town to the blue waters of the Pacific 
ocean. In 1735, the river had risen and flooded the town, wreaking 

4 



7 H 



E. z 

~ o 



E. r 




! 

i 



EARLY LIFE, AS STUDENT AND SOLDIER 



much Iiavdc among the inhabitants. The soil was poor, and the 
younger people emigrated across the mountains to the rich lowlands 
of central Luzon. Some sort of fame- was achieved by the town of 
Baler during the war between the Spanish and the Filipino forces. 
A troop of 60 Spanish soldiers and officers were besieged in the stone 
church of the town by the Filipino insurg,ents for a period of about 
10 months. No relief could be sent to them from the Spanish head- 
quarters at Manila, as the Filipinos had control of the outlying 
provinces. Food and drink were rationed out in tiny quantities 
to the men serving under the flag of Castile. They suffered horribly 
from bcri-beri and starvation, but with Spanish pride and fortitude — 
qualities which made possible the conquest of the Americas in the 
sixteenth century — they taunted the Filipinos to assault them. By 
the time news that the Spaniards had surrendered to the Americans 
in Manila had reached Baler, only 30 of the original 60 were alive. 
The Spanish troop had lost twice as much from disease as from deser- 
tion and casualties of war. When General Aguinaldo heard of the 
valiant stand made by the Spaniards in Baler, he gave special orders 
that those men were to be treated as friends and not as prisoners of 
war, and were to be sent back to Spain. The commander. Captain 
S. M. Cerezo, wrote in 1904 an account of that blockade called 
"The Siege Of Baler." The book makes a curious, short reference 
to Don Pedro Aragon, brother-in-law of Dona Maria and the pres- 
ident's future father-in-law: 

"When Carreno was dying (he was the parish priest and 77 
at that time), a truce was called and there appeared a certain Pedro 
Aragon, resident of Baler and known as the 'husband of theZeneida', 
who wanted to talk with the priest. He told us that he had been 
imprisoned in the capital for having been implicated in the uprising 
at Mota, but had been set free after the surrender of the town, and 
that he came to tell this to the parish priest, as well as other im- 
portant news. . . . He waited for a short time, but as it had started 
raining and the priest had not gone out, he suspected that we might 
capture him and he left running without heeding our calls." 

Except for this brief burst of glory, Baler was forever destined 
to remain a small town, and would never have been singled out from 

5 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



thousands of other small towns in the archipelago, had not Pres- 
ident Quezon been bom there some 57 years ago. 

Realizing the need of an education for his son, Don Lucio 
managed to save money from his meager salary. He was pretty 
well-off by the standards of the too or farmer of the fields, for he 
was a salaried maestro. Don Lucio also possessed a two-hectare 
rice land which he cultivated, and from the proceeds of this land, 
he was able to save a few hundred pesos for the education of his 
son Manud. 

Young Manuel, even then, was a bright youngster — rather 
naughty and full of pranks, as those who knew him then recall. 
He learned his ABC's from his father and mother, and later on from 
the parish priest of the town. The Quezons lived like any other 
Filipino family: they had a humble nipa house, with a split bamboo 
floor, and ate mostly rice gleaned from their field and fish caught 
from the nearby sea. Once in a while, they varied their diet with 
venison and wild honey bought from hunters who came from the 
adjacent forests. During those days, a Filipino family could live 
in a small town like Baler on four pesos a month and rice. 

An aunt, besides his parents, taught him his three R's when he 
was five. Four years later, they had taught him all that they 
could, and deemed him ready for further education in Manila. 

"Try to improve and educate yourself, as you've got the qual- 
ities to be great — and always tell the truth" was the parting ad- 
vice of the good parish fadre, an advice which President Quezon 
has never forgotten. 

From Baler to Manila is about 80 miles as the crow flies. A 
road passes north of Manila up to the fertile plains of central Lu- 
zon. To reach this road from Baler, at .the junction in Cabanatuan, 
some 40 miles of rough mountain trails have to be traveled on horse- 
back and on foot. So young Manuel, accompanied by his father, 
crossed the wild mountain trails of the forbidding Sierra Madre 
mountains southwest to San Isidro, Nueva Ecija, and from there to 
Manila. Once in the capital, he was enrolled at the Colcgio de San. 

6 



EARLY UFE, AS STUDENT AND SOLDIER 



Joan de Letran, a secondary school managed hy the Dominican 
priests, and one of the two leading schools in those days. 

As he did not have vci}- much money, young Manuel was forced 
to become a common muchacho or houseboy for a priest at the Fran- 
ciscan convent in the Walled city. He received no salary and 
merely worked for his room and board. As he found th.it working 
and studying at the same time was too strenuous, Don Lucio de- 
cided to board young Manuel in the house of a cousin living in 
Paco, then a suburb of Manila, about three miles from the school. 
Classes started at seven o'clock in the morning, and as Manuel had 
to walk to school, the daily strain soon told on his health. He 
was not very strong at the time and became sick. 

The following year, Don Lucio decided to enter his son as a 
boarder in the school. Manuel was naturally bright, and during 
his five years at Letran, from 1889 to 1894, got the highest grades. 
According to the custom of the time, he made an application to take 
the examinations for the Bachelor of Arts degree on February of 
1894. The application, written by an expert penman, and signed 
by him, is still preserved in the files of the Dominican fathers. He 
was given the degree on February 24, 1894, for having passed with 
highest honors the requirements of the secondary course. 

Even as a student, Quezon exhibited traits which were to re- 
main with him later in life. 

"He was wide awake and naturally bright — so talented that 
he became first in his class though he was too lazy to study," re- 
lates a former classmate, who once tutored him in Latin. "He 
was popular among the boys, he was a good orator, and became a 
leader of his class." 

It goes without saying that he was extremely mischievous, and 
not infrequently fell into the bad graces of his teachers. Once, 
when one of his teachers had to give Holy Communion to several 
scores of fellow students, young Manuel purposely placed only a few 
wafers in the cup. Thus only a few of the students were able to 
receive Holy Communion that morning. The priest was, to say 

7 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



the least, furious. But without waiting to be asked who was 
the culprit, young Manuel came forward and confessed his prank. 
His frankness gained him a reprieve from the irate teacher-priest, 

and he got off with a light punishment. 

Father Serapio Tamayo, now rector of the University of Santo 
Tomas, the institution of higher learning run by the Dominican 
fathers, once had to stop a fight between Manuel and another boy. 

SciBorito Manuel was fond of music and gymn.istics. He 
managed to learn the piano, and with two schoolmates — now 
Judge Francisco Ortigas and Francisco Imperial — furnished the 
music for school celebrations and graduations. Forty years later, 
though he had not touched the piano since his students days, Don 
Manuel gingerly picked with one finger the tune of the Philippine 
anthem on board the Ik de France, thus enabling the ship's orches- 
tra to play the piece in honor of the Philippine delegation. 

"Bluffer", or gulatero in Tagalog, was the nickname given him 

by his classmates, for Manuel even at that time was a showman and 
intuitive psychologist. He bluffed his classmates in games and 
studies. He exercised assiduously, and built up a physique which 
stood him in good stead in later years; he has always been physically 
vigorous until his illness in 1931. He practised on the parallel bars, 
and somersaulted from spring boards — he was quite a gymnast 
during his student days. 

While a student at Letran, the vice-rector, the Rev. Father 
Lorenzo Garcia, found that Manuel had never been confirmed. In 
the Philippines, Catholic children are confirmed at the age of three 
or four. So in keeping with Catholic belief, Manuel was confirmed 
in the school chapel— at the age of 14! His godfather was Dr. 
Rafael Bertol, his tutor in mathematics. Many years later, when 
Don Manuel was president of the Manila Railroad company, he ac- 
cidentally met Dr. Bertol, who was carrying on an insignificant 
practice in the town of Baliwag, Bulacan. In memory of the old 
days, grateful Don Manuel appointed him doctor of the railroad 
company. 

8 




At the age of 16, Don Manuel made the customary application for examinations 
at the San Juan de Letran. An expert penman made the application. Notice the 
President's signature then, and compare it with the other later signatures. 



I 

1 



1 



EARLY LIFE, AS STUDENT AND SOLDIER 



His uncle, Don Pedro Aragon, used to accompany him on the 
trips from Manila to Baler. Halfway they would stop for two 
days or so in San Isidro, Nueva Ecija. Young Manuel was the 
terror of the town's Chinese storekeepers. 

"You indecent sons of Cathay," he would shout at them. 

Cowed by his authoritative tone, the tenderos kept silent, while 
Manuel inwardly laughed with glee. 

Fond of parties, especially when fair ladies were present, he 
would pound on the piano the sentimental tune of "Cuando El 
Amor Muere" — "When Love Dies". Many a sigh was heaved 
from fair bosoms whenever the dashing student from Lctran played 
that piece on the piano. 

By 1S94, the few hundred pesos that Don Lucio had kept for 
Manuel's education was spent. He had even borrowed money to 
see his son complete the secondary course. So he simply told 
his son that he could no longer support him through the university. 
Manuel came to ManUa and spoke to his Dominican professors, who 
had becoine fond of him. They secured a job for him as one of the 
"Capistas" or tutors of the university with room, board and free 
tuition. His professors, knowing Quezon's temper, was afraid he 
could not get along with the Spanish students who formed an 
unruly lot. But young Quezon managed to curb his quick temper 
and got along remarkably well. 

In the preparatory year of law, he romped away with honors, 
and a prize for the course on the critical history of Spain. He took 
the first year of law from 1895 to 1896, but his studies were interrupt- 
ed by the revolution against Spain. General Aguinaldo had or- 
ganized the revolt throughout the provinces of Luzon and the 
Visayas. The pact of Biak-na-bato was signed, and so from 1897 
to 1898, young Quezon was able to study another year of his law 
course. But on May 1, 1 898, Admiral Dewey defeated the Spaniards 
in Manila bay, and by August the Filipinos began their hostilities 
against the newcomers. Manuel, who had been too young to 
fight against the Spaniards, was now old enough to take up arms 

9 



QUEZON: MAN OP DESTINY 



against the Yankee invaders. So he quit his studies, »od joined 
the general staff of General Emilio Agoinaldo with the ranJc erf 

lieutenant of infantry. 

* * * 

At this time Lieutenant Quezon was exhibiting Chose qualities 
which were to become stamped on him in later years. He was 
fearless, impulsive, quick to anger but as quick to forgive, some- 
what arrogant and headstrong. He had black hair swept back, 
dark-brown piercing eyes, an aquiline nose, hi^f^h cheekbones, and 
determined lines around the mouth and chin. He wore a thin 
mustache in the api>roved upwards fashion of young bucks, giving 
an aggressive military air about him. 

When the Filipino forces retreated before the inexorable advance 
of the better-armed Americans to Calumpit, Bulacan, General 
Aguinaldo sent Captain Quezon on a mission to B;nguet, in the 
Igorot country. Captain Quezon knew Colonel Alejandro Albert 
of the medical corps, now undersecretary of public instruction, and 
asked the latter if he wanted anything from Bcnguet. 

"Some coffee," said Dr. Albert. Coffee from the mountain 
province was then renowned all over the archipelago for its flavor 

and aroma, Three weeks later, true to his word. Captain Quezon 
returned with a sack of first-class coffee beans as a gift for his good 
friend Dr. Albert. 

During the rainy season of 1899, Captain Quezon was in Tarlac 
on leave. He had been promoted to Captain for his valor and was 
now earning a well-deserved leave far from the front-line trenches. 
A flood had destroyed the road, and one fine afternoon Captain 
Quezon strolled up and down the plaza with a bevy of town beauties, 
who were attracted by the fine military figure and handsome face 
of the capitan. The commandant of the town, who was at head- 
quarters facing the plaza, feeling a little jealous perhaps and. to 
show his authority, halted the group. 

"Hey, you," he shouted, "what are you doing there?" 

10 



EARLY LIFE, AS STUDENT AND SOLDIER 



"Taking a walk," replied Captain Quezon. 

•'Who gave you permission to do that?" persisted the colonel. 

"Nobody — myself," answered the captain. 

"Come up and talk to me," said the colonel. 

"Why don't you come down?" said the captain. 
"Don't you know that you're breaking rules?" 
"So what?" countered the captain. 

The Colonel nearly had his subordinate arrested for this im- 
pudence and lack of discipline. He burned the wires to general 
headquarters on the matter, and as a result Captain Quezon received 
post haste an order to join his forces in the front. 

During the entire insurrection, Captain Quezon escaped without 
serious injury, though he was often found where bullets flew thick- 
est. Once he was nicked in the arm, a mere flesh wound which 
rapidly healed. In true barrio fashion, his soldiers began to believe 
that he possessed some sort of an ant'mg-anting, or amulet, to have 
escaped the bullets of the sharpshooting Aniericanos — specially after 
his aide, a Boholano by the name of Rodriguez, was badly wounded 
by five bullets. 

Realizing that the medical corps of the revolutionary army in 
his district did not have the facilities to save the man's life. Captain 
Quezon hired a hanca or dug-out canoe to row them to Manila — a 
distance of some 30 miles, from the foothills of Mariveles, Bataan, 
to the city. Disguised in the civilian clothes of a humble tao, he 
brought his faithful aide to the hduse of Dr. Albert, who called his 
brother Jose, now head of the pediatrics division of the Philippine 
General Hospital. Captain Quezon, after learning that his aide 
had passed the critical stage, returned to the trenches. 

Many years later, when the cafitan had become a powerful 
political figure, the resident commissioner in Washington, he asked 
for that soldier, but could not find him after a long search; in pros- 
perity he did not forget his companion in adversity. 

He rose to the rank of major, as the war kept on in 1899. He 
had been transferred to the staff of General Mascardo, who command- 
ed the district northwest of Manila, in the provinces of Zambales 

11 



QUEZON; MAN OF DESTINy 



and Bataan. The Filipinos were waging a l.c.iii" li 'Jit, and one 
by one the Filipino military leaders surrcnJcrcd to the Americans. 
Major Quezon contracted dysentery and malaria. On September, 
1899, he surrendered to an American soldier, a defenseless private 
who was collecting botanical specimens at the foot of Mariveles 
mountain. 

"I did not know much Spanish and he knew no English, so 
our conversation partook largely of pantomine or sign language,** 
related his captor. "Pretty soon he asked me, in an offhand way, 
if I had time. I said to myself: "Here's where my fancy timepiece 
goes, anyway*. I felt that the watch would be just the beginning 
and that I would be stripped also of money and all that I had, 
possibly even my clothes. However to my surprise, no movement 
was made to take the watch from me and I began to pick up courage. 

"I should have said that first of all the young officer introduced 
himself as Major Quezon. I in turn introduced myself as Private 
Roy Squires. He asked me many questions about the Americans 
in Manila. He said he was ill and wished to know whether he 
would be given medical care if he surrendered. Did the Americans 
have good doctors in Manila? Had they set up any hospitals? 
And would they treat with dignity a major who surrendered?" 

The following day, Major Quezon turned up in the American 
camp and surrendered to the authorities. To this day, Mr. Squires — 
who is now a prosperous merchant — treasiures an autograph and the 
sword among his trophies. 

Penniless and sick, he was kept in prison for six months by the 
American army authorities. The Alejandro Alberts brought him 
food until Don Francisco Ortigas, a former schoolmate, also brought 
him food and clothes. He was released and stayed with the Alberts 
in their house at I32 Ronquillo. One rainy night, a detachment of 
American soldiers came to the house and arrested him on the charge 
that he was implicated in the death of one of his co-prisoners. So 
back to jail on Callc Anda in the Walled City, Quezon was sent. 

Father Florencio Llanos, a former teacher, one day looked out 
from the window of their school on Calle Anda, and heard Quezon's 

12 



i 



i 



EARLY LIFE, AS STUDENT AND SOLDIER 



weak voice caUing him. He at once recognized his former favorite 
pupil. 

"What are you doing there, man?" asked the priest. 

"They've falsely accused me of murder, although I'm innocent. 
I'm sick — please help me," begged Quezon. Father Llanos promis- 
ed to help him. Father Llanos went to the Archbishop, Monsignor 
Alcocer, who got in touch vnth the church's attorney, Mr. Hartigan. 
The American lawyer, in turn, convinced the military authorities 
that Quezon was innocent. 

His former professors and friends managed to have him admitted 
free of charge to the San Juan de Dios hospital. For several weeks 
he stayed in the hospital, until Dr. Gregorio Singian — now head of 
the hospital and one of the most famous of Filipino physicians — 
— took care of him. 

"President Quezon was then p.ale and weak from the disease," 
relates Dr. Singian. "He was nervous and unstrung after his 
experiences in jail. I used to take him in my carriage for a ride, 
while I was making calls. There was a cholera epidemic at that 
time," he added with a smile, "and I noticed that my friend shook 
my hand gingerly after my calls on patients." 

With the establishment of the civil government under Governor 
William H. Taft, peace reigned in the archipelago though a few 
stubborn military leaders were still hiding in the mountain fast- 
nesses. Quezon decided to continue with his studies. Probably 
disgusted with what he had seen during the war, or merely following 
the yearning in his heart so commpn in young men of a spiritual 
bent, he decided to take theology at the university. That was in 
1902. A jest, however, prevented his taking the course. 

"What are you doing in my class?" inquired the professor in 
a half jesting tone. The teacher had known his headstrong charac- 
ter and reputation, and added in a bantering tone; "You don't 
belong here— I don't want you!" 

So Manuel Quezon instead definitely decided to take up law. 
Had he been allowed to take up theology, he would have risen as 
brilliantly, and by now would undoubtedly have become the highest 
Filipino clergyman in the Catholic church, for he possesses those 

13 



ifli'ii iiiiiiii 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



qualities for leadership and greatness which could not have been 
hidden or suppressed whatever the profession he had chosen to 
enter. 

He was as poor as a church mouse and did not have a centavo 

with which to continue his law studies. With the aid of his former 
professors whowerc fond of him, he got a job in the provinces as 
an overseer in the friar estates at Dinalupihan, Bataan. Quezon 
knew he was getting nowhere, so a few months later he came back 
to Manila, where he got a job for P25 a month in a minor position 
at the Monte de Picdad, a savings bank owned by the church. He 
lived in the house of a Mang Segundo, whom he paid a nominal 
sum for room and board. Many years later, when he became rich 
and famous, he never forgot Mang Segundo, who had become poor 
and old. He made the old man a permanent guest in his house. 
That is one outstanding characteristic of President Quezon — he 
appreciates favors done to him, specially when he was poor and un- 
known, and never fails to do what he can in return. 

In those early days of the civil government, the requirements 
for taking the bar examinations were not as strict as today; either 
three years of practice, or two years of university work, was ail that 
was needed to qualify. While at Lctran college, Quezon had been 
given the title of "Perito Agrimensor y Tasador dc Tierras," or 
Experienced Surveyor and Appraiser of Lands", besides his B. A. 
The subjects he studied while at Lctran and Santo Tomas, with 
the grades he received, were as follows: 

Subjects Studied Where Examined Grade 

(First Year, 1889-90) 

Latin Grammar, first course Letran Excellent 

Spanish Grammar, first course 

Christian Doctrine and history " 

(Second Year, 1890-91) 

Latin Grammar, second course Letran Excellent 

Spanish Grammar, second course 

Geography " 



14 



EARLY LIFE, AS STUDENT AND SOLDIER 

■ 

(Thirdl Year, 1891-92) 

Latin analysis and translation and Greek 

rudiments Letraa Excellent 

Universal history of Spain and the Philip- 
pines 

Arithmetic and algebra 

OFourth Year, 1892-93) 

Rcthoric and Poetry Letran Excellent 

Geometry and Rectilinear Trigonometry.. " " 
French Sto. Tomas 

(Fifth Year, 1893-94) 
Psychology, Logic and Moral Philosophy. .Sto. Tomas Excellent 

Physics and chemistry 

Natural History 

The following annotations were made on his high school re- 
cord: "Don Manuel Quezon y Molina, alumnus of Letran and Sto. 
Tomas, resident of Baler, province of the Distrito del Principe, 16 
years old, was examined for the title of Bachelor of Arts on Feb- 
ruary 19, 1894, obtained the grade of excellent, and the corre- 
sponding title was bestowed upon him on February 24, 1894." 

By a curious coincidence, the day that President Quezon passed 
so successfully his examinations in Manila was the sixth birthday 
of his cousin and future wife! 

His school record at the University of Santo Tomas, though 
good, was not so imposing: 

Subject Grade 

(Preparatory Course 1894-95) 

Metaphysics Notable 

General Spanish Literature Excellent 

Critical History of Spain Excellent (Prize awarded) 

(First Year, 1895-96) 

Elements of Natural Law Notable 

Rules of Canon Law Notable 

Economics and Statistics Good 



15 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 

(Second Year, 1896-97) 
Roman Law 1 ^j^^ ^^^^^^ 

Guardianship J 

(Second Year, 1897-98) 

Rules of Roman Law Fair 

Guardianship of the Indies and Eccle- 
siastical Discipline Notable 

(First Year of Theology, 1902-03) 
He left the course 

On February 20, 1903, he wrote his application for permission 
to take the bar examinations. His application, examination 

papers, and other record, are still preserved at the Supreme Court. 
The application is curious for one thing: he signed his name without 
the usual "L" and spelled Quezon with an "S" instead of a "Z". 
Many imaginative deductions could be inferred from this change; 
but the subject belongs more to a chirographer rather than a biogra- 
pher. The grades in the subjects he took were as foUows: 

Civil Law 95 

Civil Procedure 96 

Mercantile Law 85 

Penal Code 93 

Private International Law 60 (He had time to answer 

only six of the ten questions.) 
Criminal Procedure 98 

Thus by studying hard at night, while working at the Monte 
de Picdad during the day, he was able to pass the bar examinations 
with a very high grade, and on April 16, 1903, took the oath of a 
licensed lawyer. 



16 



a- 



-V ^ -1 



I 

A facsimile ol the apiilicniion nuidc hv I'lLsiJcnt Quc/iin for ilic Ixir examinations. 
Notice his signature, and tompaic with prc\-ious and present handwriting. 



1 



CHAPTER n 



Years Of Preparation For Leadership 

MAN as E^ood-looking as President Quezon is prone to have 
many love affairs. As Winchcll would say, lie felt f/jaf way 
several times over several pretty girls, but as this is not a jwep- 
hole biography of Sciior Quezon, we will have to confine ourselves 
to a few "innocent" anecdotes. 

Sefior Quezon was fond of having a good time even in his 
youth; He had numerous sweethearts while at school. Strict 
convention in those days, however, prevented any of these a£fairs 
from becoming serious, and they never passed the one-Iook-bchind- 
the fan stage. Once, while a student at Letran, he saw a pretty 
little thing of a mestixa in a second-story window. 

"Before a week," he boasted to a schoolmate, "I'll be talking 
to her." That was quite daring in those days of innimicrable 
petticoats and still more innumerable chaperones in the form of 
sharp-eyed duennas. But before a week had passed, Don Manuel 
had carried on a spirited conversation with her; she had condes- 
cended to talk with him through the iron-barred window on the first 
floor of the house. 

At another time, seeing a beautiful girl in Ermita, he started a 
conversation with her from the street, as young men were not 
allowed in the same room with the young women unless they had 
the permission of the girls' parents. The male cousins of the girl 
didn't like Don Manuel, so they threatened to beat him up unless 
he left. With his usual impudence, our young man told them to go 
and jump in the bay. They came down, five of them, against the 
ardent suitor — and Don Manuel had to leave forcibly and rather 
badly bruised. 

17 




QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



In the years following, Senor Quezon had other and numerous 
escapades. Of great physical attraction and magnetism, he 
proved irresistible to women. Even to this day, there are many 
rumors and backstairs stories about the private life of President 
Quezon — but as we said before, this is not the story of the erotic 
side of his life. No biographer of President Quezon can deny, how- 
ever, that he has in him the makings of a Casanova or a Don Juan. 
By temperament and by heritage, he belongs to that race of intre- 
pid Spanish conquistadores who were noted for conquests made on 
land and sea, as well ais in the ranks of the fair sex. 

After passing the bar examination, Quezon did not enter politics 

immediately. At the invitation of his old friend Judge Francisco 
Ortigas, who had established a law ofiBce enjoying considerable pres- 
tige, he joined the firm at a salary of TI5O a month. The amount 
was quite large in those days for a lawyer who had had no previous 
experience in his profession, but his old friend had not misjudged 
his true value and ability. He was further allowed to have his 
own clients and was entitled to receive fees apart from Bis salary. 
He argued his cases so well in court that he won every one of them. 
In association with another lawyer, Attorney Gay from Iloilo, he 
made about P2,000 in the four months he worked with Judge 
Ortigas. His other companions at the firm were Attorneys Eusebio 
Orense, Florencio Gonzales Diez, Rafael del Pan, and Casademunt. 

"Attorney Quezon was a good dresser," one of his former co- 
workers in the firni remembers. "He came every morning to the 
office quite early, spick and span like a dandy. But he always took 
off his coat as soon as he sat down, and as he became, immersed in 
his work, off came his tie and cuffs as well. He had the faculty of 
concentrating on what he was working. He was a jolly fellow, 
rather roguish when it came to women, and was free and easy with 
his money — whenever he had some." 

He lived at that time with his partner Gay and Dr. Fernando 
Calderon, now director of the Philippine General hospital. Dr. 
Calderon was then a widower and with the two lawyers maintained 
bachelor quarters in the Calzada dc San Sebastian, now Callc R; 

18 



YEARS OF PREPARATION FOR LEADERSHIP 



Hidalgo. The house was owned by the late Dr. Benito Valdes, whom 
they paid :i rent of PISO a month. The three fricnJs lived upstairs, 
while the lirst lloor was converted into a clinic for Dr. Calderon. 
After some weeks, Attorney Gay moved out, and so Calderon and 
Quezon shared equally the expenses of the household. They had 
a cook by the name of Ramon, a cochcro or driver by the name of 
Iliong, and two or three houseboys. 

Cupid nicked Don Manuel badly at this time of his life. He 
fell madly in love with a certain heiress, who was as beautiful as 
she was rich — two requisites sufficient to make any man's heart go 
pit-a-pat in any clime. He courted her assiduously, and even went 
to Antipolo in the month of May in order to be near her. With 
a friend, he went to her house several times on a visit. The girl 
had an elderly spinster for an aunt, who acted as chaperone. Love 
couldn't make very much headway with such an aunt as the third 
party to the conversation. So like a first-class strategist, he con- 
trived to have his friend flirt with the spinster, while he made love 
to the girl. But true love never did run smooth. Parents of the 
girl objected to his attentions; he was an obscure, impoverished 
abogadillo, worth next to nothing. They bundled off the! girl 
on a trip to Europe and she eventually married somebody else. Senor 
Quezon was heartbroken — but not for long. His gay spirits were 
too irrepressible, and after some time he was back to his life of a 
carefree bachelor. 

When they first moved into the house, they gave Quezon the 
money with which to pay for the installation of electric lights. He 
had to leave, unfortunately, for Tayabas the following morning and 
forgot to pass by the electric light company. So for the next three 
nights, Calderon and Gay ate their supper by candlelight. Quezon 
had forgotten to have the electricity connected, and was profuse 
in his apologies when he came back some days later. 

Don Lucio Quezon, in the meantime, had died shortly after the 
revolution, and so Don Manuel had to return to his province, 
Tayabas, in order to file a civil suit for the recovery of the land of 
his deceased father. The land had been unlawfully occupied by 

19 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



another party. He noticed that he had a better fuctirc by hanging 
out his shingle in Tayabas rather than in the capital, so he came 
back to Manila and severed his association with Mr. Gay. He got 
hold of several cases, civil as well as criminal, and won every one 
of them. The most famous lawyer of that province was then Atty. 
Martinez Llanos, but the newcomer promptly took his clientele 
away. Scfior Quezon was well on his way to bigger things. 

His reputation as a bold, shrewd lawyer grew and eventually- 
reached the ears of the powers that were in Manila. Dr. Pardo dc 
Tavera, a member of the Philippine Commission, was looking 
around for bright young Filipinos to join the government service; 
that sage bibliophile knew that the hope for the advancement of the 
country lay in the youth of the land. So he offered the job of provin- 
cial fiscal, or prosecuting attorney, for Mindoro to twcnty-five-ycar- 
oldManucl Quezon. Quezon hesitated for some time before accepting 
the offer. As a lawyer in Tayabas, he was making over a thousand 
pesos a month, while the post of fiscal paid only PI5O a month. 
He finally accepted the offer on September, 1903. Six months later, 
he was promoted to Tayabas, until September, 1904, when he 
resigned to resume his law practice. With his quick temper, he 
had disagreements with his superiors and for this reason decided 
to get out of the government service. It came about in this manner: 

One day an American lav^rycr, Francisco J. Berry, dropped in at 
the office of Fiscal Quezon of Tayabas. Without removing his hat, 
he asked whether the contracts he had previously left in Mr. Que- 
zon's office had already been inscribed. At that time, €hc provincial 
fiscal had something to do with the registration of deeds. Paying 
no attention to the lack of manners on the part of the visitor, the 
young fiscal rummaged around his desk and finally fotmd the papers 
in one of the drawers. 

"Sorry I haven't been able to register them for lack of time," 
said Senor Quezon with an apologetic smile." 

Mr. Berry glared at the fiscal. As owner of the Cablmews, the 
most elaborate and influential English daily in the archipelago, he 

20 



YEARS OF PREPARATION FOR LEADERSHIP 



was not accustomed to'meet ddtj in the hands of provincial ofiEdals 

— much less young fiscals who were just cutting their wisdom 
teeth. So he exploded and gave vent to what he thought of Fili- 
pino ofBcials, and in particolar of the provincial fiscal of Tayabas. 

Fiscal Quezon raised his eyebrows in surprise, while his nostrils 
began to twitch ever so lightly in repressed anger. 

"I'll file administrative charges," threatened Mr. Berry, "for 
dereliction in the discharge of your duties!" 

"Get out — and stay out!" shouted the fiscal as he rose and 
pointed to the door. The visitor glared b.ack for a few minutes, 
then left suddenly without saying a single word. 

Fiscal Quezon knew how powerful and influential the American 
lawyef was in government circles, but that did not mean that he 
could bully a Filipino. Berry's violent insistence that the papers 
be registered made Quezon suspect that all was not well. He ex- 
amined the papers and found that they were deeds of sale executed 
by about 25 persons, who were then incarcerated in the provincial 
jail on charges of brigandage. The fiscal immediately wondered 
how an American lawyer, a newcomer in Tayabas, could have ac- 
quired so much land bought with cash, according to the documents. 
So he went to the jail and found from the prisoners the facts of the 
transaction. Mr. Berry had offered his services to defend them, and 
had made them sign the documents of sale in the belief that the 
papers were mere agrectnents to secure pa]ntnent of attorney's fees. 

From the jail, Quezon went to the justice of the peace, whose 
signature appeared in the papers, as having apparently ratified the 
transaction. 

"Have these decuments been read and acknowledged by these 
25 men before they were signed?" asked the fiscal. 

"No," said the justice of the peace. "They were brought in 
by Mr. Berry already prepared. He told me that they were mere 
undertakings, so I signed my name in acknowledgment." 

21 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



In spite of Mr. Berry's inflacntkl position, and in spite of his 
belonging to the race of the sovereign power, Quezon immediately 
filed 25 informations for estafa against him, and demanded his im- 
mediate arrest. That action of the young Tayabas fiscal was an 
extremely daring thing to do in those days— in 1904— as the in- 
fluence of the military regime was still felt throughout the archi- 
pelago. There were still numerous Filipinos in jail accused of bri- 
gandage, and a move like that would only bring reprisals in its wake. 
But knowing that he was only doing his duty, it was characteristic 
of him to carry the struggle to the very end. 

The five best American lawyers in the archipelago, including 
former Associate Justice F. C. Fisher of the Supreme Court, W. W. 
Bishop, one time fiscal of the city of Manila, and former Judge W. 
C. Kincaid, defended the publisher of the Cablenews, but all the 
Philippine courts found Berry guilty of the charges. The lawyer- 
publisher was convicted and disbarred, but did not enter jail as he 
forfeited his bond by escaping from the couritty. 

Lawyers of established practice in Manila, Americans as well 
as Filipinos, began to eye this youngster from Tayabas. They 
admired his courage, but expressed doubts as to his future. He had 
made too many powerful enemies in the American community, 
some said, and some day would find himself in hot water with the 
government— which was mainly staffed by Americans. 

The reprisal was not long in coming. As an aftermath of this 
case, and for his own personal reasons. Captain Ofley, then the 
governor of Mindoro, brought administrative charges against 
Quezon, who had akeady been promoted to Tayabas. Without 
being previously informed of the charges, an ex-farte investigation 
was held in Mindoro and witnesses were called to testify against 
him during his absence. 

These charges were found to be groundless, though it was a 
fact that Fiscal Quezon had physically attacked some person or 
other. Disgusted by what happened, Quezon resigned against 
the advice of Judge James Ross, then the inspector of provincial 

22 



YEARS OF PREPARATION FOR LEADERSHIP 



fiscals. Judge Ross had tried to appease Quezon by telling Secretary 
of Justice Henry Idc, in his presence, that he was the best provincial 
fiscal in the service — but to no avail. 

As a lawyer once more in his home province, he made several 
thousand pesos. He charged those clients who could pay, but 

gave free service to the poor and the oppressed. He consequent- 
ly earned the gratitude of the masses, both as a private lawyer and a 
provincial fiscal. Early in 1906, he decided to enter politics, and on 
January 15 was elected councilor for the provincial board of Tavabas. 
Knowing his strength with the masses, he resigned from the council 
the following month to enter his candidacy for governor of Tayabas, 
and was duly elected despite the opposition of the rich and in- 
fluential families of the province. 

His two rival candidates belonged to the richest and most 
influential families in Tayabas. The upper classes were against 
him, as they considered him an unprincipled upstart with radical 
ideas of helping the masses. In those days, the councilors from the 
various municipalities elected the provincial governor. The coun- 
cilors, who had come to the provincial capital, could not make up 
their minds whom to elect governor after one day. So it was ne- 
cessary for Quezon to house and feed his electors during their stay 
in tovm. 

With Quezon, money has always been "easy come, easy go". 
And at that particular time, he was broke. The deadlock continued 
for several days, as each candidate could not muster sufficient votes 
to win. His political enemies knew that he was penniless, and so 

tried to squeeze him out of the race by having all the stores in town 
with which he had credit closed to him. Unable to feed his sup- 
porters, he was faced by political disaster. In the nick of time, his 
lavandera or washerwoman came forward and insisted on feeding his 
supporters with food purchased by her life savings. Though he is 
ordinarily too proud to accept such a sacrifice, he yielded to her 
demands afid' finally won the protracted contest fof governorship. 
Several years later, when he was a famous man, he asked for that 
humble lavandera in one of his visits home. The sight of that 

23 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 

bent little woman, almost blind, who had never asked 
reward, made him burst into tears before an audience ot 

hundred people. 

f few 

He had the support of the masses and the friendship o a 
officials, such as General Bandholtz, his predecessor, who ^^ -^s 
onlyAmericanever to become governor by popular vote. .o^er- 
Quezon won the elections to become the first Filipino elective & ~ 
nor of Tayabas. His election was protested, one of the groun s g 
that those who had voted for him were the uneducated. 
election was confirmed, and he was duly inaugurated governor o ic 
province. 

A fast thinker in tight spots, he possesses an iron nccvc 
and does not know fear. As governor, he had incurred the 
deep enmity of an influential political chieftain who had sworn to 
kill him on sight. One day he encountered the man in a n^""**^ 
corridor. To avoid meeting, one or the other had to turri back. 
Governor Quezon, however, kept on walking and then hailed the 
person: •' Amiga, have you any cigarettes? Can you spare me one. 

This greeting so disarmed the would-be enemy that he forgot 
his hatred and the two became fast friends. 

Like a good politician, he had made several speeches against 
the friars in his campaign for governor. In one of his trips to Ma- 
nila, he met Father Llanos, his one-time teacher, in the streets. 

"What's this I hear about your attacking us?" inquired the 
priest. 

"Oh, that's just politics," replied Governor Quezon with a 
disarming smile. 

When Father Llanos died several years later, Quezon cried like 
a child at his funeral. 

While governor of Tayabas, Quezon called on Dona Ignacia 
Albert, wife of his old friend. Dr. Albert. "You've both been so 
good to me," he said, "that I consider you as my father and mother. 

24 



YEARS OF PREPARATION FOR LEADERSHIP 



I want to let you have the first money I've ever saved in niy whole 
life — please keep it." He presented as a memento a half ounce gold 
piece, a Spanish eight-peso gold coin. 

Soon after his election as governor, Quezon once spent the night 
in a friend's house in one of the towns. Atmidnight, a firestartcd in 

neighboring house. Governor Quezon, aroused from a deep slumber, 
rushed out and personally helped in putting out the conflagration. 
Tilis personal deed so impressed the townspeople — who thought 
that he had purposely traveled several miles from the capital to the 
town — that Governor Quezon's popularity increased by leaps and 
bounds. 

Skeptical American officials in Manila, who had doubted his 
abilities as fiscal and lawyer, began to hold a high regard for this 
youngster from Tayabas once he became governor. 

"TIic experience gained in administering provincial govern- 
ments proved helpful to the Filipinos who later reached high public 
office," wrote ex-Governor W. Cameron Forbes. "Some of the 
provincial governors showed marked ability in meeting and solving 
their problems. Governor Manuel Quezon. . . gave good service 
as governor of the province of Tayabas. He also assumed the ini- 
tiative and used his official position beyond the legal powers of a 
provincial governor in requiring citizens to improve their own prop- 
erty by planting great areas of coconut and hemp — an extra-legal 
performance which resulted in much greater prosperity in that 
region." In fact, this use of extra-legal powers got him into diffi- 
culties later in his assiduous struggle for independence during the 
administration of General Wood. It was his characteristic to over- 
step the limits in the pursuit of a worthy goal. 

Governor Quezon was particularly active in subduing banditry 
in his province. He personally accompanied and led the expeditions 
of constabulary soldiers against the bandits, and his personal bravery 
aroused the admiration of the American community in the Philip- 
pines. With General J. G. Harbord, then head of the constabulary 
forces, he hiked all day and night over the mountain trails without 



25 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



food or sleep until they met the bandit forces. A Iiand to hand 
struggle ensued, and the tulisanes were captured and jailed. 

Possessing those qualities for leadership, proved during his 
terms as fiscal, councilor and governor, Don Manuel was ready to 
be catapulted into national prominence. 

On July, 1907, he resigned from the governorship to enter his 
candidacy for a seat in the first Philippine Assembly. By one of 
the largest majorities in that July election, he won in the first 
district of Tayabas over Domingo Lopez by the count of 2,237 
against 840 votes. This time the rich, as well as the poor, were 
behind him. 



26 



CHAPTER III 



The Making Of A Hero 



N those early days of civil government, the majority of Filipino 
officeholders belonged to the Federalist party, which favored the 

annexation of the archipelago to the United States. This party 
was about the only one in existence, as it was the only one recog- 
nized and supported by the American authorities. The party was 
composed mostly of older men, like Dr. Pardo de Tavcra, Felipe 
Agoncillo, Benito Legarda, Felipe Buencamino, Antonio Regidor, 
Pedro Paterno and others who had achieved prestige during the 
revolution. This party, recognizing that the admission of the 
Islands as a state was impracticable, revised its platform in I9O5 
to declare itself in favor of ultimate independence. There were 
several small parties, more or less nationalistic in their aspirations. 
Early in 1907 these parties were brought together in the P.miJo 
Nacionalista, or Nationalist party, under the leardership of the 
younger men composed of Sergio Osmeiia, Manuel Quezon, Rafael 
Palma, Alberto Barretto and others. 

The election of 1907 was thus a fight between age and youth, 
between conservatives and radicals, between the "ins" and the 
"outs". The result was a decisive victory for the Nationalist 
party. 

The masterly way with which Sergio Osmeiia got himself elect- 
ed Speaker and the way he ran the Assembly cannot be omitted in 
any r6sum6 of Philippine politics. Like Quezon, Osmeiia had 
aroused the admiration of the Americans by his efficient administra- 
tion of Cebu as provincial governor, and by his personal bravery in 
capturing bandits. He had been elected, and re-elected president 
of the league of provincial governors and had thus gained national 
political prestige before he was thirty years old. High American 

27 




QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



officials liked the political technique of these youngsters in contrast 
to that of the older men, who were cramped by the Spanish style 
of never conunitting themselves on any question. At that time 
there were several small political parties, and it was impossible to 
unify them under one leadership because of the lack of discipline. 
Personalities, rather than cohesive groups, were dominant in 
Philippine politics. 

Osmena, during the three months prior to the first session of 
the Assembly, used Quezon as his right-hand man in convincing the 
younger delegates to follow his leadership, and Rafael Palma as his 
second lieutenant in enticing the elder politicians from the folds of 
the Federalist party. The July elections gave the Nationalists 32 
members, the independents 20, the Progressives (the old Federalist 
under a new name) 16, the Independistas 4, and one Centra Catolico. 
So well did Osmena's henchmen work that by the first session, 
the Assemblymen were classified into 58 Nationalists, 16 Progres- 
sives, and six independents. Osmena, who was not yet thirty, was 
unanimously elected speaker. He ran this and the succeeding As- 
semblies with a smoothness that even a Mark Haiina or a Boss 
Tweed would have envied. For the next decade and half, Sergio 
Osmena could very well say like King Louis, "L'etat c' est tnoi." 

In recognition of his ability, and as reward for his services in 
ironing out difficulties, Assemblyman Quezon was picked by Speaker 
Osmena to become majority floor leader. He was also made chair- 
man of the most important committee — that of appropriations. 
On the floor of the Assembly, Delegate Quezon distinguished him- 
self by his oratory and was instrumental in dimming the lustre of 
another great and influential figure of that day: Dominador Gomez, 
who had the solid support of the working class in Manila. When- 
ever Osmena needed a strong hand to whip unruly members into 
party discipline, he relied upon the fiery majority floor-leader for the 
task. On July, 1908, when Governor Taft wanted a member of 
the Nationalist party in the Commission, Osmena chose Palma, 
a more prudent and tactful personality, for the job, while Quezon 
remained in the Assembly for strong-arm work. The Commission 

28 




1X~)N MANUliL 1.. QUl-ZCIN 
As he looked when hu bLxamc ;i mcnibcr of the lirst Philippine Asseinblv, back in 
1907. He was the scconj most powerful political personage in the archipelago — 
even before he reached his thirtieth year! 



THE MAKING OF A HERO 



performed a dual r61e; it was the executive branch, of government as 
well as the upper legislative body which passed laws in conjunction 
with the lower house or Assembly. 

The Nationalist party, which had started out with the platform 
asserting Filipino capacity and expressing the desire for independ- 
ence, began to co-operate with the Commission in passing con- 
structive laws for the benefit of the country. The Federalists joined 
the radicals, and abandoning their former stand of friendship with 
the Americans, began accusing the Nationalists with being pro- 
Americans. Osmcfia and his men got along .idniirably with the 
Commission, which was then composed of four Americans and three 
Filipinos, but it was poor politics on their part. Following the 
tenets of good politics, and to avoid the attacks of the Federalists, 
they often quarreled with the Commission. 

The majority in the Assembly had a squabble with the American 
Commissioners over the appropriation bill, and from 1910 to 1913, 
no general appropriation bill was passed. In these debates, Quezon 
shone on the floor in his att.acks against the alleged excessive sums 
included in the general appropriation bill. 

His ungovernable temper, which had gotten him into a scrap 
while he was fiscal of Mindoro, again cropped out while he was an 
Assemblyman. The editor of a newspaper in Spanish, La Demo- 
cracia, had been attacking Quezon for his record as fiscal of Mindoro. 
The attacks were so scurrilous that on January 7, 1909, Quezon, ac- 
companied by Assemblymen Juan Villamor and Lcrma, paid a call 
to the editorial offices of the newspaper. Upon seeing the editor, 
Quezon held him by the neck, shook him as a terrier would shake 
a rat, then pushed him away so vigorously that he fell to the floor. 
Mutual friends separated the two assailants. Henceforth, editors 
were more careful in criticising Quezon. 

President Quezon has always been grateful to his former teach- 
ers and benefactors. The revision of the Torrens title to land was 
made while he was in the Assembly. By an oversight on the part 
of the Dominican fathers, a piece of their property valued at ?100,- 

29 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



000 located in the Walled city had been declared as belongin t; co the 

government and entered officially as such in the records. When 
Father Tamayo returned from the provinces and learned what had 
happened, he rushed to his former pupil for help. Quezon ap- 
proached the governor general, who readily gave his consent to the 
return of the property, but the land could not be returned unless 
repurchased back or an error was declared. The government was 
not to blame for the error, however, and so the petitioners were in .i 
quandary. Resourceful Quezon then approached Fiscal Ramon 
Avanceiia, now chief justice of the Supreme court, who suggested 
that the courts were the only remedy. As a result, the court pre- 
sided by Judge Roman Lacson ruled that the Torrcns title secured 
by the government was — of all things — a fraud! Tiiis is about the 
only case of the Philippine government cottimitting a fraud. 

As a promising assemblyman, good timber for national leader- 
ship, Quezon evinced the desire to see something of the world. A 
great many of the Filipinos had already traveled abroad, but Quezon 
had been too poor to afford any kind of a trip outside of the archi- 
pefago. So a bill appropriating F34,000 for expenses was passed 
to send him as delegate to the International Navigation conference 
at St. Petersburg, Russia. This bill was a transparent ruse, for it 
was passed at a time when, even by taking the earliest transporta- 
tion, the delegate could not reach St. Petersbturg until after the 
conference was ended. 

Thus in the summer of 1908, the second most powerful figure 
in Philippine politics, who had not yet completed his thirtieth year, 
left Manila for Hongkong accompanied by two secretaries. These 
companions were two newspapermen: Teodoro M. Kalaw, now 
director of the National Library, and Theo. F. Rogers, business 
manager of the Free Press. Quezon could not have chosen two more 
agreeable pals. As the two Filipinos had never left the blessed 
shores of their native land, they were prevailed upon in all sobriety 
by Mr. Rogers to doll up in formal moroing attire — tophat, cut- 
away coat, stiff collar, spats, gloves, cane and all — upon landing in 
Hongkong. 

30 



THE MAKING OF A HERO 



"Remember,'* warned Rogers, "you're the official representa- 
tives of the Filipino people; the British governor and other high 
officials of Hongkong will be at the pier to welcome you." 

Needless to say, the British officials had never even heard that 
the trio were to land in Hongkong. 

When the trio came to Paris, they promptly separated. Quezon 
liked the French climate and so stayed there; Rogers sailed for the 
United States, his home; while Kalaw felt the pangs of nostalgia and 
decided to take the first vessel for Manila. Despite their different 
return routes back to Manila, all had a ripping good time. That 
was President Quezon's first junket abroad, and by no means his 
last. Of the various officials in the insular irovcrnment, he has 
probably traveled more than any other living Filipino. Senor 
Quezon liked that trip to Paris — so immensely that he decided he 
wanted to become a resident commissioner in Washington, D. C, 
as the Philippine representative in the Congress of the United States. 
He shrewdly guessed that the relations between America and his 
country would last for at least a score of years, and knew t hat greater 
political rights would be granted to Filipinos only by the President 
of the United States or by Congress. The post of resident commis- 
sioner, then, was a key position. Whoever brought independence, 
or greater self-government, to Filipinos would naturally be acclaim- 
ed as the hero of his people. The resident commissionership in Wash- 
ington was his logical step for advancement. The first junket he 
had taken had given him the itch to see other lands, study foreign 
governments and customs. Furthermore, he was a handsome 
bachelor who had a pronounced weakness for beautiful women. 
Perhaps it was a combination of these reasons that made him 
aspire to the resident commissionership. 

At any rate, when the Assembly convened in 1909, Quezon 
had the job in the bag. Wishing to maintain his supremacy in the 
political field, Osmena naturally was opposed to sending his brilliant 
colleague to the United States — just in case Congress or the President 
might grant political concessions, as they eventually did in 1913 

31 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 

and again in 1916. He foresaw the danger, and wanted his first 
lieutenant and potential arch-enemy at home where he could keep 
a watchful eye over him. 

But astute Quezon had gone around to the various assembly- 
men and enlisted their support. When the matter came up before 
the house in 1909, Quezon was unanimously chosen one of the two 
resident commissioners. This was his first deviation from, the 
wishes of the party head, a mild forerunner of the famous break 
eleven years later, when he finaUy dethroned Sefior Osmefia firom 
political leadership in the Philippines. 

* * * 



For a period of nearly eight years, or from May 15, 1909, to 
January 11, 1917, Manuel Quezon was one of the two resident com- 
missioners, and during that period two important political con- 
cessions were given to Filipinos. These were the granting of a 
Filipino majority in the Philippine -Commission in 1913 and the 
surrender of all legislative rights to Filipinos by the establishment 
of the Philippine Senate in 1916. 

The Filipino nationalists who expected Commissioner Quezon 
to make a speech in Congress as fiery as his attacks against the 
Americans in Manila, were disappointed by the tame maiden speech 
of the junior commissioner delivered on May 14, 1910. In fact, 
Quezon was properly appreciative of the work done and the pro- 
gress made in the Philippines under the American regime. Again 
Quezon was playing good politics. He had gone to Washington 
to beg — not to insult. 

"I am glad to be able to affirm, first of all," he said, "that 
simultaneously with the American occupation, there has been estab- 
lished a more liberal government and, from that, the Filipinos have 
enjovcd more personal and political liberty than they ever did under 
the Spanish Crown. These facts are freely acknowledged through- 
out the length and breadth of the Islands, and my countrymen wish 
me most cordially to assure the House and, through it, the people 

32 



THE MAKING OF A HERO 



of the United Sta tes, that they are grateful, profoundly grateful, 
for all the benefits that your government has conferred upon them." 

Commissioner Quezon's ardent struggle to have Congress and 
American officials in Manila recognize him as a delegate of the Fili- 
pino people, instead of only the Assembly, began in the middle of 
1910 with the visit of Secretary of War Dickinson to the Philippines. 
The first two resident commissioners, chosen in 1907, were selected 
by the Commission and the Assembly; in 1909, the Assembly took 
the position that it had the right to appoint both commissioners, 
to which the American ofhcials objected. During all this time, 
the two commissioners were regarded as representatives of either 
the Assembly or the Commission, but not of the people. Accom- 
panied by the then Governor-General Forbes, Secretary Dickinson 
went to Jolo and Zamboanga on an inspection trip. Commissioner 
Quezon was with them. After a speech of Secretary Dickinson, 
Quezon also wanted to speak, but Bostonian Forbes asked what 
gave him the right to talk. 

"As resident commissioner," replied Quezon, "I represent 
the Filipino people — hence I have the right to talk to them." 

"Sorry," replied the polo-playing governor, "but as commis- 
sioner you merely represent the Assembly in Congress — not the 
people." 

His racial and national pride hurt to the quick, Quezon vowed 
that he would make the Americans recognize his position as a repre- 
sentative of the people. That incident was an important turning 
point in the political history of the Islands, for it spurred him to 
seize and encroach upon all prerogatives of the sovereign power in 
a dogged attempt to increase the autonomy of the Filipinos. This 
attitude was again reflected in his celebrated struggle against Gov- 
ernor General Wood a decade later. 

Commissioner Quezon began his independence campaign in the 
influential New England states. That was in 1911. "Our trip 
was widely advertised," he relates, "and we found large crowds 

33 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



at every station. I got off at one of the stations with a silk hat and 
an overcoat. The people looked at me in astonishment. Some 
inquired: 'Where is the Filipino?' When I was pointed out to them, 
they left in disgust, as they had expected to find me in G-strings." 

The junior resident commissioner had diligently studied the 
English language, so as to be able to speak before the American 
public. He mastered the new language in a short time, though he 
still pronounces the words with a slight Spanish inflection. 

Though he had used friendly words in his maiden speech before 
Congress, Conmiissioner Quezon began to attract the attention 
of Congressmen by his vigorous, forceful speeches on^ the ftoor 
of the House. His first issue with the American administration 
at Manila was over the friar lands controversy. The Commission 
had permitted the sale of 55,000 acres of agricultural land in San josc, 
Mindoro, to an American corporation. Quezon immediately 
attacked this transaction as inimical to the policy of conserving the 
land as a patrimony for future generations of Filipinos. General 
Edwards, then chief of the bureau of insular affairs, seeing how 
Quezon's outspoken attitude would embarrass the American admin- 
istration back in the Islands, openly warned the junior resident com- 
missioner that if he continued in his attacks, the general would 
do all in his power to have the commissioner recalled. Threats 
have never diminished Quezon's campaign for a worthy cause, 
and have always produced a contrary effect. Needless to add. 
Commissioner Quezon remained in his post until he chose to resign 
in 1916 to assume the presidency of the insular senate. 

The new commissioner brought a new technique with him to 
Washington, in securing publicity for independence. Prior to 
his arrival, the two resident commissioners were Pablo Ocampo, 
a Nationalist party man, and Benito Legarda, a Progressive. The 
former made speeches in favor of independence, according to his 
party tenets, while the latter favored annexation with America. 
Ocampo and Legarda thus nullified each other in their propaganda 
work, and did not present a united front in their political demands. 
Prior to the arrival of these two commissioners in the United States 

34 



THE MAKING OF A HERO 



in 1907, the American public Icarr.cJ about the archipelago through 
American writers, who were dubious about the capacity of Fili- 
pinos for self-government. Secretary Dean C. Worcester of interior 
wrote extensively for American periodicals, and held the opinion 
that the natives were not yet fit for independence. He was a faculty 
member of the University of Michigan, had made a scientific trip 
to the Islands just before the Spanish-American war, and was thus 
regarded as an authority on things Philippine; but unfortunately, 
he was also an ethnologist fond of writing about headhunting Igo- 
rots, and unwittingly gave Americans in the United States the 
impression that all Filipinos were savage cannibals. Furthermore, 
the appearance of non-Chriscian Filipinos at the St. Louis Inter- 
national Exposition in 1906 gave rise to the erroneous belief among 
Americans that the majority of Filipinos were cither Igorots or 
Moros. 

Commissioner Quezon directly undertook to combat this 
wrong impression of the Filipinos, and endeavored to present 
his fellow-countrymen as they really were to the American public. 

In the beginning, Don Benito Legarda looked with disfavor 
upon his more energetic colleague. Rich, an influential member 
of the conservative party, head of one of the oldest and richest 
families in the archipelago, he regarded the Tayabas youngster with 
a critical eye. But Quezon had imbibed some of the American ways 
of showmanship, so much so that Don Benito wrote a letter— publish- 
ed in Manila newspapers — describing him as a sort of a political 
acrobat. Quezon, however, managed to win over his colleague 
and succeeded in preventing the older man from making speeches 
and statements which would nullify his work for independence. 

The technique used in securing independence for the Phil- 
ippines was related by President Quezon 20 years later, during his 
visit to Java in September, 1934. After he had been feted by the 
Dutch and American officials in Surabaya, the Javanese invited 
President Quezon, Undersecretary Jorge B. Vargas, and the other 
Filipinos to a native gathering. The Javanese delegation took the 

35 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



Filipinos in a car, and drove several miles into the remote interior. 
Just as el presidenu began to wonder if he w^ere being abducted, they 
stopped at a huge house, apparently the meeting place. The shut- 
ters were drawn, and native guards stood outside. Several score 
of Javanese welcomed the visitors and began making speeches in 
favor of Javanese independence. 

"How did you succeed in getting Philippine independence — 
what methods did you use which would be useful to us in securing 
our autonomy from the Dutch?" aslced the spokesman. 

"In the first place," said President Quezon, who was feeling 
rather stifled in the hot, closed room; "open all these windows and 
shutters^ — then take away all your guards, hold your meetings in 
the open and in front of the Dutch themselves — make yourselves 
heard — make a hell of a lot of noise — and if you do it long enough, 
you'll eventually get what you want!" 

By a stroke of good luck, the Democratic party was victorious 
in the national elections of 1912, and Governor Woodrow Wilson 
of New Jersey was elected president of the United States. The 
party which had always looked with sympathy on Filipino aspira- 
tions for self-govcrixment, ever since the time of William Jennings 
Bryan at the turn of the twentieth century, was to stay at the helm of 
government for at least the next four years. Much in the way of 
political concessions could be gotten in that period of time. The 
Filipinos hailed with great demonstrations of joy the election of 
idealistic Wilson, former professor of Princeton university. 

The lucky star of Quezon had not failed him. The golden 
moment had come. And he was not the man to waste his oppor- 
tunities. 

Commissioner Quezon had several conferences with President 
Wilson over the Philippine question. In one of these conferences, 
he brought along his old friend. Dr. Albert, who was then in Wash- 
ington as manager of the first Filipino baseball team to invade the 
United States. Quezon introduced Dr. Albert as the secretary of 

36 



THE MAKING OF A HERO 



the Federalist or opposition p:irt7, who coiild give an unbiased 
report of conditions in the Philippines. 

"There is a government," vohmtccrcd Dr. Albert, "of Amer- 
icans, by Americans, :inJ for the few Americ.ms living there." 

"Conditions in the Philippines," the president readily promised, 
"will soon be entirely different. The first step will be to give the 
Filipinos the majority in the Commission." 

The conversation shifted to gubernatorial possibilities. 

"The Filipinos would be glad to .<;cc Jacob Gould Schurman as 
next chief executive," suggested Quezon. Dr. Schurman had been 
chairman of the first Philippine Commission, was well versed in 
Philippine affairs, and a liberal. He was, however, a Republican. 

••Hie Senate, with a Democratic majority,'* countered President 
Wilson, "will not approve his appointment." 

"How about Moorficld Storey?" said Quezon after a pause. 
Mr. Storey was the active head of the Anti-Imperialist league and 
a close friend of the Filipinos. 

"Too old," answered the president. Mr. Storey was then 
nearing 70, and the president felt that a younger and more active 
man would be needed. So the matter was postponed for a few 
months, while a suitable candidate was being picked by Com- 
liiissioner Quezon. 

One day, Francis Burton Harrison, a Tammany Congress- 
man from the silk-stocking district of New York, came to Quezon's 
house to advocate the candidacy of a friend for the governorship. 

"Why in the world," suddenly exclaimed Don Manuel, 
"shouldn't you yourself be the candidate?" 

Rep. Harrison was taken by surprise. ' "Are you talking serious- 
ly?" he asked. 

"Yes," answered the commissioner. "It will be a great thing 
to see you appointed governor general of the Philippines." 

37 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



The congressman paused. He was ranking mcmhcr of an im- 
portant house committee. On the other hand, to become governor 
general in the manner of a Roman pro-consul of old, was a dis- 
tinction not to be overlooked by a wealthy, refined gentleman such 
as he was. He finally promised: ' 'I'll think it over. I'll come back 
tomorrow to let you know." 

At 11 o'clock the following morning, he accepted the proposal. 
"Fine," said Quezon, "now let's begin to work for it. Sec so-and- 
so, while I'll see the secretary of state so that this matter can be 
brought to the immediate attention of the president." 

At 11:30 that morning. Commissioner Quezon had a conference 
with Secretary of State Bryan. He came out of the executive build- 
ing an hour later, his face wreathed in smiles. 

"Chico," he jubilantly shouted to a Filipino companion, "we've 
got independence. Harrison's candidacy is backed by Secretary 

Bryan." 

Three days later, President Wilson sent the appointment of 
Congressman Harrison to the Senate. The grooves had been smooth- 
ed beforehand: the Senate okayed the appointment in less than 
six hours after receiving the papers from the president. 

Manuel L. Quezon was now the maker of governors general. 

Though he had done excellent work as resident commissioner, 
and was hailed by Filipinos as the hero of the day for having secured 
greater political rights, Quezon — if he wanted to — ^was in no posi- 
tion to challenge the leadership of Osmena. The wily leader from 
Cebu had built a personal political machine by the rigid system of 
having all appointments referred to him for approval. The machine 
could not very well be bucked without meeting disaster. Speaker Os- 
inefia exercised a power and discipline of party so unassailable that 
it would have been political suicide for the commissioner to even 
attempt to challenge it. To combat Sergio Osmefia, he would 
have to re-enter the Assembly and fight on enemy ground which 
was well fortified. Furthermore, Quezon must have felt that his 

38 



THE MAKING OF A HERO 



work in Washington was only half done; having gotten so much, 
he naturally expected more, not in executive orders which could be 
revoked by an unsympathetic successor, but in the more permanent 
form of a law passed by Congress. The Democrats would stay in 
power at least until the end of 1916, with a good chimce of staying 
another four years. His place, then, as a loyal party man was in 
Washington as resident commissioner. 

President Quezon's intuitive knowledge of mass psychology 
was perfected during his stay in the United States. He was ex- 
tremely active in making speeches and in writing for American 
periodicals advocating Philippine independence. 

Typical of his views at that time, was an article he wrote for 
the Journal Of Race Development Qzaxxary, 1915) on "Recent Pro- 
gress in The Philippines": 

"The Filipinos are a people of Oriental habits and tjrpes of mind, resident 
in the tropics, and subject to their own conditions of life and industry. It seems 
to me to expect them to emulate the U. S. in all particulars is a gross perversion 
of the teaching of human experience or of any sound political philosophy. . . . 
I think that the thoughtful student of race development must feel that it is far 
better th:it :i nation should evolve its own type of culture and of government 
and should follow its own instincts in selecting a path toward the attainment 
Cif a higher civilization than that it should be made a slavish imitator of any other 
country or group of countries however elevated may be the civilization of the 
latter. I would go further than this and say that even if such a nation did not 
do as well in the initial stages of self-government as it might do with foreign 
preceptors, nevertheless the slower and less perfect progress was the more solid 
and stable, and therefore vastly to be preferred. 

" As I have said in another connection ; I question most seriously the statement 
that any nation can successfully direct the course of development that must be 
followed by another. The education of the individual is most successful when it 
affords the best vehicle for self-expression; the education of the nation or the 
race proceeds most naturally as a matter of internal evolution. Mistakes may 
be made, and when made they bring their own penalty. Now, as always, it is 
true that experience is the best teacher, and that only by endeavoring, aspiring, 
and striving can a government attain to practical efficiency. That has been con- ' 
spicuously the history of the Anglo-Saxon race. . . . 

"I do not believe that either the Filipinos or any other Eastern people, if 
left to themselves, would either reject or be unable to assimilate the western 

39 



QUEZON: MAN OF DISIINY 



civilization. Quite the contrary. Wc have the example of Japan, and China 
herself is beginning to furnish another illustration of the same sort. Japan, 
withoDt falling under the rule of another nation, nevertheless made marvellous 
progress within a short time. Why can Filipinos not accomplish, by using the 
same means, what Japan has accomplished? Who can say that Japan would 
have made as much progress had she fallen under a foreign yoke? 

"The Filipinos arc showing that they are amply capable of taking over and 
assimilating the beneficial ideas of western nations, adapting them to their own 
use, fitting them to the needs of their peculiar situation and drawing intellectual 
sustenance therefrom. This has been the history of successful civilizations every, 
where. They have not advanced by a process of mental inbreeding, but by a 
process of crossing themselves intellectually with the best strains they could find, 
the world over. It is not progress, but just the reverse, if a nation be compelled 
to confine itself to imitation of another and if it be debarred from selecting useful 
elements of civilization, education, social custom and government wherever it 
can find them throughout the world. 

"I refuse to test the progress of Filipinos by the extent to which they have 
adopted American customs, law, and civilization, whether in their desirable or 
in their undesirable aspects. It is a sign of progress that they have succeeded in 
assimilating so rapidly those elements of civilization and of thought in which 
America stands conspicuous. This does not mean that for the future they should 
be debarred from following any other models. Least of all does it signify that 
whenever there is a departure from American practice such departure should afford 
the basis for bitter criticism. In the fundamentals of civilized life and thought, 
Filipinos, considering the opportunities they have had, the character of their 
preceptors, the nature of their surroundings, have done conspicuously well." 

After several years of effort. Congressman William H. Jones 
finally secured on August 29, 1916, the passage by Congress of a bill 
reorganizing the government of the Philippines on the basis of a 
greatly extended autonomy. Quezon himself had prepared an 
earlier bill which granted independence' after eight years, also 
sponsored by Rep. Jones, but this had proved unacceptable. While 
the second bill was up in the Senate for consideration, the Clarke 
amendment was passed granting complete independence within a 
period of from two to four years. 

Years later, when the Osmefia-Quezon split took place. Pres- 
ident Quezon claimed that he referred the matter to the former, 
who was indirectly responsible for its defeat. Governor Harrison 

40 



THE MAKING OF A HERO 



later explained what had happened: "About 28 Democrats bolted 

the party leadership and voted with the majority of the Republi- 
cans against independence: these bolting members were virtually 
all members of the Roman Catholic faith, and it is understood that 

their attitude was the result of intervention by Cardinal James 
Gibbons of Baltimore, acting, it is supposed, at the instigation of 
the ecclesiastical authorities in the Philippines. 

In 1913, Cardinal Gibbons had written to Commissioner 
Quezon: "I am convinced that, for the present, at least, the welfare 
of the Islands will be better safeguarded under the care and direction 
of the United States. There is great difference between independ- 
ence and liberty. There are countries which have independence 
but no liberty or freedom, whereas the Philippine Islands, although 
for the present not enjoying independence, have freedom and 
liberty." 

To Speaker Osmena in Manila, Quezon cabled as follows: 
"Defeat of Clarke amendment by big majority in the House, and its 
passage by only the vice-president's vote in the Senate, proves that I 
was right when I said that in my opinion Congress is against fixing 
an advance date for independence. I have fought all I could for Clarke 
amendment." The majority that Quezon spoke about was not as 
big as he imagined, for the amendment was defeated by a vote of 
213 to 165; and had the Catholic members not bolted, the amend- 
ment would have been approved. 

On August 29, 1916, the second Jones bill became law. Com- 
menting on its passage, Quezon declared on the floor of the House: 
"To adopt a measure which at least represents some progress which 
gives assurance that ground already gained shall not be lost, is, 
we think, only the part of wisdom; and is dictated by every consid- 
eration of expediency and of the immfediate interest of the peo- 
ple . . . We accept the new Jones bill, but we hold fast to our 
program . . . We recognize no substitute, admit no alternative, 
concede no reduction of our righteous demand for the absolute in- 
dependence of the Philippines." 

41 • 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTTNY 



Until the enactment of the Tydings-McDuffie act in 1934, the 

passage of the Jones bill was considered as President Quezon's 
greatest political achievement — but also his greatest lost opportu- 
nity. As Maximo Kalaw, political scientist, has pointed out, the 
preamble to the Jones law was a glorious victory for the independ- 
ence cause. The preamble states: ". . . it has always been the 
purpose of the people of the United States to withdraw their sover- 
eignty over the Philippine Islands, and to recognize their inde- 
pendence as soon as a stable government could be established 
therein. . ." But Commissioner Quezon also missed a precious 
opportunity in failing to secure in the Jones bill a more liberal 
provision for Filipino autonomy through the neglect of details. 
He was not an expert on constitutional matters; his fault was one 
of omission rather than commission. He had already prepared a 
cable asking for a Filipino committee to come over to Washington 
and help draft independence legislation, but for some reason or 
the other, the cable was not sent. Commissioner Quezon must have 
immediately realized his mistake, for during Governor Harrison's 
administration, he was instrumental in encroaching upon the prero- 
gatives of the chief executive. Eighteen years later, during the 
discussion over the Hawes-Cutting law, he admitted the oversight 
he committed in drafting the Jones law. If Filipino constitutional 
experts had only helped draft the Jones law, the painful episode 
with Governor General Wood half a dozen years later would not 
have taken place. 

In the autumn of that year, Manuel Quezon returned to his 
native land with the Jones bill in his pocket as a gift to his country- 
men. By a series of fortuitous circumstances, he was coming back 
after having secured a larger measure of political rights for his 
people. 

The local boy had made good. 



4Z 



CHAPTER IV 



The Struggle With OsmeHa And Wood 

IKE a conquering hero returning from the battlefield, President 
Que2on was carried on the shoulders of his fellow citizens upon 
his arrival in Manila. He was feted and praised everywhere he went. 
A new gate in the historic Walled City of Manila was named after 
him. His popularity, with the masses as well as with the ladies, 
knew no bounds. 

Keeping in step with prevailing modes, Quezon had shaved 
oS his mustache while in the United States. When he came back 
to Manila, his cronies kidded him about his facial change. Quezon 
wittily replied: "The ladies said it tickled them — so I shaved it off!" 

According to his own admission, Don Manuel twice tried to 

resign from politics at this juncture of his career. Once, after the 
passage of the Jones bill; and the second time, a few months after 
he had been elected President of the newly-created Philippine Senate. 
Perhaps these resignations were merely noble gestures on his part; 
perhaps he really felt that his work was done; perhaps he had no 
ambitions whatsoever at the time of challenging the established 
leadership of the man who had been his bosom friend since their 
student days at the university — at any rate, he was prevailed upon 
by Speaker Osmefia not to do so. In spite of the danger he must have 
foreseen in Quezon as a rival, Osmefia knew that the aggressive, 
fighting qualities of his lieutenant were indispensable in their seem- 
ingly endless struggle for greater autonomy. 

The Jones Bill abolished the Philippine Commission, and 
separated the executive from the legislative branch of the govern- 
ment. Executive authority was vested in the American governor 
general, who was appointed by the president of the United States. 

43 




QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



Legislative authority rested with two bodies: the Senate and the 
House. Veto of legislative bills remained with the governor, 
though the legislature by a two-thirds majority could override the 
veto, and the matter would then be for the President of the United 
States to decide. 

Even while he was in Washington, President Quezon cabled 
Speaker Osmena to run for the Senate. Up to this time Quezon 
had no desire to supplant Osttfefia in his rdle as national leader. 
Quezon believed that in the long run, the Senate would be the 
more influential body because of its power to confirm appointments. 
But Osmena believed that the House was nearer to the people, as 
the representatives were elected every three years, and so for senti- 
mental reasons he decided to remain speaker of the lower house. 
By temperament, Quezon was fitted for the lower house and Osmena 
for the more august branch of the legislature. Continuing as the 
absolute head of the majority party, Osmena probably felt that it 
did not matter much if he remained in the lower house — he still 
would have control of affairs. But that decision was a tactical 
mistake, as events proved within the next five years. 

The senators, who believed themselves superior to the more 
numerous representatives of the lower house, began to get jealous 
of having to submit to the discipline of Speaker Osmeiia. Accord- 
ing to party discipline, all matters had to be referred to the speaker 
for approval; the senators felt slighted. Dissatisfaction began to 
grow, slowly but surely, against the political dictatorship of Speaker 
Osmena. 



An interlude — a romantic one — occurred at this period of 
President Quezon's life. He had seen his cousin Aurora, who 
was nearly 11 years his junior, grow up in Baler and had always 
treated her with great affection. In fact, it was he who had paid 
for her expenses at the Philippine Normal School in Manila. He 
began writing letters to her when he first left the archipelago for 

44 



THE STRUGGLE WITH OSMENA AND WOOD 



that junket to St. Petersburg, Russia, and kept in touch with her 
through the succeeding years by letter whenever circumstances 
forced him to be away from her side, ivirs. Quezon i-eligiously keeps 
these letters, and perhaps some day in the future they will be pub- 
lished and we will learn of Manuel Quezon as companion, lover, 
husband and father. 

Sefiorita Aurora often came to Manila at the invitation of her 
cider cousin, accompanied either by . Mrs. San Agustin or Mrs. 
Rodriguez as chapcrone. Fond of practical jokes, Assemblyman 
Quezon once, caused his beautiful cousin to shed bitter tears. 
Returning one evening from a formal dinner, he dropped in at her 
home. He wanted to play a joke on her and wore a spray of orange 
blossoms on the la|>el of his tuxedo. She was at that time enter- 
taining two suitors, but upon his entrance she immediately noticed 
the orange blossoms. 

"Why are yoa wearing those flowers — what's the big occa- 
sion?" she asked. 

Don Manuel was nonchalant as he airily replied: "Oh, I've 
just been married I" 

She suddenly burst into tears in front of everybody. Many 
years later, when she remembered the incident, she revealed: "I 
could not explain why I cried so bitterly in front of my visitors — 
but I could not help it. It was not because he was going to get 
married that hurt me most; no, I was hurt because he did not tell 
us he was going to marry." 

Realizing that his joke had gone too far, Don Manuel con- 
fessed that the incident was merely a prank on his part. 

Dona Aurora left Manila that December of 1918 without know- 
ing that she was going to be married in Hongkong. Some months 
prior to their departure, Don Manuel had whispered to a few inti- 
mate friends that he was going to get married before long. He 
did not tell the girl's name, however, and merely said: "Oh, one 

45 



QUEZON; MAN OF DESTINY 



of the fair daughters of Tayabas." This bit of information even- 
tually reached the ears of Senorita Aragon, who was naturally dis- 
tressed by the news, but at the same time felt happy that her cousin 
decided to settle down. She tried to imagine who the ,i;irl could he, 
but failed to do so as Don Manuel was a gallant and rather hcklc 
young man. 

She was in poor health at that time. When she was asked 
by her cousin to join the mission in order to recover her lost 
health, she readily accepted. She sailed witli the party, accom- 
panied by her maid. Senate-President Quezon was then on his way 
to the United States as head of an independence mission, the first 
of the string of missions sent to wage the unrelenting campaign for 
independence. 

On that first night outward bound for Hongkong, Don Manuel 
proposed to her. The night was chilly, the decks were deserted, 
and so the two lovers were alone underneath the o]-)en sky. He 
proposed to her, but she did not answer; her heart of a maiden was 
overflowing with love and joy which expressed itself in tears that 
silently coursed down her face. Don Manuel took her silence for 
consent, and nothing more was said about the matter. 

Upon their arrival in Hongkong, Don Manuel said nothing to 
Dona Aurora about the wedding plans, as he wanted to surprise her. 
In the meantime he had told the rest of the party about his coming 

marriage to Dona Aurora. He casually told her that they were 
going to visit the American legation, but would go shopping before 
the visit. 

The party headed downtown, but Doiia Aurora's rickshaw man 

started for the opposite direction. When she realized the mistake 
made by her coolie, she shouted "Stop — stop!". The coolie thought 
that she meant "shop — shop" and so started running faster. Don 
Manuel, with the rc$t of the party, had to turn around to catch up 
with her. 

The civil marriage took place at the American legation where 
the matter had been arranged beforehand, on the fourteenth. Three 

46 



THE STRUGGLE WITH OSME5fA AND WOOD 



days later, the wedding was solemnized by the Bishop of Hong- 
kong in the Catholic cathedral. 

The bridegroom was dressed in an ordinary business suit, while 
the bride had ;i traveling dress; she had no flowers or other frills 
so dear to feminine hc;ircs — the ceremony \vas as simple as if Don 
Manuel had been the humblest citizen of his land. Their wedding 
was a decided surprise to Philippine residents. When President 
Quezon cabled Governor Harrison, "Got married today," the chief 
executive cabled back: "What's her name?" 

* * * 

Once his ^vork with tlic mission was through. President Quezon 
made plans to abandon politics. He signed an agreement with two 
other well-known lawyers — former Judge Clyde DcWitt and former 
Attorney General Quinrin P;irc<.!cs— to form a partnership. He 
was so determined to resume his pri\'ate law practice, that he even 
posted a bond of 1P5,000 in case he changed his mind. He felt that, 
as a married man, it was high time for him to make some money — 
twenty times more than what he could make as president of the 
senate. He had always been a spendthrift, and it did not matter 
much, as he was a bachelor and fond of good time. But now he 
was a family man. Pressure was again brought on him not to give 
up politics, and Quezon asked to be released from his bond with 
Messrs. DeWitt and Paredes, a permission which they readily gave. 

President Quezon now occupied such an important position 

in Philippine politics that circumstances forced him to remain 
active, whether he wanted to or not. Again and again, years later, 
he tried to quit the strenuous political life; but even poor health 
was not accepted by his followers as a reason for his retirement. 
He was destined to serve his people and his country. 

By 1920, the friction between Quezon and Osmena gi-ew to 
more tangible proportions. Towards the end of the administration 
of Harrison, Quezon began to consolidate his followers. Harrison 

47 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTTNY 

naturally was in his favor, and even publicly attributed his appoint- 
ment to the senate president. The first open clash took place over 

the reorganization of the juJici-ary, but these differences were 
ironed out after a compromise. The Wood-Forbcs report, which 
condemned the administration of the Islands during the past half 
dozen years, furnished Quezon with material for dissension within 
the ranks of the Nationalist party. He began to blame the bad 
state of affairs on Osmeaa, titular head of the party. 

In the meantime, General Leonard Wood had been sent out to 
Manila as governor general, following the disastrous defeat of the 
Democrats in the 1920 elections. Both Quezon and Osmena shovved 
a desire to co-operate with the new chief executive, probably with 
different motives: Osmena thought it was good for Wood to leave 
after a year with warm feeh'ngs in his heart towards the Filipinos; 
Quezon was preparing to challenge Osmena's leadership and felt 
possibly that one war at a time was all he could conveniently carry. 
Wood had decided to come to the Islands for about a year before as- 
suming the presidency of an American university, but .fate des- 
tined that he was to remain in the Philippines for the next six years. 

At the party convention in 1921, Osmena seemed willing to 
have a platform couched in general terms. Quezon, however, 
wanted a more specific one; he wanted a more vigorous and exact 
demand for independence from the United States. President Quezon 
even intimated that he would not care if the Nationalist party was 
divided, if the division would come not on personalities but on 
issues. Quezon apparently did not want to force the separation 
on this occasion, probably believing that the time was not yet ripe. 
Not being sure of victory, he allowed the convention to end in an 
apparent victory for Osmena. The drafting of the party platform 
was left for the next convention. Speaker Osmena remained pres- 
ident, and President Quezon the first vice-president, of the party. 
Osmena, in keeping with his personality, played a waiting game. 
It was up to Quezon to take the offensive. 

The awaited break was not] long in coming. With all the 
fiery vocabulary at his command. President Quezon began his 

48 



THE STRUGGIJB .WnH OSMEfjA AND WOOD 



attacks against the leadership of Speaker Osmena. He charged 

the latter with maneuvering reactionary legislation; with having 
been responsible for the deplorable state of affairs during Harrison's 
regime. He accused Osmena of "unipersonalism" — of deciding 
everything by himself without cunsulcing the members of his party. 
This, said President Quezon, was dictatorship of the rankest sort; 
in a democracy, the party leader should always consult the wishes 
of his followers and should abide by the will of the majority. The 
Collectivist party was thus formed by a split in the ranks of the 
old Nationalist group. 

General Wood had kept strict neutrality during the struggle 
for supremacy between the two leaders. He wrote in his diary of 
January 10, 1922: "The row between Osmena and Quezon is going 
on merrily. It is purely a struggle on the part of Osmena for a 
one-man representation in both Houses. Osmena seems to be having 
the better of him. Many of the senators are deserting Quezon." 

Elections were only six months away; that is, on the following 
June. Ever resourceful, Quezon launched a major offensive. It 
was at this time that he coined the famous phrase: "My loyalty to 
my party ends where loyalty to my country begins." 

Both leaders were naturally pleasant to newspapermen— 
specially at this critical period. Reporters always saw first Speaker 
Osmena in his room at the old legislative building, the Ayuntamiento 
in the Walled City. Suave Osmena always offered reporters light 
wines and biscuits for refreshment. Then the reporters would 
troop to the office of the senate president. When Quezon learned 
the kind of refreshment offered to ncwsha\vks by his rival, he 
snorted: "That's refreshment for sissies — it's indicative of the type 
of people who support him and the ideals he holds." With a 
typical magnanimous gesture of his hand, he added: "Gentlemen — 
I'll give you something with a kick! For the gentlemen of the 
press — beer and sandwiches, or if you prefer, whisky and soda. 
Tell me which do you like best!" 

Being regular fellows, the gentlemen of the press naturally 
could not help liking^ Senor Quezon a wee bit more. 

49 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



Recognizing the danger to Philippine interests of an open break 
between the Filipinos, Osmciia offered Quezon the leadership of 
the Nationalist party, or anything else that the latter wanted. 
But ;/ presidente, once he had set out on his course of action, was 
obdurate. The issue was placed squarely before the electorate on 
the June elections of 1922. 

Like a first-class tactician, Quezon brought the fight into 
Osmena's own bailiwick. A strong opponent was placed against 
the speaker in Cebu. Not willing to run the risk of a defeat, Os- 
mcna made a clever countermovc. He became a candidate for the 
senate. That was a lucky change, for he lost in the big towns and 
only his popularity among the barrio folks saved him. He was 
strong enough all over the province of Cebu, but weak in the sec- 
tions he had formerly represented. 

President Quezon found, after elections, that he had a slight 
but sure majority in the senate. In the lower house, however, the 
strength between the old Nationalist party and the new Collectivist 
party was about even. The balance of power remained in the hands 
of the Democrata party, which had hitherto been a negligible factor 
in insular politics. The Democrata party was tlic old Progressive 
party which had changed its name after the disastrous elections of 
1916 when the Nationalists were overwhelmingly victorious. The 
Progressives had won only one seat in the Senate, and seven in the 
House. Quezon's candidate for speaker was a brilliant young man, 
Manuel Roxas; Osmena who had run for the Senate, wanted Miguel 
Cuenco for the post; while the Democratas presented Claro Recto. 
For three long weeks, the House failed to agree upon a speaker. 
President Quezon was apparently checkmated. 

Choosing the lesser of two evils, to prevent a coalition between 
the Nationalists and the Democratas, he decided to smoke the pipe 
of peace with his former rival. They patched a truce, reunited 
their followers into the Nacionalista-Consolidado party, and chose 
Quezon's man, Manuel Roxas, speaker of the House. 

Senator Osmciia, however, was playing a patient game of 
watchful waiting. On the surface, things were going on smoothly. 

50 



THE STRUGGLE WITH OSMEfjA AND WOOD 



He knew that his former lieutenant hail a narrow margin, and was 
likely to m:ik:c a f:ilse move :it any time. President Quezon also 
realized that he was skating on thin ice; having started and won the 
struggle for supremacy, he was under the terrific burden of continuing 
unbroken rli:it leadership- - lie needed to consolidate the gains he had 
made — to entrench himself in power. To beat Osmena at his own 
game wbuld be suicidal. By temperament and strategy, he was of 
the opposite type. He was at his best in an open fight. By sheer 
force of his personality, lightning decisions, and intuitive knowledge 
of saying the right things at the right time, he had no equal in the 
Philippines when in the midst of a titanic struggle. But after that 
clash in the open, Osmeiia was content to remain under cover, and 
Quezon could not very well smoke him out of his hole for a second 
encounter. 

No one, no enemy, remained on the field. No one except 

Leonard Wood, the bystander, who had kept strict neutrality during 
the tluel. Upon him charged Manuel Quezon, the fighter. And 
being a warrior by profession, General Wood was not the sort of 
person to retreat. Thus began the epic struggle between President 
Quezon and Governor Wood. 

- • # * * 

Was President Quezon justified in seeking an issue with Governor 
General Wood? 

This question has so often been asked that it becomes imperative 
to study the events leading to that political duel, in order to arrive 
at an impartial estimate of President Quezon as a political leader. 
A brief sketch of conditions up to the arrival of Wood follows: 

During the preceding administration, Harrison had surrendered 
many of his prerogatives as chief executive to the Filipinos. Like 
his chief at the White House, he believed that the best way for 
Filipinos to attain self-government was to practise it. He allowed 
his department secretaries, all Filipinos, wide discretion in all 

51 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



domestic affairs. He created the Council of State, composed of the 
governor, the senate president, the speaker, and the cabinet members; 
and the Board of Control, composed of the governor and the pres- 
idents of the two legislative chambers. Furthermore, he allowed 
the legislature to indulge in business ventures and experiments — a 
mild form of government socialism. These government entities, 
from the National Bank down to the National Development com- 
pany, were under the thumb of the Board of Control. He thorough- 
ly FUipinized the insular government, and got rid of several hundred 
American employees during his term. All these were encroach- 
ments upon American sovereignty, and the Filipinos hugged tight 
the rights they had wrested from the chief executive. 

General Wood came with the express purpose of dragging the 
insular government out of business, in true Republican fashion. 
The National Bank and government finances had gone to the dogs. 
With military precision, Governor Wood began to rehabilitate 
government finances. He began to take back the prerogatives 
surrendered by his predecessor. Personally a kindly man, easy to 
approach, he had the poor judgment to surround himself with 
military advisers who proved too brusque to the sensitive pride of 
the Filipinos. President Quezon once had an appointment with 
Governor Wood at 9 o'clock in the morning. When the time came, 
another person who had arrived later than he did was shown in. 

Naturally, el president felt slighted. He silently got up and 
left, but his nose began to twitch like a rabbit — a nervous habit he 
has when excited or angry. And whenever el fresidente's nose 
twitches, there's hell to pay. A messenger overtook him at the 
gates to Malacanan Palace with the request that General Wood 
wanted to see him. 

"You can tell General Wood to go to hell!" exploded el pre- 
sidtnte as he left. 

When the Conlcy incident occurred in July, 1923, Governor 
Wood acted over the heads of his subordinates, the Mayor of the 
city of Manila and the secretary of the department of interior. 

52 



THE STRUGGLE WITH OSMEfjA AND WOOD 



The mayor had found an American detective guilty of certain ir- 
regularities, and the secretary of interior had upheld the mayor, 
but Governor Wood, wanting to exercise his prerogatives of su- 
pervision and control as contained in the Jones law, reinstated the 

detective. Though he was witliin his rights to do so, yet he violated 
the practise observed during Harrison's regime. As a result, all the 
department secretaries resigned. 

General V/ood's evaluation of the situation, following a con- 
ference with the leaders and cabinet members, was entered in his 
diary of July 17 as follows: "Mr. Osmena kept entirely out of the 
discussion. I think that he has been pushing Quezon on more or 
less quietly, seeing that the little man was going to eventually blow 
up and burst in his cflForts at aggrandizement and his reaching for 
power; all of which would be very agreeable to Osmcha. I have 
done everything possible to keep Quezon from m;iking a fool of 
himself but it has been difficult and, in the end, as shown today, 
impossible." We must remember that these acrid lines were en- 
tered in the heat of rancor against the senate president, but there 
was undoubtedly a grain of truth in his sizing up of the situation. 

As the weeks passed. President Quezon began to lose ground. 
Conditions were gradually improving under the strict supervision 
of Governor Wood. Business was picking up. Quezon was run- 
ning out of ammunition. Then he hit upon a brilliant plan. 

Juan Sumulong, leading member of the Democrata party which 
had supported General Wood in the recent controversy, was a candi- 
date for senator in the special election of October, 1923. President 
Quezon shrewdly picked as opponent Ramon Fernandez, the mayor 
who had resigned his post because of the disagreement with Wood. 
Mr. Fernandez could not even make a speech in Tagalog, the lan- 
guage of his electors, but d pesidente fought the election on the issue 
that Sumulong was Wood's man, while Fernandez was a victim of 
the governor's vindictiveness and hence was a martyr to the Fili- 
pino cause. Fernandez didn't have a ghost of a chance, but upon 
that issue he was elected by a close margin. 

53 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



Once more. President Quezon had turned the triclp — one of the 
neatest in his long list of political triumphs. 

President Quezon's motive in his fight with Wood was clc;irlv 
revealed in an address he gave before the student body of the Uni- 
versity of the Philippines, the state institution of higher learning. 
He said in part: "... All scudcnts of English constitutional his- 
tory know that the English people's liberties were finally built up 
after centuries of constant and unremitting struggle against the royal 
powers and prerogatives, a long drawn-out conflict in which the 
champions of the people seized every advantage to further increase 
the extent and sphere of popular rights. ... I would not be be- 
traying any secret here if I say that our object is to reduce the gov- 
ernor general of the Philippine Islands to a mere figurehead, because 
we want a government of Filipinos, by the Filipinos, and for the 
Filipinos. So it is unpatriotic for any Filipino to stand by Governor 
Wood in his policies. The Filipinos have worthily enjoyed auton- 
omy under Governor Harrison. No people worthy of freedom 
would allow it to be taken away from them. As for me, I shall 
fight for it as long as there is energy of life in my body! If we stand 
together, sooner or later, action favorable to Philippine autonomy 
will come. Why? Because someone must yield in this conflict, 
someone must be taken out of the way. The Legislature will not 
yield. It is inconceivable that Congress will abolish the Legis- 
lature." 

In the words of a University of Michigan political scientist, 
who later became the last of the American vice-governors: "... the 
real grievance of the men who dominated that body (the Legislature) 
was not that General Wood used the powers of his office arbitrarily, 
or harshly, or even unwisely, but that he exercised them 
at all." 

President Quezon struggled with General Wood, then, to 
retain those executive rights which the Filipinos had wrested 
from Harrison — an essential part of their unceasing struggle for 
greater autonomy. In that respect he was justified in the clash he 
had with General Wood. But how far this reason coincided with 

54 



THE STRUGGLE WITH OSMERA AND WOOD 



his personal motives of maintaining his supremacy in the political 
field, vvc have no way of staiiging. 

The next question that comes up is this: why didn't Senator 
Osmefia join forces with General Wood, and in that way defeat his 
rival. President Quezon? The only answer can be found in the 
desire of the Cehu senator to preserve a united Filipino front in their 
demands for independence. He could very well have taken the side 
of General Wood, as did otiier Filipinos of unquestioned patriotism. 
General Emilio Aguinaldo, hero of the revolution, had sided with 
the warrior at Malacaiian. Not much blame could be attached 
to Senator Osfiaena if he had allowed personal ambition to creep 
into his decision by backing up the chief executive. 

Even General Wood remarked on this topic in a letter to one 
of his aides, dated April 16, 1927: "Quezon is making an ass of 
himself in talking about preferring hell full of Filipinos to a heaven 
full of Americans and other silly and childish remarks. I think he 
is losing his grasp on the situation. Osmefia, if he had only the 
fighting edge, could have joined forces with Aguinaldo and 
beaten Quezon in the struggle for control." 

President Quezon's bitter fight with Governor Wood had its 
repercussion in Washington. Congress was in a mind to give the 
Filipinos what they shouted for, and on April, 1924, passed the Fair- 
field bill. In many respects, this bill was similar to the present 
Tydings-McDufFie law but placed the transition or Commonwealth 
period to 30 years. Congressional leaders would not push the 
bill, unless they had the support of the Filipino leaders, and asked 
for an open endorsement of the bill. Senate-President Quezon, 
Senator Osmefia, Speaker Roxas, Commissioners Pedro Guevara 
and Isauro Gabaldon, and other Filipino leaders who were in Wash- 
ington at the time, favored the measure; they decided, however, 
to refer the matter for approval to the legislators back in Manila. 
Speaker Roxas was sent back to get the approval of the solons. 
Opinion in the insular legislature and elsewhere, however, was 
strongly nationalistic and the Fairfield bill seemed too tame. The 
belief was rampant back in the archipelago that a bill could be 

55 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



had from Congress by just whistling for it, at terms asked for — the 
transition period of 30 years was considered too long. Hence 
Speaker Roxas delivered a public speech at the Botanical Gardens 
stating that the mission had not committed itself on the subject. 
Lacking the endorsement of the Filipinos, Congressional leaders 
abandoned the Fairfield bill. 

Had the -politicos fanned Filipino nationalism to white heat for 
"complete, immediate, and absolute independence," such that — 
like Frankenstein's monster — tlie situation had gone beyond their 
control? An attempt to answer this question today would be im- 
mature, and only events within the next two decades will give 
the answer to this question. 

But it was true that the Filipino political leaders exaggerated 
their demands for complete, absolute, and immediate independence. 
The politicos found that nationalism was the most potent appeal it 
could make to the electorate. In public, specially in campaign 
speeches, they uttered radical demands; but in pri\'ate, they were 
more conservative, though they never abandoned their ideal of 
self-government. General Wood entered in his diary: "Roxas 
said that they had been compelled to make radical statements to 
maintain their hold on the people, and Quezon said the same thing. ' ' 
The attitude of the Filipinos on this matter can best be summarized 
by the one word "bluff" — to gain what they really wanted, they 
were forced to increase the size of their demands. The battlecry 
of "immediate, complete and absolute" independence had to be 
adopted to refresh the spirit of Filipino nationalism, to make' an 
impression on the American public, and thus spur Congress to 
accede to the demands of Filipinos for greater autonomy. The 
Wood-Forbes mission had discovered that a great many Filipinos 
preferred independence under the protection of the United States. 
Thus, after the report was published that "independence under the 
protection of another nation is not true independence" the legislators 
grew much louder in their demands for complete, immediate, and 
absolute independence. 

Early in 1926, Quezon organized the National Supreme Council. 
This body was composed of the Nacionalista-Consolidado and the 

36 



THE STRUGGLE WITH OSME5JA AND WOOD 



Democrata parties, for the object of directing Filipino policy "in 
all that concerns the campaign for independence, all matters which 
may affect the relations between the United States and the Philip- 
pines, and the administiMcion of the interests of the country in 
general." At that time, the so-called Bacon bill, separating Min- 
danao and Sulu from the rest of the archipelago, was introduced in 
Congress. Faced by a common foe, the various leaders tmited under 
the banner of President Quezon. By a masterful stroke, aided by 
the opportune danger which loomed from the Potomac, President 
Quezon was able to carry his fight against Wood and at the same time 
maintain his precarious supremacy in local politics. 

Victory did not always go to President Quezon. In the first 
place, the Republicans were now in power and both Harding and 
Coolidge backed Wood to the hilt. Half a million pesos had been 
appropriated in 1918 to send a mission headed by President Quezon 
to the United States. The following year, membership of the mis- 
sion increased to 28 Filipinos holding key positions ih the insular 
government. In 1920, the legislature made a standing appropriation 
of one million pesos for the independence mission. Though such 
missions were undoubtedly necessary to carry out the campaign for 
independence, specially since the Republicans came into power, 
the sum appropriated was far too much; such missions became mere 
pleasure trips for high government officials who brought along with 
them their families'at the expense of the taxpayers. 

At the instigation of Wood, the insular auditor in 1924 dis- 
approved such appropriations as illegal. President Quezon, not 
to be outdone, came back with the reply that the expenses of the 
Wood-Forbes mission had been paid by the Legislature^ if the Fili- 
pino mission members were guilty of extravagance, the same charge 
could be applied to the Wood-Forbes mission. Realizing that his 
generosity had been taken advantage of by his followers. President 
Quezon did not hesitate to state that Wood and Forbes had taken a 
similar advantage.- 

President Quezon's biggest setback at the hands of Governor 
Wood took place in 1926, when the U. S. attorney general ruled that 

57 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



the creation of the Board of Control was an illegal act, and hence 
could be dissolved by an executive order. Governor Wood decided 
to dissolve the board because of a disagreement he had with Pres- 
ident Quezon and Speaker Roxas late in 1926. Wood liad a verbal 
agreement with the two Filipino leaders to sell the Ccbu Portland 
Cement company to a private firm. The Filipino newspapers, 
however, attacked the transactif)n. When Wood had everything 
prepared for the sale, both Quezon and Roxas backed out. Wood 
was furious. Quezon and Roxas apologetically explained that they 
had to break their word because popular sentiment went against 
their private belief. 

Wood received the ruling of the attorney general on October, 
1926. A month later, he dissolved the Board of Control. The 
case was brought to the Philippine Supreme Court, which approved 
the dissolution by a vote of 6 to 3, one of the Filipino justices siding 
with the Americans. The case was appealed to the Supreme Court 
of the United States, which also upheld the decision, though three 
justices including the late Justice Holmes dissented with the 
majority. 

Had General Wood consented to play politics, or had he been 
a cleverer opponent, he could have forced President Quezon into an 
ignominious defeat. 

In the early phase of their duel, when the legislators were 
still watching how the wind blew, Governor Wood could have 
licked el fresidente pretty badly. Many of the legislators were 
grumbling against the leadership of President Quezon, as Governor 
Wood had vetoed appropriation bills right and left. Had General 
Wood played politics, he could have gotten a good number of legis- 
lators to bolt the Quezon camp, for he controlled the purse strings 
of government. Perhaps he was too obtuse and unaccustomed to 
politics — notice the way he was tricked in the 1920 Republican con- 
vention for the presidency — or perhaps he disdained to stoop to 
such underhanded, but legitimate, methods. It was fortunate for 
President Quezon that Governor Wood was a man trained in the 
battlefield, and not in the political arena. 

58 



THE STRUGGLE WITH OSMENA AND WOOD 



Both opponents, nevertheless, held a high opinion of each other. 

Though General Wood never failed to say nasty things about Quezon 
in his diary, he admired el presidente; Wood preferred Quezon to 
Osmena, whom he couldn't fathom. President Quezon also respect- 
ed his adversary. A few }-ears later, when he \\ ms in Kansas city. 
President Quezon lived in the house once occupied by General Wood. 

"Let us see what kind of books the old man liked," remarked 
Senor Quezon with a meaning smile to Vicente Bunuan, director 
of the Washington publicity bureau. "Maybe that will explain 
why we differed so much." He thoroughly examined and read 
the books once perused by the general. As d presidente expected, 
the books dealt mostly with military discipline. 

Against Genera! Wood, President could not make much head- 
way. That Rough Rider refused to budge. The Filipino leaders, 
headed by Quezon, had announced a policy of non-cooperation. 
But the government continued to function as usual -with the under- 
secretaries on duty. The legislative and the executive branches 
of the government had reached an impasse: neither would give in 
an inch of ground. The racial angle was being injected into the 
political issue— potential dynamite. Philippine affairs were drifting 
to the Lord knows where. Then, on August 7, 1927, Governor 
General Wood died in a Boston hospital following an operation. 

President Quezon and his followers breathed a sigh of relief. 
The tension was over. 



59 




MANUEL L. QUEZON 



President Qncion is a. lover 

of good books, and during 
his rcccnc illness read assi- 
duously on various subjects. 
At the Icfc is a facsimile of 
his book-plate. 



Dfia. Aurora Aragon de 
Quezon is one of the most 
cultured of Filipino women 
through constant reading. 
At the right is a reproduction 
of her ex-libris; notice the 
picture of her husband with 
the words "Not for self but 
for country." What greater 
sacrifice could a country 
exact of a mother and a wife? 




. AURORA A. DE QUEZON _ 



CHAPTER V 



The Last Duel With Osmefla 

ITH General Wood providenrly out of the way, Filipino 
political leaders were disposed to cooperate with the suc- 
cessor. Governor Henry L. Stimson. Stimson, on his part, met 
the Filipinos halfway and followed a middle course between that 

of his two predecessors. 

Though Stimson and Quezon were good friends, they some 
times had violent disagreements. On one occasion, while former 
Secretary of Agriculture Rafael Alunan was in a conference with 
Governor Stimson, President Quezon made a call. He had come 
to defend before the chief executive Speaker Roxas, his prot6g6, 
who was not very well liked by Stimson. Secretary Alunan wanted 
to leave, but President Quezon asked him to stay. 

Both Stimson and Quezon were frank in their utterances, and 
raised their voices, as both of them were men of strong convictions. 
Hot words were exchanged, and Mr. Alunan feared that the two 
might come to blows. At the end of every point he made, Stimson 
turned to Alunan with the words; "Don't you agree with me, 
Mr. Secretary?" 

Quezon, at the termination of each argument, likewise turned 
to Alunan with the query: "Now, isn't that right?" 

That was Mr. Alunan's most embarrassing moment, and at 
the time wished that he was in any other place except Malacafian. 

Agitation had been increasing in Congress to curtail the amount 
of duty-free products such as sugar, coconut oil, cigars and hemp. 
President Quezon left Manila late in 1927 to direct the campaign 
in the United States. The situation was'so sefious that Senator 

61 




QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



Osmena accompanied him. Though Filipino leaders had secured 
a statement that no backward step would be taken by President 
Harding as far as Philippine autonomy was concerned, the llcpub- 
licans were notoriously against independence. President Quezon was 
particularly active in conferences with various public men, and in 
delivering speeches. He fell ill, and consulted New York specialists 
who advised him to take a rest aire for one year or more if he ex- 
pected to get well. 

He spent the Christmas of 1927 as a patient in the Pottinger 
sanatorium in Monrovia, California. That was his loneliest 
Christmas, away from his wife and three children. He did not 
remain idle, however, during those days of enforced solitude. He 
read assiduously books on history, politics, economics, contem- 
porary world events, biographies and philosophy. For relaxation, 
he indulged in detective stories. The reading habit he acquired 
during this illness came in handy later on. 

On his first visit with President Hoover, in the summer of 1930, 
the White House executive started to talk on the economic situation 
in Europe. Mr. Hoover probably wanted to find out how well- 
informed Senor Quezon was. "I cited to him a few facts and fig- 
ures," related el presidente, "and I think I convinced him that I 
knew a little about these matters." 

Early in 1928, Quezon cabled Osmeiaa that he wanted to resign 
from politics because of ill health, but his former chief would not 
hear of it. Osmena preferred to play the second fiddle. In Quezon 
he recognized a personality which could not be dispensed with in 
the Filipinos' struggle for greater autonomy. Quezon won the 
election without any fuss, and again was elected president of the 
Senate. He returned to the Philippines in the middle of 1928 a 
very sick man. 

About a year later, he had to leave for Monrovia for a second 
treatment and rest cure. He was suffering from tuberculosis, and 
his health was greatly impaired. In the meantime. President 
Hoover had appointed Nicholas Roosevelt vice-governor of the 

62 



THE LAST DUEL WITH OSMENA 



Philippines. Mr. Roosevelt had visited the Islands and written 
a book called "The Philippines — a Treasure and a Problem," 
wherein he baldly stated that the Filipinos were not yet capable 
of self-government. He also called President Quezon and other 
leaders a few unflattering names. Vigorous protests from Manila 
evaporated into thin air when it reached the White House. Upon 
his arrival in Seattle, President Quezon wrote the following letter 
to the secretary of war : 

Let mc at the outset disclaim any intention on our part to challenge the 
power of the President to appoint whomever he chooses. We are only exercising 
the right to petition, the use of which in this instance and in my case, considering 
the position I hold, becomes a duty, imposed alike by my loyalty to the Gov- 
ernment of the United States and to the people of the Philippine Islands. I 
hope, therefore, that these represenutions will be accepted in the spirit in which 
they are made. 

1 would request you, Mr. Secretary, to realize how humiliating it will be 
for the Filipino people to have at the head of their Department of Public Instruc- 
tion and, from time to time, as acting head of their Government, one who has 
branded them as dishonest and deceitful, and how extremely embarrassing it will 
be for the Filipinos in public life to deal officially and socially with one who has 
written of them with contempt. 

In recent years I have cooperated, first with Governor Stimson, and then with 
Governor Davis, to bring about a better understanding and more cordial relations 
between the people of the Philippines and the representative of the Government 
of the United States in the Islands, with the result that not only have these rela- 
tions been very much improved but also the racial feeling— which has always 
been the thorn in the Philippine problem— between Americans and Filipinos. 
You can, therefore, very well understand my very serious concern over this ap* 
pointmcnt, which will surely revive racial anugonisms. 

Allow me, Mr. Secretary, to place these considerations before you, as chief 
of the department in charge of Philippine affairs, with the request that you lay 
them before the President. 

As a result, President Hoover withdrew his ad interim appoint- 
ment, and Mr. Roosevelt was sent as Minister to Hungary. Speak- 
ing of that letter weeks later, he laughingly remarked: "I was 
rather hard put in writing that letter because I had no one to help 
me. I did not know whether I was using the correct words or the 



63 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



correct construction, but I kept on until I finished :ind then mailed 
it. Yet, I think it turned out to be not such a bad letter after all." 

Like any other man in public life. President Quezon tries to 
remember the names and faces of people he meets. But he is by- 
no means a memory wizard. Once, while in Wasliin<j;t()n, D.C., 
an American wanted to see him in his room at the Willard Hotel. 
After greeting him effusively, el presidente asked to be excused as he 
had not yet shaved. The visitor had mentioned that he was a 
former colonel in the Philippine Constabulary. 

While he was at his toilet, Sefior Quezon tried hard to remember 
the American's face or name — but failed. Nevertheless, he came 
out and amiably chatted with the visitor for half an hour, reminisc- 
ing on the days of empire in the archipelago at the turn of the 
century. The visitor got up and left. 

"I'll be d if I can remember his name," the Filipino leader 

later said to his secretary. Throughout the entire visit, he had 

no idea of the identity of his guest, but carried along the conver- 
sation as if the visitor was an old acquaintance. 

In the middle of 1931, he went on another trip to the United 
States. Sugar, farm, dairy and labor interests were insistent in 
their demands to cut the Philippines adrift, or at least to treat the 
Islands as a foreign nation so far as trade was concerned. President 
Quezon made a frank analysis of conditions 'and presented three 
proposals before political leaders in Washington with relation to 
the future of the Philippines, These three proposals were: 

1. Immediate establishment of an independent government with free trade 
between America and the Philippines for a period of 10 years, limiting the amount 
of sugar entering the United States free of duty to one million tons and oil to the 
amount exported at present, and the restciction of Filipino labor immigration 
into the United States. 

2. If unacceptable, immediate establishment of an autonomous govern- 
ment with all consequent powers, including that of enacting measures consid- 
ered necessary to meet the responsibilities of an independent government when 
independence is granted, with restrictions necessary to safeguard the interests 
of American sovereignty in the Philippines. Within such a period of 10 years, 

64 



THE LAST DUEL WITH OSMENA 



trade relations between the United St.iccs .md tlic Philippines and the labor immi- 
gration into the United States, will be the same as proposed in the preceding 
paragraph. At the end of 10 years, the Filipino people will decide by means 
of a plebiscite if it desires to continue with such a government or prefers to have 
one that is absolutely independent. In the latter case, American sovereignty 
vrill be immediately withdrawn from the Islands. 

3. la the event that this is not accepwble, the Filipino people will welcome 
any bill granting Philippine independence in any fbrm< 

President Quezon presented these proposals to the Filipino 
people in November of 1931. The Detnocrata party at once branded 
him as reactionary, and a traitor to his pristine ideals of absolute, 
complete, and immediate independence. There can be no doubt 
that President Quezon, with full responsibility resting on his shoul- 
ders, became realistic in his treatment of the Philippine problem— 
and hence more conservative. The first two proposals sound like 
the Fairfield bill of a decade ago, whUe the third alternative is a 
brave gesture to show that the Filipinos had not abandoned their 
desire for self-government at any cost. 

"The affairs of government," President Quezon confessed, 
"are eminently practical— not theoretical. Those who have the 
responsibility to guide the destinies of a nation have the solemn 
duty to harmonize the lofty ideals of their people with realities...." 

Quezon the politician was now Quezon the statesman. ^ That 
single statement, given at a time when he was very sick and seriously 
tried to retire from politics, reflects his true attitude on the whole 
matter more truly than the dozen fiery speeches he has made on the 
same question. 

In the beginning of 1932, he went to Baguio, summer capital of 
the archipelago, for a prolonged cure. He was very much depressed 
by his failure to get better after his treatment in Monrovia. 

"I'd be glad to live for two or three more years, until Phil- 
ippine conditions are more stable," he confided to his physician. 
Dr. Andreas Trepp, tuberculosis specialist in charge of the Santol 
Sanatorium in Manila, examined him thoroughly. He realized 
that el fresidente's cvure lay in psychological more than in medical 

65 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



treatment. The first thing to do, then, was to cheer him up. 
Gradually, President Quezon was made to take exercises. By June 
of that year, he had a better appetite and was much more 
cheerful. 

One day he went on an automobile ride, accompanied by Dr. 
Trepp and Jacob Rosenthal, a bosom friend. The doctor saluted 
a beautiful woman who was walking on the street. President 
Quezon, inveterate admirer of all things beautiful, turned his head 

around to watch her as the car passed by. 

"Ah — Don Manuel is saved!" exclaimed Jake. "Everything 
is fine. El president's interest in women lias revived." 

It was during this illness that President Quezon returned to the 
Catholic faith. He had joined masonry when he was still an as- 
semblyman from Tayabas, and had gradually risen to the thirty- 
second degree. Beginning 1928, however, he underwent a spiritual 
renascence. 

A tiny book of 36 pages, written by Annie Fellows Johnston, 
a religious mystic, undoubtedly played an important part in his 
change of outlook on religion. Quezon read this book on March 
of 1928 while in the sanatorium, according to Dr. Antonio Sison, 
personal physician and friend of the president. 

"It was this book that turned the tide of President Quezon's 
morale when his health was at its lowest ebb in Monrovia. The 
simple moving story, couched in the form of a legend, to teach the 
virtue of patience and hope, sustained President Quezon — gave 
him new strength to face the fight and roused his will to a determi- 
nation to conquer the disease," said Dr. Sison. The booklet con- 
tained this moral: 

"To gather from every one thou passes t on the highway, and from every experienct 
fate sends thee, as Omar gathered from the heart of every rose, and out of the wide knewUdgt 
thus gained of human weaknesses and human needs, to distill in thine heart the precious 
oil of sympathy. That is the attar that shall for thee ■» welcemi wherever thou goest. 
And no man fills his crystal vase with it until hi has first been pricked by the world's 
disappointments, and lowed hyjts tasks." 

66 



THE LAST DUEL WITH OSMENA 



"While I was sick in Monrovia," he later confided to Father 
Tamayo, his former teacher and benefactor, "I felt that I was going 
to die — just like an animal, without any spiritual consolation or 
hope. Now that you're here, my heart feels lighter." 

During his illness in Baguio, Archbishop Michael O'Doherty 
came to see him several times. They had long talks on theology, 
the philosophy of the Catholic faith, and other kindred subjects. 
His wife and children, all devout Catholics, naturally had a great 
deal of influence on his outlook. As a result, President Quezon 
abjured masonry and became a devout Catholic. He has had a 
private chapel constructed in his home in Pasay, where he hears 
mass on occasion. 

With death staring him in the face, and thoroughly believing 
that he would live for only a couple of years at the most, he under- 
went a spiritual conversion so common to mortals. His return 
to the Catholic faith, the religion of his boyhood, was imquestion- 
ably sincere. But his motives were impugned by his severest critics 
who pointed out that the conversion was an opportune move: 
no matter how sincdre" President Quezon was in his sudden change 
of heart, they claimed, the conversion had redounded to his benefit, 
for henceforth he would have the support of the church. And to 
this day,, the church plays a powerful — though silent — part in 
Philippine kffairs. 

Those years of poor health were a blessing in disguise, for they 
gave him a chance to catch up with his reading on many and di- 
verse subjects — a re-education, so to speak, of a great leader. Today, 
President Quezon is one of the most widely-read individuals in the 
Philippines, and is equally at home on a discussion of Freud, Lord 
Bryce, Napoleon, Malthus, or S. S. Van Dine. Reading and trav- 
eling so much has, of course, deeply influenced his views; they 
have made of him a liberal and a progressive. On his fifty-fourth 
birthday — in 1932 — he gave a scholarly sxmimary of shifting values 
and political evolution, as follows: 

67 



QUEZON; MAN OF DESUNY 



"I am a born optimist. But, there arc things in the world today that tinge 
vay optimism with concern. The world is changing; thought is changing; io- 
stitutioos believed to be eternal are tottering. Some have fxllcn. And we are 
in the midst of all the change. We cannot escape its effects. 

"Our concern is government, because gOTcrnment is the concern of the people- 
As I see it, the world has gone through fbnr stages in this hnman iostitotion 
we call government. 

"At first there was the tribal system. It was a simple aSaii. Yet it was an 
outgrowth of a still simpler one, the family rale, which is the basis of society. 
Essentially it was democratic, since it was created by the will of the ingredients 
of the tribe, &unilies, equal to one another, and maintained by their will. 

"Then came the growing complexities which followed npon the increase 

in population. For a time wc still had the dcmocr.-itic principle in the great 
Athenian, and later the Roman, democracies. Then, as peoples grew and civili- 
zation became more complex, 'strong men seized the power, and wc had the birth, 
rise, and eventually the downfall, of the Roman and Oriental empires. This 
was the second stage. 

"Feudalism, which erected its castles on the ruins of the empires, followed; 
and was in turn superseded by monarchies, as the power became centralized in 
leading families, carrying the world through a third stage in government. The 
monarchies tore down the strongholds of feudalism, and ruled until the people, 
newly taught and newly inspired, began to assert themselves. And wc had the 
birth of the republican form of govemnienti which was the fourth. 

"It may be said that we are at present in this fourth stage. But as I see it 
wc are entering an entirely new phase of government. What this fifth stage will 
be is fw the fiitnre to reveal. 

"Today the world is in state of upheaval, of change, reacting to two sig- 
nificant movements in government, both characterized by a form of despotism, 
yet each diametrically opposed to the other. On the one hand we have the 
one-man despotism in Italy, where a Mussolini by sheer force of character and 
will is in control of the government. On the other we have a people's despotism, 
as in Russia, where a section of the people, the masses, are driving the rest of 
the people in zealous adherence to an idea. 

"These rival — if I may say so — systems arc naturally throwing the world 
into upheaval, almost into chaos. Necessarily, the political upheavals bring 
about economic overturns. In fact, both the Russian revolt of 1917 and Musso- 
lini's march on Rome were in essence economic movements. 

"They also bring about changes in thought, new tendencies in ideas and 
ideals. And this upheaval, these new tendencies, these new currents of thought. 



68 



THE LAST DUEL WITH OSMERA 



arc fclc here in die Philippines. For \vc Filipinos stand directly in the paths of 
these cross-currents, which cannot but affect our outlook, our viewpoints, our 
very lives. 

"In this we have certain advantages: that we arc a young country. We have 
not, as had Russia, any old institutions, old traditions of government, to batter 
down. Our people will not be compelled to pass through a readjustment that will 
strike at the very roots of their spiritual or physical existence. We can examine 
these new ideas of government, these new social panaceas that come to us: examine 
them, and adopt for our own use those which we feel are best suited to our needs. 

"There are, however, two institutions which we have, that must be preserved 
at all costs. They are the family, and the democracy of our people. I should 
not call them 'institations.' In effect they are our foundation. To put it an- 
other way: they ate two safe anchorages to which we must hold as vre meet the 
rush of new thought and new ideas. We should adopt and adapt to our purposes 
whatever is best of these new ideas. But we should always judge the new by 
their adaptability to those two fundamentals: the family and democracy. 

"On my fifty-fourth birthd.iy, as I look back, and see what we have accom- 
plished; and look ahead, and see what is before us, I envision a great future for 
our country — ^if our people would only keep abreast of the times. 

"And as I see all this, my message to the people now is; go slow. The 
world is changing. Wc are in the midst of the change and we, like other peoples, 
arc facing a severe trial. It is fotile to try to get away from the change, and folly 
to try to escape the trial. Wisdom and caution— these are our weapons and our 
shield, in one. Let us watch; let us keep our eyes open. Let us judge carefully 
and without passion these new things that whirl about us. There is good among 
them, and there is evil. There is salvation and there is deadly danger. Wisdom, 
coolness and caution will gain for us the good and the salvation. Haste and 
unreasoning passion will sweep us into danger. Wc must go slow." 



When wc take into consideration the fact that he was more or 
less responsible for the government going into business, an observer 
would be inclined to think that President Quezon is personally 
not averse to some form of socialism. Defending the venture of 
the Philippine government into state socialism, he stated in 1920: 

"The government has definitely adopted a plan for the develofimiit of our foreign trade 
as well as for the improvement of our affieulturt and our industries. If there is any fault 
in this respect, it would bi because we are hying to do mare than. ..we can froferly handle. 
In other words, the governrnertt mtg be accused of going too fast rather than too slow, hut 

69 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



our defense — // as r-.-.'.i ^jr.y — in our daire to have the Philippsnts go with the times 
iit her tamomic development, for we fear that in this age of keen competition and scramble 
for riches, the cottntty leill be left in tie rearyutri unless we nutkt great strides." 

* * * 

In the meantime, a political storm was brewing over the Potomac 
in Washington, D.C. — a storm which reached the intensity of a 
typhoon by the time it struck Manila, and decided once and for all 
the supremacy between himself and Senator Osmena. 

President Quezon never did aspire to wrest national leadership 
from Senator Osmena prior to the creation of the insular senate, as 
we have already pointed out. He was content to remain second in 
command, though it was rather humiliating for him as senate- 
president. It was not until after the Jones law was passed, that a 
spirit of rivalry grew between these two titans in Philippine politics. 
As senate-president, Quezon was in an awkward and ratlicr embar- 
rassing situation. He was only the vice-president of the Nation- 
alist party, while Osmena was president. In the Council of State, 
Osmena, as head of the party, was officially ranked above him. No 
matter how justified President Quezon was in seeking a change of 
national leadership for the benefit of the country, there can be no 
doubt that the personal equation must have played some part in his 
decision to seek a break with Osmena. 

The duel between these two men was entirely natural and to be 
expected; it was a ruthless straggle for the survival of the fittest. 
Both, in their grasp of the principles of politics and practical states- 
manship, have no superiors in any country of the world. Both 
are of unquestioned patriotism. But both could not rule at the 
same time — it had to be either one or the other. 

From 1920 to 1934, latent rivalry existed between these two 
leaders. After Quezon had seized the leadership, as we have al- 
ready seen, Osmena played a game of watchful waiting; he followed 
orders like a disciplined soldier, but nevertheless he was ready to 
reassert his supremacy at the right time. On the other hand, 
Quezon, by means of brilliant moves was able to maintain his lead- 
ership unbroken. These two adversaries were like skillful fencers 
thrusting, feinting, and parrying, with an occasional riposte, for 

70 



THE LAST DUEL WITH OSMENA 



ultimate victorjr. Osmena was like a rapier, resilient but deadly; 
Quezon like the sword of the Crusader, crushingly massive and ir- 
resistible. 

"Osmefia is patient, silent, cautious, wise— Oriental in type. As a man of 

property and a conservative, he inspires confidence in the more mature. He 
belongs to the largest racial group in the Philippines — the Bisay.ans, and has some 
Chinese blood in his veins. Quezon, on the other hand, is impatient, impulsive, 
frank, brilliant — Occidental in type. He inspires personal attacluaent and is 
idolized by the yonoger element. He is a Tagalog, and in his veins com^ the 
impetuous blood of a Spanish ancestor." 

Chinese cunning was matched against Spanish audacity — and 
in the end, the latter won out. The decade and a half preceding 
1935 were years of bitter and unrelenting struggle between the two 
Filipino leaders. Except for the open break in 1922 and again in 
1934, the battle raged under cover. Though not as spectacular as 
the fight with Wood, the struggle between these two men was more 
protracted and, from a spect.itor's viewpoint, more interesting 
because of the apparently innocent moves and countermoves made 
by one or the other. When the detailed facts of this period are 
revealed, an epic saga could be written about these two men in their 
drawn-out warfare for political supremacy in the Philippines. 
Obviously, only an outline of the moves made by the two advier- 
saries can be included in a short biogr.iphy like this. 

After Manuel Roxas had made of himself a persona non grata to 
Coolidge, who upheld Wood, Quezon was in a tight spot. Certain 
senators even offered Osmefia the presidency of the senate, but he 
refused. Realizing his delicate position, Quezon then decided to 
get rid of Osmena by sending him to Washington as head of the 
mission, to fight threatened reactionary legislation. The senator 
from Cebu knew the danger, but he consented and left for Washing- 
ton. After a survey of American conditions, he reported that the 
non-cooperation policy started by Quezon was doing the independ- 
ence cause much harm. Thus he turned the tables on Quezon. 
Supporters of Quezon, in turn, accused Osmeiia of being a traitor to 
the cause. There was even talk of Osmena's recall, but his fol- 
lowers were too strong. It was at this time that Quezon came back 
witl^ a, brilliant countermove; in organizing the Supreme National 

71 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



Council, he got the sopport of the Democratas by promising to 

appoint a member of their party to the next vacant post in the re- 
sident commissionership. Osmeiia was suspicioxis of the Coali- 
tion, as embodied by the Supreme National Council, but Quezon 
had outwitted him and he characteristically fell in line. Pres- 
ident Quezon's sense of the dramatic and the colorful, saved 
him in many a tight fix in his long political career; for on the 
verge of defeat, he always made a daring move which discomfited 
his opponents, and turned an apparent downfall into victory. 

On more than one occasion, Quezon seriously tried to resign 
from politics, yet each time Osmefia was the first to plead against 
such a proposal. Why? It seems to us that Osmeiia must have 
fiilly realized the value of Quezon to the nation; and it is not in- 
conceivable that he was loath to lose such a worthy adversary. 
Both of them were good fighters, who enjoyed a good scrap; in a 
similar way that chess players prefer to pit their mental skill against 
a worthy opponent. 

After Quezon had made his three proposals, Osmefia jbucneyed 
to the United States accompanied by Roxas. For nearly tw^o years 
the Osmcna-Roxas mission stayed in Washington in a strenuous 
effort to get an independence law. They must have known that 
the enactment of a law granting Filipinos greater autonomy would 
automatically thrust into their hands the national leadership held by 
Qwzon. In spite of the growing opposition from the Quezon 
faction in Manila over the provisions of the Hawes-Cutting-Hare 
law, which was then taking shape, the Osrox (newspaper abbrevia- 
tion for Osmcfia-Roxas) mission decided not to obey orders. 

Back in Manila, in the meantime, a reorganization of the 
government was taking place. The change was undoubtedly needed 
for purposes of economy and efficiency. The reorganization was 
h Q»»czon faction as a much-needed improvement, 

while the Osrox supporters claimed that it was merely an opportun- 
ity to get rid of some of their party men in government service. 
Perhaps both factions are right. At any rate, the matter is still 
in dispute: whether the reorganization was carried out in good faith, 
or whether it was used as a cloak for a marshaling of political forces. 

72 



THE LAST DUEL WITH OSME^A 



It is an interesting, though not conclusive, sidelight that in 1932 
there were 21,823 civil service employees; this number dropped the 
following year to 20,725 after the reorganization was effected; while 
in 1934, the number of government workers increased to 21,492. 

Late in 1932, the Hawes-Cutting-Hare law was passed by both 
Houses of Congress, but was vetoed by outgoing President Hoover. 
Congress repassed the law over his veto, and acceptance was up to 
'the insular legislature. 

These events are perhaps too recent for a fair appraisal, but in 
view of subsequent incidents, a general evaluation can be given with 
inipartiality. The Hawes-Cutting-Hare law was frankly a com- 
promise bill — hence it was not entirely favorable to the best in- 
terests of the Filipinos. The Osrox group held that it was the best 
law obtainable under the circumstances, and fulfilled the require- 
ments outlined by President Quezon in the second of his three alter- 
natives. 

For some months. President Quezon was undecided whether to 
accept or reject the proffer of independence as embodied in the 
H-C-H act. He was extremely critical of the bill — and with good 
reason — but took no decisive step. He even went to the United 
States by way of Europe to confer with Senator Osmena, but re- 
mained undecided. Those were decisive weeks wherein the fate 
of the nation hung in the balance. 

On the voyage from Cherbourg to New York, the Filipino 
leader was with the then premier of France, Edouard Herriot, and 
25 other prominent French officials on board. Filipino members of 
the mission were afraid that their leader would be relegated to 
second place in point of interest — but not with Quezon as head 
of that mission. Such a thing as inferiority complex is simply not 
to be found in the Quezonian makeup. By his brilliant conversation, 
suave manners, and arresting personality, he shared honors with 
the French premier. And when the lie de France docked in New 
York, the waterfront reporters made as much fuss over the Filipino 
leader as with the premier. 

On the return trip aboard the same liner, the Filipinos had the 
famous Polish pianist, Ignatz Jan Paderewski, as fellow passenger 

73 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



besides Hetriot. It was on this voyage that Quezon surprised 
members of his mission and other passengers by having the ship's 
orchestra play the Filipiao anthem. Naturally, a score of the 
anthem could not be found, bat el fresidente haltingly played the 
tune on the piano with one finger — suflScicntly for tlic orchcscLM 
to render later the entire music with proper accompaniment. He 
had not forgotten his student days in Letran when he captivated 
the ladies by his mastery of the piano. 

Why didn't Quezon go with the Osrox mission during the 
framing of the H-C-H bill and in that way help shape a measure 
which would be acceptable to Filipinos? Later, during the dis- 
cussion over the H-C-H law in the legislature, Quezon said: 

"At the time [1932] I asserted that the reason why I could not go with the 
Jaission was that I was ill, but the real reason I am now telling you. If I had gone 
to America I would have been compelled to work for any one of my three propo- 
sitions or for all of them which I had submitted to the legislature. My .-ittitudc 
would not have been sanctioned by the legislature. The country appeared to 
against me — some went even to the extent of calling me a traitor to my country — 
*nd I conld not be the chairman of « mission that was leaving at the precise 
moment when the Philippine problem was to be decided without the full support 
<rf the Filipino people, a support expressed in an indubitable manner. Under the 
ctrcumstances, I could not go with the mission; and I am now happy that I did 
not go, because if I had been with the mission and the law wliich had been passed, 
hid been passed despite my protests, there would be always some gentlemen who 
would assert that it is Quezon who is the advocate of autonomy — who is respon- 
»ible for this law," 

President Quezon and his followers objected to the H-C-H 

^•w mainly because of the provision for American military and naval 

Reservations after the transition period; the export tax which would 

e rmaous to Philippine trade 'and industry; the powers granted to 

^ High Commissioner; and other various and sundry reasons. 

e oppoQcnts of the bill examined each provision with a fine tooth- 

President Quezon, after his experience with the Jones law 

^^^^ tiis clash with Woofd, in ia speech before the legislators 
^•^ealed: 

'"as then, [after the fight with Wood] gentlemen, I realized that when we 
We h °' ^""^"^ ^^^Y a law passed by Congress, on our relations with America, 
*ttould proceed slowly and examine the significance of each word and phrase 

74 



THE LAST DUEL WITH OSMEf?A 



and come out openly if there be any doubt about its interpretation against 
us and in favor of the sovereign power. I then realized also the crass error that 
I committed in the discussion of Jones bill No. 2, which, be it said in passing, is 

not the bill which I h;iJ preferred, for that which I did prefer was Jones Bill No. 
1; when in the discussion of the Jones L.iw, I repeat, I knew that it would be 
impossible to have a law passed graiiciiig us our immediate independence as pro- 
vided in the Clarke amendment, I centered my attention upon, and directed 
all my efforts to, changing that apparent defieat into a victory by means of the 
preamble to the Jones Law. 

"I assured the Filipino people that their liberty was coming with the promise 
that independence would be given us as soon as a stable government had been 
established here; and my attention was fully cng.iged by this preamble, taking 
into account the unequivocal expression of policy to be adopted and should be 
adopted by the government constituted under the Jones Law, which was to give 
to the Filipinos the greatest possible autonomy consistent with the exercise of 
American sovereignty." 

Having made an error once, President Quezon was not to be 
caught twice in a mistake of the same sort. 

A bitter struggle took place; tlie Democrata party broke and 
took sides with either Quezon or Osmena. Sweeping political 
realignments occurred, and the country was divided into the pros 
and the antis with regard to their stand on the H-C-H law. Even 
academic tradition of remaining aloof from political issues was 
rudely shattered when Rafael Palma, then president of the state 
university, entered into the affray; while two deans, Jorge Bocobo 
and Maximo Kalaw, maintained a sustained polemic in the news- 
papers. Even General Aguinaldo sided, this time, with Quezon. 

According to some well-informed observers, some ambitious 
followers of el president wanted to displace Osmena and Roxas from 
power in order to take their places; others say that the Osrox com- 
bination, guessing that the masses would be with them, w^ere eager 
to force the issue and to come to a break with the Quezon faction. 
Perhaps these commentators are right. But it is an incontrovertible 
fact Chat had the legislature accepted the H-C-H law, OsmeSia and 
Roxas would share the credit in securing a law more generous than 
the Jones bill. Thus Osmena and Roxas would have the leading 
r61es under the Commonwealth. Both Quezon and Osmeiia must 
have realized this. No matter how sincere these two men and their 



75 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



followers were on the question, the personal element must have 
unconsciously crept into their deliberations. The issue of the 
H-C-H law would finally decide as to who would be number one 
plitico of the Philippines. Both were getting old in years, and 
this was to be the last duel in their political careers. 

One sultry morning in July, 1933, President Quezon resigned 
from the presidency of the senate to find out if he still had the con- 
fidence of his fellow members; Senator Osmeiia promptly voted 
in favor of his resignation, and virulently attacked his leadership 
as "opportunistic" and based on "clandestine combinations." 
This time it was Osmena who was challenging Quezon. The 
Osrox party denounced Quezon as "arrogant," and el presidmte 
came back with the crushing reply: 

"It is my understanding that an 'arrogant' attitude means that without 
any jnstification one adopts postures and attitudes, but I have never believed— 
and I do not now believe, unless distinguished literary men can convince me to 
the contrary— that they can characterize as arrogant the attitude of a man, how- 
ever humble and powerless he be, who asserts his rights and fights for them. 
There is a praiseworthy attitude; it is not an arrogant attitude; it is the attitude 
which every man should adopt who will not brook any oppression and who would 
at least protest against it." 

The antis, however, had the situation well in hand. Seiior 
Quezon continued as senate president, while Manuel Roxas was 
deposed from the speakership. As a consequence, the legislature 
rejected the H-C-H law. Quezon and Roxas had been bosom 
friends, and the latter owed the former his election to the speaker- 
ship, but when an honest difference of opinion arose over the 
H-C-H act, both did not hesitate to take an uncompromising view, 
and both did not hesitate to terminate their political alliance. 

Followers of Osmena and Roxas now had a grievance to place 
before the people, who were nationalists in the majority and desired 
greater autonomy in any form. Quezon controlled the legislature, 
but elections were less than a year away. Wily Quezon imme- 
^ diatcly sailed for the United States to secure single-handed a better 
independence law. The odds were heavy against him. In- 
fluential Congressional lf^4ers had declared that the matter of 

76 



THE LASTIJDBL' WITH OSMEFfA 



Philippine independence was a closed question; Congress would not 
consider opening the topic for at least another two years. Senator 
Key Pittman, then ranking member of the senate committee on 
territories and insular affairs, was brutally frank in stating that 
the independence question was a closed matter. 

It is a tribute to President Quezon's tenacity, and diploniatic 

presentation of issues, that Congress passed a new measure called 
the Tydings-McDuifie law. El presidente's first task, upon arrival 
in America, was to win over Congressmen who were displeased at 
the rejection of the H-C-H law. Exerting his charming personality 
to the utmost. President Quezon was able to win over Senator Mil- 
lard Tydihgs. He even patched up his previous disagreement with 
Senator Joseph Robinson. With the help of Joseph Tumulty, a lob- 
byist who received P25,000 for his services, and former Senator 
Harry B. Hawes, the Quezon mission was able to get a more sym- 
pathetic heating for a better independence law. 

In the middle of January, 1934, Quezon submitted his formula 
to President Rooscvck. The outstanding features of the formula 
were: 1. Independence in two or three years with limited free 
trade based on the volume of average exports of the years 1932 and 
1933, and reciprocal trade relations after independence. 2. Alter- 
native was also offered of independence in 1940, and in the mean- 
time more autonomous government; and if this was accepted, in 
the meantime, a million tons of sugar, 200,000 tons of oil, and 6,- 
000,000 pounds of cordage to be sent duty-free from the Islands to 
the mainland; with special trade relations after independence in 
1940. Both plans carried provision for the neutralization of the 
archipelago. 

Congressional leaders, won over by Quezon's frankness and 
fact, and spurred by selfish interests which wanted to erect economic 
and labor barriers against their little brown brothers at any cost, 
compromised and left the matter up to the White House; President 
Roosevelt referred the case to his trusted lieutenant in Manila; and 
Governor General Murphy, who had kept strict neutrality during 
the H^C-H fight, naturally favored coSperation with whoever was 

71 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 

in power among the Filipinos. Thus the Tydings-McDuffic law 

was enacted. Again circumstances favored the man from Baler. 
Again he had done the impossible. 

The Osrox party was now without any real issue. The ground 
underneath them had been snatched away. The pros had assured 
the people that Congress would not pass an independence law for 
some years, but Quezon secured a new measure. It was true that 
the new law did not differ radically from the previous one, but 
all that the pros could do was to accuse Quezon of personal jealousy 
and aggrandizement. President Quezon, on the other hand, could 
very well say that he had secured a better substitute. The Tydings- 
McDuffie law contained in unequivocal terms that complete inde- 
pendence would ensue after the transition period of about 10 years; 
and it abolished military reservations. Furthermore, President 
Roosevelt promised that the matter of trade relations would be 
taken up soon, so as to make the economic provisions more equi- 
table to Filipinos, while the matter of naval reservations would be 
taken up at a later conference. As for the powers of the American 
High Commissioner, President Quezon astutely asked Governor 
Murphy to remain in the new capacity and thus establish a pre- 
cedent which a future Leonard Wood would find hard to break. 
Otherwise, the Tydings law was the same as the Hawes bill. And 
that is the reason why the Sakdalistas, in attacking the Tydings 
independence law, merely repeat the majority of the attacks made 
by the antis against the H-C-H law. 

The passage of the Tydings-McDuffie bill, approved on March 
2-4, 1934, definitely cinched the elections of the following June for 
the Quezon party. President Quezon had complete control of both 
chambers of the legislature. Fourteen senators sided with him, 
as against four for Osmena; sixty-three representatives voted for 

Qumtm Paredes as speaker, while only nineteen were for Manuel 
Roxas, 

The supremacy between him and Senator Osmena was ended. 



78 



CHAPTER VI 
Triumphant Leadership Reaffirmed 

qjfN the latter part of 1934, President Quezon left the Islands for 
^ an operation at the John Hopkins hospital in Baltimore. He 
was suffering from gaUstones. The operation was successful and 
Sefior Quezon became one of the joUiest patients of that hospital. 

From his bedside he discussed his experiences with urologists 
with reporters: "When I left Manila, the doctors told me I could 
drink nothing intoxicating. When I reached Java I saw a doctor, 
and he said 'a glass of beer would not hurt". So I drank beer from 
Java to Paris. In Paris another doctor said: 'You should not 
drink beer; wine is the only thing'. So I changed gratefully to white 
wine. Then a French specialist told me: 'You should drink only 
champagne, it is the only thing for you.' So I drank champagne 
for a time. 

"Then I reached the United States, and here my physicians tell 
me: 'Don't drink any wines and beers at all. Whisky is the only 
proper drink.* So now, if I want a drink, all I have to do is to 
decide which physician I will obey. But this time, we will drink 
the health of the American doctor in his own medicine." 

He returned to Manila on December 22, 1934, with his health 
fully recovered, and in the gayest of sphrits. He had reason to be 
happy. He knew he was going to be the first president of the Com- 
monwealth. He felt and looked 15 years younger that morning 
in December, as he related: 

"I told them in the hospital that prisoners convicted to the death penalty 
are usually given whatever food they ask for the day before their execution 
Well, the night before my operation I wanted 'adobo' above everything else and 
asked that, 'adobo' boisetved to me as my dinnef . Li Washington they had to 

79 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 

search high and low for a Filipino cook, and the 'adobo' once prepared was rushed 
to the hospital in Baltimore. 

"I did not want to worry my wife, so when I entered the hospital in New 
York, where I went first, I asked my physician to register me under another name. 
But the name he chose was Joe Brown, and who v.ouh! r.ikc me for a Brown? 
Besides, apparently they had seen my pictures in the papers, and one of the nurses 
approached me with a twinkle in her eyes and whispered: "Are yon really Mr. 
Brown?' 

"I never said a word to my wife about the operation. When I registered 
in the hospital at Baltimore, I did not want to take any clianccs. I feared my 
doctor would give me another American name if I asked him to give me a ficti- 
tious name, so I registered as Pedro Lopez, and Pedro Lopcss I was until the news- 
papermen discovered I was there. 

"When I was taken into the operating room and I saw Nieto, Estrada, Ehr- 
man and others who were with me with long faces, I cracked jokes right and left 

to cliccr them up. The doctors wanted to fool me by making it appear that I 
was going to be placed under anesthesia. One of the nurses had a piece of cotton 
covering my nose with some fake ether. I tried to inhale as deeply as I could 
but when after several seconds I felt I was not falling asleep, I peremptorily ordered 
the nurse to quit fooling me and to remove the cotton — which she did immedi- 
ately. 

"Then I saw the reflector right above me and everything that the surgeon 
was doing was reflected there, so I watched the reflector and was an interested 
spectator of my own operation, until the nurses caught sight of my eye and seeing 
what was happening placed a bandage on my eyes. All the time I was not feeling 
any pam. After 12 minutes of operation, Dr. Estrada approached me and I asked 
hun m Tagalog: 'Ano ba, doctor, ano bang kalokohan ang ginagawa pa dian?" 
(Well, doctor, what foolishness are they still doing there?) to which he answered 
that the stone had already been removed. When the last stitches were behig 
placed I felt the pain, and then I told the doctor it was time to stop. 

"Dr. Young is a remarkable surgeon and I don't think there is anyone like 
him^ anywhere in the world. He performed a wonderful operation, so wonderful 
It did not leave even a scar. All I have is a thin red line which looks like a pin 
scratch, and I can say that it is even elegant. 

The following day after the operation, I talked to my wife over the radio- 
phone, and two days afterward I was already working full blast, dictating letters 
and readmg books, so much so that I had a slight relapse, and the doctor had to 
give me strict orders to quit dictating and have complete rest. 

Now I feel younger, very much younger, and rarin" to go. . . . I'm glad 
that I connnued my trip, i m ^ot know chat my kidney was akeady swelling 

80 



TRIUMPHANT LEADERSHIP REAFFIRMED 



and that if I had remained here and was not operated on in time, I would be 
critically ill now, and maybe instead of welcoming the young man that yon 
are welcoming this morning, you would be visiting a decrepit old fellow in 
his sickbed, or accompanying him to the Ctmmtirio dtl Ntrtt. CThe cemetery.) 

*'It was a major operation and something not to be scoffed at. But I 
don't know what there is in mc that when a critical situation confronts me, 
I make the decision instantly, no matter what the consequences may be. Of 

course, when I was already on the operation table, I was worried by the fact 
that I did not tell the truth to my wife, and I was thinking of what she would 
say if I died without even bidding her goodbye." 

Such an account as this is an illuminating sidelight into the 
real character of the man and husband. 

A few weeks after his .irriv.al, President Quezon outlined eight 
points to be observed during the Commonwealth period .and .after: 
1. National unity and peace are absolutely essential to the preser- 
vation of Philippine independence. 2. The establishment of a 
strong national defense organization must be -carried out to dis- 
courage foreign invasion. 3. The Filipino people should realize 
the heavy responsibilities of an independent existence and should be 
prepared to face the future with fortitude and courage. 4. Taxes 
must be paid for the support of the government, but should be 
levied in proportion to the paying capacity of the citizens. 5. 
The eountfy should be made economically self-sufficient. 6. Abuses 
by high government officials, or by the rich and the powerful few, 
must not be tolerated. 7. The poor and the weak should not be 
oppressed and the fundamental governmental policy should be: not 
to make the poor poorer and the rich richer, but to make the poor 
rich and to provide relief for the needy. 8. Great care must be 
exercised in disposing of natural resources for development to power- 
ful corporations, as these should be preserved for future generations. 

President Quezon left the details of his program for future ex- 
ecution, while two immediate problems cor^ont his attention: 1. 
Some sort of a reciprocal trade agreement with the United States 
after the Commonwealth, so as to rescue such products as sugar and 
coconut oil, which arc absolutely dependent on the free American 
market^ 2. Protection of the PhilippiiQcs from possible foreign 

Si 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



aggression, preferably with the help of the United States. To 

discuss these two important paramount problems with Washington 
officials. President Quezon left Manila last February; he also had 
the Philippine Constitution in his pocket for the signature of Pres- 
ident Franklin Roosevelt. As a result, a round-table conference 
between Americans and Filipinos v/ill be held some time late this 
year to discuss these and other problems. 

In an interview recently given to a journalist in New York city, 
he gave a concise exposition of the problems facing an independent 
Philippines as follows: 

"The security of the Philippines is constantly my special concern. 1 have 
two clear-cut sets of ideas .ibout it. The first of these pcrt.-iins to economics, 
the second to military defense. We feel we have ten years — the ten years of 
America's continued presence in the Islands — in which to perfect our defenses. 
We hardly think any enemy would attack us while the American flag still flies 
over the country. 

■'Now as to my economic ideas. They Center entirely in the relations be- 
tween America and the Philippines. We want these relations to be as close, 
as friendly, and as mutually profitable as they possibly can be made. And I 
want to emphasize, mutually profttaWe. 

"We are not begging. We are talking business. We have raw tropical 
products which America needs and America has manufactured products which we 
nepd. 

"Mutually advantageous reciprocal arrangements should be easy, and they 
would be mutually advantageous, not only economically, but politically. Large 
American economic interests in the Philippines would give America a moral 
position in the West Pacific which would strengthen her diplomacy throughout 
East India. It would mean that, while she had left the Islands in a legal sense- 
had ceased to be responsible for their governance— she was still there, very de- 
cidedly, in an economic and moral sense. I regard that as of immense importance 
to settle down political conditions in the Far East. 

"Let no one mistake the opportunities for trade in the Philippines. They 
«c great at present, and they will be vastly greater as the^years go by. When 
the Stars and Stripes were raised over Mifeckflin Palace, there were 6,000,000 
Filipinos. That was a generation ago. Wc now have 14,000,000 people. In 
another generation we shall have 25,000,000. Luzon is two-thirds the size 
' ': ^'J»v»,i atjd Java has 51,000*000. Our islands arc as large as Great Britain, with 



TRIUMPHANT LEADERSHIP REAFFIEIMED 



a population of 43,000,000. And wc have the highest living-standard in Asia. 
There will be 40,000,000 of these consumers in the Philippines at no very distant 
day — a magtiificent prospective market. 

"And ic is the Jccp-scatcJ desire of our people to build up the great American- 
Filipino connection of which I speak. It seems natural, America has been long 
with OS. She has taught us much. Her splendid moral, educational, political 
and scientific imprint is a shining reality in the Islands. We arc used to American 
products, American ideas, American ways of life, and we like them. 

"We &el it would be an unspeakable pit)-, after all that America has done 
in the Philippines, for the two nations to drift apart, as they inevitably wOl 
unless they be welded together economically. Economics, in these times, deter- 
mines national destinies. If America declines to enter into the reciprocal trade 
relations suggested, the Philippines will be compelled to seek their economic 
future in other directions. 

"The economic side of my scheme of national defense consists in a progressive 
extension and consolidation of Filipino-American business, cultural, and senti- 
mental relations. And a very powerful defensive mechanism it would be, 
good alike for Americans and for us, and with its unmistakable weight in the 
scales of internatitmal peace. 

"Our military plans are purely defensive in conception and in limitation. 
My idea is to build an armament and munition factories, an arsenal and also an 
aviation factory, in the Islands. I will propose universal compulsory military 
training for our youth, and a highly-developed and well-equipped native army 
as a nucleus for our fighting power as a whole. Filipinos make very fine soldiers. 
They arc among the most peaceable of men, but, if wronged, they love to fight, 
and they know how to fight." 

"We do not contemplate a navy of any sort. We think of only coastal 
defense, a thing which I am assured, can be made extremely effective. As to the 
most of Philippine preparedness for self-protection, if competent opinion may be 
trusted, it should not exceed a twentieth of our national budget, or about 
$10,000,000 annually. In ten years we should be so strong in soldierly training, 
national discipline, and strategic fortification as to offer an emphatically un- 
attractive objective for aggression. 

"In any case, I want independence with all its risks. Independence is above 
price to individuals and to nations, and I do not think we shall be taking greater 
yisijs than others have taken, and taken successfully. 

' 'My desire is to have an independent Filipino nation join the League of Na- 
tions. The League has had its troubles, made its mistakes, fallen short of the 
full realization of its lofty aims, but its aims have been, and are, lofty; and I 
should wish the Philippines to do anything in their power to add to its inter- 
national force afii. Tilnp*'* . . 

.83 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



President Quezon is always a generous winner, in the same way 
that Senator Osmena is a good loser. The seeds of conflict sown 
during the H-C-H controversy had taken root, and followers of 
these two men bitterly opposed their union. But both Quezon and 
Osmena realized that partisan politics should give way to the best 
interests of the country; both of them, first one then the other, had 
ruled the country during the past three decades, and their rich ex- 
perience and services were badly needed at this crucial moment in 
the life of the nation. With characteristic aplomb, Quezon told 
his followers that he would not be a candidate for the presidency of 
the Commonwealth unless Senator Osmena was his running mate 
for the vice-presidency. Though the union of these two men were 
opposed by some selfish foliticos, the majority of Filipinos in public 
hfe favored the movement, and thus the coalition became a reality. 

From the viewpoint of practical politics, the coalition of these 
two great leaders was a wise move. It is not inconceivable that 
had Senator Osmena— if he had been willing— joined forces with 
General Emilio Aguinaldo, the political supremacy of President 
Quezon would have been seriously endangered. 

During the H-C-lJ controversy, Aguinaldo had sided with 
Quezon because of their common opposition to the bill. The general- 
issimo of the revolution wanted a short transition period — two 

M n ffi ''^^^ -^"^ ^^^^ Quezon secured the Tydings- 

McDuffie law, with a similar period of transition as the H-C-H bill, 
Aguinaldo naturally fought the new bill. Last May 25, he an- 
nounced his candidacy for the presidency; Raymundo Melliza of 
ouo, former associate jusfifcfe of the Supreme court, was candidate 
tor vice-president on the same ticket. 

Bishop Gregorio Aglipay, founder of the Filipino IndependcQt 
^^rotestant) church, who had remained in the background since 
C3.n6^^^°^f^ announced on June 5 that he was also a 

idate for the highest office under the Commonwealth; his chief 
w>v,°v Quezon." On the same ticket 

witn ma was Norberto Nabong. a Mamla radical. 

84 



TRIUMPHANT LEADERSHIP REAFFIRMED 

The coalition candidates conducted a dignified, front-porch 

campaign; their public statements were made to appeal to reason 
rather than prejudices, to the head rather than the heart. Agui- 
naldo stumped in central Ltizoci and the Visayas, but avoided the 
Ilocos provinces because of his unpopularity there with the follow- 
ers of the late General Antonio Luna, an Ilocano, who was sup- 
posedly killed at his instigation.' Bishop Aglipay proved to be the 
most colorful and sensational of the three candidates. The white- 
haired Iiisho]^, who is ncaring 70, spouted blood and thunder; he 
added the salt and pepper to an election which would otherwise 
have been colorless because of ' the one-sidedness of the outcome. 
It was a foregone conclusion, ever since the 1934 elections, that 
Manuel Quezon would become the first president of the Common- 
wealth. 

The election results were as follows: 

Fer President 

Manuel L. Quezon 695,332 or 67.93 

Emilio Aguinaldo 179,349 or 17.51 

Gregorio Aglipay 148,010 or 14.45% 

Pascual Racuyal i » 157 

Total 1,023,848 

The last-named candidate, an unknown from the southern 
islands, was the joker in the deck. 

For Vice-President 

Setgio Osmefia 812;352 or 86.9% 

Raymundo Melliza 70,899 or 7.5% 

Norbcrto Nabong 51,443 or 5-5% 

Total.......... 934.694 

President Quezon's victory at the polls was conclusive; he won 
in all 50t pr(S*i?nces except three — Cavite, bailiwick of Aguinaldo, 
"llsoc'os N6tt©anAiNi{©m.'V.&eaiPa whcte Aglipay was supreme. Scc- 



% 

% 



QUEZON; MAN OF DESTINY 



tionalism did not play an important part in these elections, unlike 
the 1934 elections over the H-C-H bill. Aglipay is an Ilocano, 
Aguinaldo a Tagalog, and Q uezon also a Tagalogj yet Quezon won 
in the Uocos provinces against ,in Ilocano, and in the Tagalog prov- 
inces against a Tagalog. In the Visayas, Quezon received an over- 
whelming majority. The city of Manila gave Quezon a decided 
surprise. Cities arc usually against the party in power; during the 
1934 elections, the city of Manila went heavily against Quezon. 
Yet last September, the capital gave Quezon a majority of nearly 
15,000 over Aguinaldo; and the cities of Cebu and Iloilo polled 
heavily in Don Manuel's favor. Quezon received four times as 
many votes as either of his opponents; his majority was twice the 
combined votes of the defeated candidates. The people had spoken 
overwhelmingly, decisively and conclusively in favor of President 
Quezon. 

The votes cast for Aglipay were mostly sectarian ballots from 
followers of his church; while a good number of those cast for 
Aguinaldo were protest votes against el fresidente. Had the bishop 
not entered the race, it is almost a certainty that Seiior Quezon 
would have gotten as great a majority over Aguinaldo, as Osmefia 
did over his two opponents. The total number of votes cast for the 
vice-presidency was about 100,000 less than that cast for president; 
there was not as much interest shown in the vice-presidential race 
as in the fight between Quezon, Aguinaldo and Aglipay. Both 
Melliza and Nabong did not possess national reputations, and were 
not powerful enough to take away votes from Osmena. 

Surrounded by his wife. Senator Osmena, and a few intimate 
friends. President Quezon awaited the first results of the elections 
at midnight that September 11. Senator Osmefia was the first to 
congratulate him, and offered his hand, but Don Manuel instead 
embraced Don Sergio. Then Don Manuel drank a silent toast to 
Dofia Aurora. 

"I feel happy, of course," he said to those around him. "Yet 
more awed than happy. The Filipino people have once again 
CQdorscd our leadership, and I'm gratified beyond words by their 



TRIUMPHANT LEADERSHIP REAFFIRMED 



overwhelming endors^ent. But luore than mere gratification, I 
feel the weight of the responsibility that has been placed on our 
shoulders anew. I am awed by the signiticance of this trust, and I 
can only pray God that we shall be equal to it. It is not the position 
itself, you see, that matters now however glorious it may be. It is 
the greater privilege that has become ours to serve the people, and 
cofTcsponding to this privilege the vaster responsibility which we 
must bear." 

"What will you do the first thing tomorrow morning?" he was 
asked. 

"I will not wait for the morrow," he characteristically replied. 
"Tonight, before I go to bed, I will fall down on my knees and thank 
God for this privilege of serving the people again. The days to 
come will be trying days for us and I will ask His help. Tomorrow 
morning, I will go to my oflicc at the Legislative building, and 
there be alone in the place where I have spent many years shaping 
as best as I may the destiny of our country. I have developed a 
sentimental attachment to that office; it has known my shadow and 
my voice more intimately than has my own home, and I will go 
there for leave-taking, as it ww- 

"And after that, I will go to Malacafian to thank Governor 

General Murphy for his kindness in calling up to congratulate me 
tonight. Tomorrow noon, I will be with my family — alone." 

Manuel Luis Quezon y Molina, who had risen from poverty in 
the humble town of Baler, was now the accepted leader of his 
country and his peoplfr— he was now the Man Of Destiny. 

* * * 

The Quezon of today is a totally different man from the Quezon 
of two decades, or even one decade, ago. He is now a statesman in 
the highest sense of the word, though he still has traces of the 
politician in hini. With increasing responsibility, he has become 

87 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



more of a realist and less of an optimist — he is more conservative 
in his public utterances than he used to be, specially at the time of 
General Wood. 

"I was once," he recently confessed, "among the most con- 
firmed of international optimists. I was one who believed — 
believed in my heart- that 'The War To End War' w.-is precisely that. 
My faith led me to desire that Filipino soldiers should fight in the 
war, and that Filipino mon^ should support it. I believed when 
that monstrous struggle was over, that aggression would be dead 
and war forever ended. 

"But now — ^my views have changed. My beautiful vision 
now eludes me. One sees the world bristling with armaments as 
never before. Everywhere, warlike manufacturers and chemists 
are busy, navies and armies are growing, warships arc maneuvering, 
soldiers are drilling, guns are rumbling, political and economic 
systems are clashing, people are disputing and quarreling, and one 
hears very little of a determination in any quarter to effectuate 
peace treaties. The scene is disturbing. Perhaps, just as I was 
too optimistic, too much of a dreamer — once — so I may be too pes- 
simistic, too much of a realist, now. I hope so. No statesman 
can rest his policy on a foundation of hopes." 

His election to the presidency, and the full realization that his 
words and deeds for the next six years will affect not only living 
Filipinos but generations yet to come, have had a sobering effect on 
him. 

A week after the elections, in a talk given before members 6f 
the Philippine Columbian association, he said: "This victory 
makes me a debtor to no particular group or individual; no political 
party will have the right to come to me and say, 'You must do this, 
Mr. President, for we have elected you.' I have been elected as 
the candidate of the two national parties in the Philippine Islands, 
and these two national parties have assumed with me the respon- 
sibility of carrying out the platform which the two parties in sep- 
arate conventions have jointly adopted. They, with me, arc 

88 



TRIUMPHANT LEADEjlSHIP REAFFIRMED 



bound to give this country a government free from political con- 
siderations, and I want to say right now that I intend to do this — 
whether the two parties desire to join me in doing it, or not. . . ." 

Frank talk from a man as candid as President Quezon, is hearten- 
ing to all Filipinos who have the welfare of their country at heart. 

A man as colorful and interesting as President Quezon has many 
facets to his personality; there are still numberless anecdotes and 

incidents which, when related in the near future, will accentuate 
or reveal some hidden trait of his character. 

In one of his numerous trips to Baguio, Dr. EJuardo Quisum- 
bing of the bureau of science once accompanied him. Upon their 
arrival in the Pines City, Dr. Quisumbing received a telegram stating 
that his son had been suddenly taken very ill. The President found 
out about it, and immediately volunteered, "Don't worry — ^we'll 
return at once this afternoon, instead of tomorrow." A devoted 
father himself, he sympathizes with the feelings of parents over 
their children, and is always solicitous and as helpful as he can be. 
He even forgets enmities incurred at the heat of political campaigns 
when affliction or sorrow visits his opponents. For example, when 
the son of Camilo Osias died. President Quezon without being asked 
gave one thousand pesos for funeral expenses, as he knew quite well 
that the former resident commissioner, who had been his bitter 
enemy during the Hawes-Cutting law controversy in 1934, had spent 
every centavo in a vain effort to combat him. Magnanimous to a 
fault, he has always been a noble adversary, and never harbors 
petty or bittef feelings against opponents once the struggle is over. 

President Quezon once bawled out one of his private secretaries 
for some mistake or the other. The secretary felt so bad about it 
that he immediately wrote a letter of resignation. Quezon re- 
ceived the letter while in a conference with some legislators. He 
had already forgotten about thie incident, and was surprised by the 
letter. He called the s&Xfi!tmy, who reminded him of what had 
happened. ; 

89 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



"Caramba," said el presidente, "is that all? I had forgotten all 
about it. I'm sorry I said anything to hurt you. If you want I 
shall apologize before all these gentlemen for what I said." 

As Manuel Nieto, his intimate friend and bodyguard, ones 
remarked: "President Quezon's fuficta is more of a benediction 
than a malediction." 

Unlike George Washington, with that bed-time story of the 
cherry tree, Quezon once hedged around the truth to prevent his 
children from knowing facts which were "not nice." He was ac- 
companied by his children on one of his recent trips to Europe. 
While promenading one day in Monte Carlo, they c:unc across two 
members of the mission — both newspapermen — wlio were having 
refreshments at a caf6 near the Casino in the company of two beau- 
tous French blondes. 

"Daddy," said one of the children, after el presidente had cour- 
teously tipped his hat to his friends, "who are those ladies?" 

"Oh — " he replied, as he cleared his throat, then explained 
like a perfect gentleman, " — oh, those ladies are their secretaries. . . " 

Frank and honest by disposition, Quezon also appreciates 
those qualities in others. Late one night, after all the important 
visitors had departed from his Pasay home, a man wanted to see him. 
The man, who had been waiting half the day to see the senate- 
president, was a minor employee in the bureau of printing. He said 
that he had been included in the blacklist prepared by the Secretary 
of Interior for being a Communist and was going to be discharged; 
with a large family dependent on him, he pleaded, he could not 
afford to be without employment. 

"Is it true that you are a Communist?" asked Quezon. 

The man paused, then quietly replied: "Yes, senor presidente." 

Suddenly President Quezon realized that here was a man, a 
humble government employee, who had the courage of his convic- 

90 



TRIUMPHANT LEADERSHIP REAFFIRMED 



dons in the face of disaster itself. He patted the caller on the back 
as he promised: "I like your frankness, and I shall do what I can 
for you." 

The employee was not discharged, and to this day remains one 
of the stauachest supporters of the president. 

Did you know that President Quezon also bears the legal sur- 
name of Antonio? Santiago Antonio and liis wife, humble res- 
idents of Manila, had known Quezon since 1901 and had even given 
him free board and lodging in their poor house, first in Pandacan 
and later in Santa Cruz, until Don Manuel was appointed fiscal. 
Years later, Quezon took care of them in" their old age and never 
failed to give them a monthly pension in gratitude for what they 
had done for him when he was an obscure, impoverished student. 
El presidente lield the old man with such great affection that he 
consented in 1923 to be legally adopted by lAang Tiago, who was 
then 78 years old. Thus his full legal name is Manuel Luis Quezon 
Antonio y Molina. When Mang Tiago passed away some years 
ago, Don Manuel cried as if his own father had died. 

President Quezon is by no means the inflexible, unbending per- 
sonality that he sometimes appears. In fact, he has been accused 
of lacking in tenacity; the sort of a person, they say, who can be 
influenced by those nearest to him. In the American community 
at Manila, there is a saying that "when Osmcfia promises some- 
thing, you can safely go to sleep on it, as he'll fulfill it no matter 
what happens. ' ' This adage was particularly popular after Quezon 
had broken his promise to Wood to sell the Cebu Portland Cement 
company. But his complete reversal of attitude was proof that he 
was no dictator; on the contrary, he changed his position in ac- 
cordance with Filipino public opinion. He was the servant of the 
people — and not their master. 

In 1925, President Quezon frequented a certain cabaret so often 
that it became an open scandal. The then editor of the Tribune, 
Carlos P. Romulo, wrote scathing editorials attacking the senate- 

91 



QUE2X5N: MAN OF DESTINY 



president's open departure ^om official decorum. The attacks 
got nnder el fresidmtes skin and so he sent for Romulo. 

"If you stop writing those clirorials, I'll Stop g<iing to caba- 
rets — but if you keep on printing them, I'll go there every night 
just to spite you!" bargained the senate-president. 

"The latter part will not then be necessary," assented the 
young editor. 

True to his agreement, Quezon checked his bohemian pro- 
pensities and has behaved ever since in public like a respected and 

proper leader of the nation. 

A male as gallant to females as President Quezon is of course in 
favor of woman suffrage. But back in 1914, he was against it as his 
speech before Congress testifies: 

"I believe in the political eqnaUty of mea and women. I woald not sub- 
scribe to the theory that the right to vote belongs exclusively to man becanse 
of his sex; therefore I would not withhold the franchise from women if they 

wanted to exercise it; but neither would I impose this duty upon them against 
their will. ... I am opposed Cto suffrage) because the women of my country — 
practically all of them, so far as I know their will — do not want to vote." 

That was at the time when the question of women's rights was 
one of the dominant topics before the American people. By 1916, 
when the insular Senate was created, President Quezon underwent 
a change of attitude. With Senator Rafael Palma, he delivered a 
long, vigorous oration urging the granting of the ballot to Fili- 
pino women. Perhaps it was a chivalrous gesture on his part, or 
merely good politics; but that he is sincere on this point is proved 
by the fact that since then he has always favored giving the fran- 
chise to women. He has not forced his views on the subject, how- 
ever, on his fellow-legislators, and has left them free to decide on 
the matter. As a result, Filipino women will not be allowed to 
vote during the Commonwealth unless the Constitution is amended. 

When he returned on April, 1934, after bringing the Constitu- 
tion to President Roosevelt for signature, a delegation of women 

92 



TRIUMPHANT LEADERSHIP REAFFIRMED 

met him at the boat. He warmly congratulated them for getting 
a suffrage law. 

"But Mr. President," wailed the women, "wc arc not voting 
in the next elections — not yet." 

"No?" the president knitted his brows for a moment. "Well, 
all right — wc shall have the law amended — " 

The women smiled. He paused and smiled back: "All right, 
we shall have it amended so that the women will never vote!" 

The feminists alternately groaned and smiled at el fresidentes 
little joke. 

Smart in parrying questions, he has eluded reporters more than 
once on non-diplomatic topics. Last year, while on his way back 

to the Philippines, Japanese reporters asked him pointblank if he 
would recognize Manchukuo when the Islands became independent. 

"I can't say what the new government will do," he parried. 

"But you will be the first president of the Republic — you must 
know what it will do," insisted the newshawks. 

"Do you think so?" asked Don Manuel as he smiled broadly. 

"Yes, and we hope you will be!" replied the Nippon news- 
papermen. 

"But perhaps I'll be too old then. At any rate, before wc can 

recognize Manchukuo, the Philippine Republic will first have to be 

recognized by Japan. Will she do so?" 

"Yes!" chorused the newspapermen, characteristically drawing 
in their breath sharply between closed teeth. They smiled and 
bowed, as they realized that el presidente had turned reporter instead 
of celebrity. 

Don Manuel's sense of humor has saved him some times from 
being placed in a disadvantageous position. Once, while en route 
to Manila, reporters noticed the model of a Japanese warship in his 

93 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



cabin. The newshawks facetiously remarked that perhaps the 
model was a sign of coming events. J'icsidcnc Quezon laughed it 
off; he explained that it was a gift for his son, and added, "in order 
to avoid illusions of political storms awaiting the Philippines, it 
might be better if the model were placed in the hold where it would 
not be seen." 

When the Haiun Maru incident took place nearly a year ago, 
involving Japanese jBshing poachers who had manhandled con- 
stabulary soldiers, President Quezon tempered the seriousness of 
the occasion by humorously remarking: "If they don't look out, 
I'll send the Madrigal and Elizaldc fleets against tlicm!" It might 
be explained that the Madrigal and Elizaldc fleets consist of a few 
ships used in interisla&d commerce. 

President Quezon has reputedly amassed millions during his 
public career — ^but these are only canards circulated in the Iieat of a 
political campaign. General Aguinaldo hinted something about 
it during his fight with Don Manuel at the time of Wood; and again 
former Secretary of Interior Honorio Ventura during the H-C-H 
issue. In answer to these charges, he related: 

"After our first hzhy came, the need for making money became fiiore evident 
to me, and I went into a business v. ith Judge Ortigas at his own invitation. He, 
Jodge Ortigas and Mr. Whitakcr, were buying a very big property and they were 
virdling to take me in as their partner with onc-clcvcnth sh;irc. Real estate 
business can have no possible incompatibility with my duties as president of the 
senate or senator, and I accepted the proposition provided I found the money I 
had to put— which I did not have. 

"Through the guarantee of my friend Mr. Tomas Earnshaw, I secured a one 
hundred thousand peso loan from the National bank — Mr. Earnshaw having 
at the time three times as much deposit in cold cash in the said bank. My partic- 
ipation in the real estate to be purchased answered for my debt. The business 
was a success. I paid my debt to the bank, and from what I made out of this 
transaction I have been acqoiring other properties. 

"My total rent at present C1934) « not more than 'P12,000 a year, although 
when I need mote itaohey I borrow it, or sell some property of mine. All I have 
left now is ray house in Pasay, another in Mariquina and one more in Baguio. 
A big piece of land in Baler, over 1,000 hectares, belonged to my father through 

94 



TRIUMPHANT LEADERSHIP REAFHRMED 



occupadon tinder the Spanish laws and which he was never able to cnltivate. 

This property, which originally was about 3,000 hectares — because it was left 
unattended by me — was occupied by homesteaders. When I went to Baler and 
found that nearly two-thirds of the property had been occupied by homesteaders, 
I allowed them to keep all that they were occupying. What was left does not 
yield a centavo, and steps have already been taken for its distribution among the 
people of my town. 

"Besides, I have a coconut plantation — about 3,000 trees — in Sariaya, also 
worthless at this time; 200 hectares of land in Nueva Ecija which yet gives me 
no retuin; a participation in a real estate in Balintawak from the sale of which 
I get about 1*6,000 a year; one small lot near the University of Santo Tomas; 
two fishponds, practically the only property which gives mc any income; and 
about 'P6,000 worth of gold mine stocks." 

Don Manuel later had cause to thank his lucky stars for having 
donated his paternal land to homesteaders. "Thank heavens," he 
said to his friends after the presidential elections, "that I had given 
the land as a gift. Those homesteaders were all Ilocanos, and good 
Aglipayanos, but they all voted for me. Imagine how politically 
embarrassed I would have been had I failed to win in my own native 
town of Baler!" 

As Balcf is his home town, as well as that of his wife. President 
Quezon has a strong sentimental attachment for the place. In his 
Pasay home, he -has a big aerial picture of the town with these 
words: "Where First I Saw The Light Of Day." 

There must have several times during his public career that 
President Quezon felt sorry he ever entered politics. Was the 
neglect of his wife and family sufficiently compensated by service 
to his country? Politics is a fickle mistress to serve, and Don Manuel 
must have been sorry more than once that he had ever chosen a 
political career. His nimierous attempts to retire bear out this 
point. Once, while on his way back to Manila from Europe after 
the conference with Senator Osmena over the Hawes-Cutting bill, 
he confided to Marcial P. Lichauco: 

"I advise you never to go into politics — it's a disillusionment, 
and remember that the person telling you this has made a success 
of politics. Yet, take it from mc, don't enter politics if you can 
avoid it." 



95 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



This statement was unquestionably sincere. He had known 

for a long time Attjr. Lichauco, who was technical adviser of the 
Osrox mission. Lichauco had been one of his prot6g6s. 

Having risen liimsclf from the masses. President Quezon has the 
welfare of the taos and workers at heart, though in the past he has 
been too preoccupied with affairs of national importance to have 
paid tliem more than a passing attention. When toliacco factory 
workers decided to mariagc their own plant, the Katubusan, he was 
active in helping them raise funds. He was also responsible for 
inserting a provision protecting laborers in 1918, when the Manila 
Tobacco association and the Cigar Makers' union were at logger- 
heads. He is also said to have been the first arbiter in the archi- 
pelago between labor and capital. When cigar and cigarette work- 
ers at La Germinal went on a strike. Commissioner Quezon me- 
diated and offered his own salary to feed the family of the men on 
strike, but the generous offer was not accepted by the grateful work- 
ers. Now that the plight of our masses has been forcibly brought 
to the attention of our leaders, laborites can take heart with these 
encouraging words of President Quezon: 

"The fate of the proletariat In our country should engage our best thought 
more than ever^ We now have in our midst the seeds of discooteat which is not 
wholly unwarranted. There arc tenants in the Philippines who work through- 
out life and live in the most abject misery, only to die burdened with debt to the 
landowner for whom they have toiled. This state of afFairs must stop. And our 
factory laborer docs not yet enjoy the right enjoyed by the laborer in other civi- 
lized countries. We should give our laborers what in equity belongs to them." 

What is President Quezon's greatest achievement? The Jones 
law was an important victory, but the Tydings-McDuffie law was 
even greater. These two accomplishments, however, pointed to 
one end— that of independence. In the words of President Quezon 
on his fifty-sixth birthday, when he evaluated his own work: 

Of course, my most important achievement is to have contributed to the 
realization of the national ideal of the Filipino people to become an independent 
nation. 

96 



TiaUMPHANT LEADERSHIP BEAFFIRMED 



"I don't claim to have the sole — not even the main — credit for the achieve- 
ment of this great national undertaking. But it is the one cause to which I have 
dedicated my life. I fought for it on the field of battle as well as in the halls 

of Congress, and on my last mission to the United States I brought the law which 
assured to the Filipinos the grant of their complete independence. 

"On this occasion it is well for all of us to acknowledge that the foundations 
for this national edifice have been laid by the Filipino licrocs and martyrs of the 
past, and it is to them that our people owe an eternal debt of gratitude. 

"Nor should we forget the living — the President of the erstwhile Philippine 
Republic and the commander-in-chief of its forces. General Agninaldo; and fmrnet 
Speaker Osmciia. 

"I also wish to pay tribute to my collaborators of later days: former Speaker 

Roxas, and the members of my delegation, Senator Quirino, Commissioner Ga- 
baldon; and last but not least. Speaker Paredes, who in my absence, while on 
my last mission to America, with president pro-tempore Qarin and Senator 
Recto, bore the brunt of the work in the Philippines. 

"My most important immediate task is to make sure, as far as human fore- 
sight and ability can make it, that the independence of the Philippine Islands will 
mean safety, freedom and prosperity for the people of the Philippines. In tliis 
task, the full cooperation of the Filipino people is required, and I earnestly ask 
my people to give it to me. 

"In general, I should say that we have to see to it that our government win 
the confidence, not only of our nationals, but of foreigners as well. This will 
go a long way to win for us the respect of the world, and to avoid any cause or 
excuse for foreign interference with our affairs. 

"We must have a constitution that will vouchsafe to us our individual and 
political liberties and the stability of our public institutions. 

"But the constitution alone, no matter how wise and farseeing in its terms, 
is a dead letter unless the character and the spirit of the people give it life." 

The government of the Commonwealth will necessarily be 
a strong central government. Senator Kenneth McKcIlar, member 
of the congressional mission which came here on a trip last year, 
claims that a provision erecting a dictatorship was struck out at 
the last minute from the Philippine Constitution at the request of 
Quezon who had learned that McKellar had been told about it. 
It does not matter whether this is true or not. Our president him- 
self has noted that: "The Constitution of the Philippines gives tre- 
mendous powers to the President; powers that are not given by the 

97 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTDSTY 



constitution of the United States to the President of the United 
States. I expect to make use of those powers if and when it jxny be 
necessary. But I expect to tisc them only for the good of our peo- 
ple." 

El presideiite is an admirer of Bci^iro Mussolini, iron man of 
Italy. "He talks loud but everybody can rely upon him to do the 
right thing," Don Manuel once remark-cd. On tlic other hand, 
Senor Quezon does not care at all for Adolf Hitler of Germany. 
"That's not my idea of a leader," he said of Der Fuehrer, who be- 
lieves that the choice of 90 per cent of the German people should be 
the incarnation of their will, aspirations and even their prejudices. 

How President Quezon will fit in the scheme of Philippine 
history, only the next six years can tell. It is not improbable 
that he will fall into a class all by himself, and will neither be 
a Gandhi nor a Mussolini — of even a Franklin D. Roosevelt. 

To a great number of persons. President Quezon is an enigma — 

yet he is no more of an enigma than you or I. It is true that he is 

subject to sudden changes in attitude and conviction, specially 

when he is personally undecided. But once he sets out on a course 

of action, he is as implacable as a Simon Legree. He is susceptible to 

contradictory utterances; but we must bear in mind that el presidente 

IS a oimblc-wittcd speaker who dishes out to his audience what 

they want to hear. He is a past-master of political trial balloons — 

statements issued to catch how the wind of public opinion is blow- 
ing. 

Adverse critics of our president charge him with being incon- 
sistent in his political ideology. In a way they are right. But 
most of his so-called inconsistencies are the result of growth of 
thought and an accumulation of experience; men who hold a set of 
fixed views for a score of years without an iota of change fall into the 
class of backward, reactionary persons with fossilized brains. Pres- 
ident Quezon is a dynamic, not a static, personality. 

Take the matter of the Philippines and foreign aggression, 
favored the neutralization of the archipelago at the beginning, 

98 



TRIUMPHANT LEADERSHIP REAEFIRMED 



as witnessed by his maiden speech before Congress way back 
May 14, 1910, when he said: 

"As ;i s;ifcguarJ of the independence of the Philippines, the Filipinos ask of 
the Amcricaa people their good offices in favor of the neutralization of the Is- 
lands. The Filipinos firmly believe that in order to consununate the great werk 
inaugurated by the United States in those Islands, she will not refuse to take the 
necessary steps to bring about the agreements of the great nations of the world 
for the neatralization of the archipelago." 

Yet about 15 years later, in an authorized interview given to 
Nicholas Roosevelt for the New York Thaes, he said: 

"We do not fear that any n.uion will attempt to capture these Islands once 
America has withdrawn from them. World conditions no longer permit an act 
of wanton aggression such as an atuck on a defenseless Philippines. Our very 
weakness is our strength. Besides, it will be in the interest of eveiy nation that 
the Philippines remain free from the control of another nation once they have been 
given their independence by the United States. 

"... I have every reason to believe that the withdrawal of American sov- 
ereignty from the Philippine Islands will remove one danger of potential mis- 
understanding between some nations having interests in the Far East." 

This PoUyana attitude was, of course, for the benefit of Amer- 
ican readers. He would indeed have been a poor psychologist 
had he voiced fear of Japan or aay other country; the American 
public would wrongly take this to mean that the Filipinos did not 

want complete independence, and the Japanese would resent the 
implied accusation. He may have deviated from a fixed goal, like 
a wise navigator who shifts his course to take advantage of contrary 
wri&ds and currents, but has nevertheless remained steadfast to 
his purpose. 

By 1935, President Quezon's views on the subject underwent 
an evolution; he became a thorough-going realist. Before a group 
of American university-trained Filipinos at the Philippine Colum- 
bian clubhouse last January 15, he said: 

"One of the most important problems of the commonwealth is national 
defense. We should get ready to defend our country. There are those who 
believe that the countty would be safe under a neutrality agreement. That was 

99 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 

also my opinion. I thought thnt if •vc could secure a neutrality treaty, wc would 
be just as safe as if wc had sufJicient force to defend our country. But anyone 
who has not learned from the experiences of the last 20 years, must either be blind 

or a fool or both. Thank God I am neither. 

"The neutralization of the Philippines is O.K. We should taJce advanugc 
of the authority given to the President of the United States under the Tydings- 
McEhiffic act to negotiate a treaty for the neutralization of the Islands, but wc 
cannot rely on that treaty alone: we must get busy and be prepared to defend 
ourselves, just in case some one should decide to proclaim that treaties are mere 
scraps of paper." 

Now take the matter of economic relations witli the United 
States. On this subject he has maintained a more consistent at- 
titude. When there was talk in Congress during the early months 
of 1928 to limit the entry of duty-free Philippine sugar to the United 
States, President Quezon said to the Associated Press: "The Philip- 
pine Islands are prepared to lose the protection of American tariff 
in exchange for freedom." 

That was a do or die statement, a clear-cut presentation of the 
issue: he would not sell his country's birthright to liberty for a 
mess of pottage. 

But like the shrewd bargainer that he is. President Quezon 
would like to have independence with free trade, as it is to the 
advantage of the Filipinos to maintain economic ties with the United 
States. "Many of our industries depend for their existence on our 
reciprocal free trade relations with the United States, and we should 
try to maintain these trade relations if possible, even after independ- 
ence, he said in his acceptance speech for nomination to the pres- 
idency. 

President Quezon's political ideology during his long career 
as a public man is illuminating as well as interesting. The Philip- 
pine National Library presented him as a gift on his last birthday 
eight fat typewritten volumes of his speeches and articles about him 
aurmg the last three decades. Evidently, even an extract of such 
speeches would be out of place in a popular biography like this. 
Of all his numerous public talks, his acceptance speech for nomina- 



100 



TRIUMPHANT LEADERSHIP REAFFIRMED 



tion to the prcsidenc7 last July 20 was undoubtedly the finest and 
most statesmanlike. The speech is reprinted in full at the appendix 

to tliis \(i!uine. 

Nobody can deny that el presidetite is sometimes inconsistent 
— specially on purely political topics. As a member of the first Phil- 
ippine Assembly, he publicly admitted that the rates of taxation were 
quite low; as a resident commissioner, he complained before Con- 
gress of the high taxes; and yet, when he became president of the 
senate, the Legislature increased the rate of taxation because of the 
increase in government expenditures. Other instances of this sort 
can undoubtedly be reproduced. No man who has been in the 
public spotlight as long as President Quezon, and who has under- 
gone a progressive evolution in his education and outlook, can 
escape the charge of inconsistency. 

At his worst, his enemies call him an opportunist; that is, he 
takes advantage of every opportunity with little or no regard for 
principles or ultimate consequences. The preceding pages have 
shown how unfair is this cliarge. It cannot be denied that he has 
risen to power, rather ruthlessly perhaps, and allowed the thought 
of personal gain to creep into his decisions— but that is a 
trait common to all great leaders— from Franklin Roosevelt, 
Adolf Hitler, Benito Mussolini, and Chiang Kai-shek down to 
Josef Stalin. 

As Manuel Quezon starts on his six-year term as first president 
of the Philippine Commonwealth, he enjoys the unbounded con- 
fidence of his fellow-countrymen. 



101 



D05fA AURORA ARAGON DE QUEZON 
Heti she is seen wearing the Maria Clara dress of long ago. 



FIRST LADY OF THE LAND 



ARLY one morning about three years ago, a limousine purred 

on its way ;il ong the smooth concrete road surface of the Manila 
North road. Some 40 miles from Manila, just before reaching 
the town of San Fernando, Pampanga, the automobile slowed down 
as it approached an excited group oltaos or farmers on the road. 

A well-dressed man detached himself from the group and 
noticing the low license plate number of the car, exclaimed: "Please 
—senora, please help me— these people arc going to lynch me!" 

The sole passenger of the limousine did not recognize the man 
who had asked her help. Her car had stopped and without a 
moment's hesitation, she opened the door and got down. At a 
glance she noticed that the man's car had struck a tao who lay un- 
conscious on the dusty road. Country people in the Philippines 
have an annoying habit of manhandling and even lynching motorists 
who run over pedestrians regardless of who may be at fault. 

The crowd was in an ugly mood. Brown faces, usually im- 
passive, looked sullen and dangerous. The injured man had been 
lying there for several minutes, yet nobody had done anything to 
help him. The female relatives of the injured man were audibly 
weeping, while the men stood ominously silent. Most of them 
gripped stout cudgels while a few silently unsheathed wicked- 
looking bolos or long knives that brightly shone in the morning sun. 

The newcomer made her way to the center of the aowd where 
the unconscious man lay. 

' 'Quick," she ordered in theTagalog dialect to those around her, 
"lift him up gently and bring him to my car." Nobody moved. 
She had spoken in Tagalog, and as the taos were Pampangos who 
spoke a different dialect, only one or two understood what she had 
said. Somebody translated her order. Yet nobody moved to obey. 

103 




QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 

"What are you going to do with him?" truculently demanded 

one ot the male relatives. 

and "■^""^ ^'""/^ hospital," she replied. Tiic friends 

coir r'Tf unconscious man looked indecisive. Poor 

they co^uld^t^^'^j,'"'^' ^^^^^ 

person tn ^^.S^^P "'^'^^^^^i^X of hringin^-^ the injured 

?f '"S "^<=-ntime. precious minutes-miiuS 

^i"ch meant I,fe or death-were being lost. 

aen sLri,^'u^"f '-^""o^ncea calmly, quietly. The 

ecotlif'r ^"^^ ^""^^"^'^ ^^"^ grip on the sticks a! 
taken offfT ^'^T^'^^"^"^- Mattered straw hats were furtively 

en off ,n respect. The women stifled their sobs. ^ 

-oAinrCe^^f:"^""'>"rj""^ Q"^-^"" -'-he same 

the hosStT V , ""^ '^^'^"S^t ^t once to 

fro. .the Btt7;r ^^'^ ^« 



Now ° ''''^ "'■^ ""^il '^c IS well and strong again 

And ' ^ ^ '° '^'^ hospital. • ' ^ ^ 

»«uatio'n th -'^h which she had tactfully metThe 

P'^tCore^'';' readily helped the injured man to the c^ 
irovernm i . °^ '^^'^ w^i'^h had caused the injury a 

i vcrnrncnt official, was allowed to depart in peace-without even 
insulting word from the wounded man's relatives. 
^i^C did not recognize at the time the man who had asked her 
Protection from the fury of the mob, yet it was characteristic of her 
to come to the aid of a stranger without a thought as to the possible 
perBond consequences of her intervention. She instantly sized 
up a tense situation and quickly suggested a sensible solution. She 
did not know how badly the fao had been hurt, yet she readily 
promised to save his life and to return him as sound as if he had never 
met with the accident. When she got to Baguio, the summer 
capital, she called twice a day by long distance telephone to inquire 
about the condition of the patient. The doctors at the provincial 



104 



FIRST LADY OF THE LAIO 



hospital wanted to amputate a leg of the injured man, but she pre- 
vailed on them not to do so. As a result, after several weeks, the 
man returned to his family as vigorous and sound as ever. Mrs. 
Quezon had kept her word. 

DoHa Aurora Aragon de Quezon, wife of the first president- 
elect of the Philippine Commonwealth, is one of those rare women 
who have remained as charming and unaffected in eminence and 
power as in poverty and obscurity.. This is the opinion not only of 
her closest friends who have known her since childhood, but of the 
thousands of Filipinos and Americans who have met her several 
times. She is as gracious to the humble taos of the rice paddy fields 
as to the grande damts of cosmopolitan Manila; she is equally at 
home in the nipa shack in a remote barrio of the Islands, as in stately 
Malacahan Palace. 

The fact that she once lived in great poverty and toiled with her 
bare hands for her subsistence, is one of the reasons why she has 
preserved that democratic quality of treating everybody she meets 
on an equal level. 

Youngest in a family of eight children, Doiia Aurora was born 
on February 19, 1888, in the little town of Baler, Tayabas. This 
town is located on the eastern coast of Luzon, largest island of the 
archipelago, and is bounded on the cast by the blue waters of the 
Pacific and on the west by the rugged Sierra Madre mountains. In 
this sleepy town of Baler, with scarcely a population of 2,000 in- 
habitants, grew Dona Aurora. Her parents, Don Pedro Aragon 
and Dona Zeneida Molina de Aragon, were one of the well-to-do 
and influential families of the district. They christened her "Au- 
rora," the Spanish word for Dawn, because she was the youngest 
and prettiest of all her sisters. 

Dona Maria Molina de Quezon, her aunt and mother of her 
future husband, was her first teacher. At the age of four she started 
to learn her ABC's. But Dona Maria died about a year later, and 
Aurora's eldest sister Emilia, who taught in the town public school, 
undertook to teach her. At the age of six, little Aurora was deemed 
bright enough to enter the school at the convent of the Franciscan 
friars of the town. The friars at that time conducted practically 

105 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



all schools outside of Manila and controlled all affairs — religious, 
educational, and civil — in such country towns as J3:ilcr. 

But in 1896 the Filipinos led by General Emilio Aguinaldo 
revolted against Spain. News traveled slow in those days and it 
took weeks for information to percolate from Manila to Baler. 
When the commandant of the Ca^^adorcs, or the Spanish troops, in 
Baler learned of the insurrection, he forcibly seized members of 
several leading families of the town as hostages. These Filipinos 
were imprisoned in the town church, the only stone building in the 
entire district. And among those kept under duress was eight- 
year-old Aurora. 

"All those things that happened then now seems like a dream," 
recalls Mrs. Quezon. "Of course, I was then only a little girl — • 
and it happened so long ago. At that time — ^as I had never been 
anywhere outside of our little town — the blue sky up above seemed 
to belong to Baler, and only to Baler. I didn't know that there 
were other skies, reaching to farther and wider horizons." 

Her father had unfortunately gone down to Manila and been 
implicated with the revolt, and so according to the good old Spanish 
customhewas throwninto the famous jail of the "Bartolina". This 
was a dungeon in one of the stone walls which surrounded the old 
fortress of Manila, and water seeped through the thick walls from 
the moats with the ebb and flow of the tides. At high tide, the 
brackish water rose to a height of several feet, and scores of Filipino 
political prisoners perished either by drowning or later from the 
effects of their incarceration in that damp, filthy hole. To make 
matters worse, the Spanish government, after concluding a treaty 
with the revolutionists, confiscated Don Pedro's properties in Baler. 

Thus in 1898, before Admiral Dewey steamed into Manila Bay, 
did Dona Aurora abandon her studies to earn a living. Her father 
bad become sick, while her mother was getting old in years. Dressed 
like any other poor Filipino girl of the fields, in a skimpy skirt 
and wilted chemise, ten-year-old Aurora and her sister Amparo — 
who Was eight years older — pounded rice in the crude wooden 
mortar used by the poorest of the taos. Often she went barefooted 
and wore wooden shoes that hurt her tender feet. At short inter- 

106 



FIRST LADY OF THE LAND 



vals, they journeyed to the adjacent forests to gather firewood, and 
carried water from the nearby river in earthen jars. With crude, 
home-made soap that burned their hands, they washed the family 
clothes regularly every week. The sisters planted a little vegetable 
garden wliere they could raise sweet potatoes and a few vegetables. 
During the rainy season, they went out on bare feet to plant each 
stalk of rice, knee-deep in the oozy mud. Sometimes the sisters 
walked for miles in the hot tropical sun to gather a few handfuls of 
rice or corn, and carried their burdens in small earthen jars balanced 
on top of their head. Constant exposure to the sun made them 
as brown as any farm maiden, though they were naturally light- 
complexioncd because of the Spanish blood in their veins. 

Their home had been confiscated by the Spanish government, 
so Dona Aurora's family moved into a nipa hut not larger in area 
than five square meters. In that little hovel made of bamboo and 
palm leaves, the family of five ate, lived and worked. The bedroom 
was also the living room as well as the kitchen. There were no 
beds, no mattresses, only the split bamboo strips of the floor to lie 
down on. 

In that atmosphere of poverty and hardship. Dona Aurora's 
personality began to take shape and evolve into the lovable First 
Lady of the Philippines that she is now. To her dying day she will 
never forget that epoch of her life, and that is the main reason why 
she treats the poor and the rich alike, the humble tao on an equal 
basis as the mighty cacique. 

Her father died in 1901, leaving her alone in the world with her 
mother and two elder sisters. Though Aguinaldo had just been 
captured by the Americans, the district was still in an unsettled con- 
dition, and banditry flourished. Her cousin, Manuel, who was 11 
years her senior, was then starting to make a name for himself as a 
lawyer, and it was he who later paid her expenses as a student at the 
Philippine Normal school in Manila. On April, 1904, the three 
sisters went to Lucena, the capital of the province, to live there with 
their mother. Her cousin had become the Provincial Fiscal or 
prosecuting attorney of Tayabas. The following year Doiia Aurora 
came to. Manila and enrolled at the normal school, where she stayed 

107 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



as an interna or boarder. This school was started by Americans to 
train Filipinos who were eventually to become teachers. 

Young Aurora was placed at the lowest rung of the educational 
ladder — grade IB, in spite of her previous schooling. A more sen- 
sitive girl would not have gone to classes, for she was then seven- 
teen and the majority of her classmates were around eight! But 
she was bright and eager to learn, and finished both primary and 
intermediate grades vv-ithin three years. Senorita Aurora was 
extremely pretty and popular with girls as well as with boys. She 
was fond of dancing the carifiosa, the Filipino folk dance, and always 
took part in the various entertainments and parties given by the 
school. 

She fell ill in 1907 and was ordered by her doctor to stop study- 
ing. She was then anaemic and not very strong. So back to Baler 
she went. She was ambitious to learn more than wliat she had 
studied in school, however, and began to cultivate the reading habit. 
She read every conceivable book in English, Spanish and Tagalog. 
Though she never had the opportunity to further her schooling, 
constant reading and personal observation have broadened her 
knowledge and outlook on life. Today she is one of the most 
cultured of Filipino women. 

"My faith in reading good books is great," she confided. "I 
did not learn very much from school. I do not know how I would 
have learned to write and speak intelligently if I had not read so 
assiduously after I stopped going to school. Even now, I keep on 
studying by reading worthwhile books. ' ' She has a private library 
of some 2,000 books on all topics. During the past two years, she 
has started a collection of Filipiniana. At a recent birthd.ay of hers, 
when friends showered her with gifts, she complained that not one 
of them had given her a book. 

The impression she gathered from her first visit to America 
— on the way over she got married in Hongkong — was not very 
favorable. An influenza epidemic, which was then rampant in 
Manila, had left her rather indisposed by the time she landed in 
Seattle. She had been used to seeing green leaves, flowers and trees 
in the Islands, but Seattle in winter presented a drab appearance. 

108 




As clii'.rniini; .is htr naiiR-, Auror.i. t'lc Spanish wcirj for "D^iwn", is the First 
Lady ot the Philippines. This rare phorogriiph was taken when she was a student 
at the Philippii-ic Normal School. 



I 

i 



( 



FIRST LADY OF THE LAND 



That arrival in Seattle was one of the few times in her whole life 
that she ever felt depressed and discouraged. She has been four 

times in the United States and frankly likes the advanced standards 
in sanitary conditions and mass education of America. 

Dona Aurora is an excellent example of the new type of Filipino 
womanhood: progressive in outlook, deeply religious yet tolerant, 
with the family as the focal point of her existence. She is a happy 
blend of three civilizations: the graciousncss of Castile, the progres- 
siveness of America, and the humbleness of the Malay. 

Though she always lends support to innumerable civic and 
charitable movements, she prefers to st.-iy in the background and 
leave the active work to others. She is, of course, an ardent fem- 
inist and believes in suffrage for Filipino women, but again she 
leaves her friends to actively push the movement. Her private 
donations to charitable institutions and individuals amount to a 
respectable sum, but like many other women of high position she 
is reticent on the matter. 

The subordination of her personal self to the interests of her 
husband and her children is almost a by-word in the Philippines. 
She personally supervises household affairs though she leaves routine 
matters to her cousin Dona Carmen. She takes pains to prepare 
the food specially liked by her husband and children and rarely 
leaves home when any one of them is seriously ill. When Pres- 
ident Quezon was taken ill in the United States in the autumn of 
1927, she left Manila for the sanatorium at Monrovia, California, 
to be at the side of her husband. Her husband was then in a serious 
condition, suffering from tuberculosis, and with her own hands she 
prepared Filipino dishes to lessen the nostalgic longing for his own 
country. Her three children— Maria Aurora, 16, Maria Zeneida, 
15, and Manuel Jr., 9— were with her, and for the first time since 
their marriage she had her family alone to herself without the 
frequent intrusions she had experienced while in Manila or Washing- 
ton. In the early spring of 1928, her children fell sick and she was 
very much worried. To make matters worse, she also fell ill and 
upon the urgent advice of her physician had to make a trip to 
Philadelphia for an operation. After the operation, which was 

109 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



successful, she hurriedly took a train for California. But she was 

in a weakened condition and the nurse who accompanied her was 
not of much help. Just before reaching Kansas City, she collapsed 
on the train. Porters rushed her to an hotel where she lay in bed 
for about a month. That was the most disagreeable experience in 
her life. Alone, with strangers attending to her, not knowing the 
condition of her husband and children — it was an ordeal that tried 
the mettle of her soul. But that month taught her to live alone, 
to rely solely on herself, and gave her greater confidence to face 
future difficulties with a braver spirit. 

An indication of her character may be gathered from her per- 
sonal views in the education of children and the place of woman in 
fflodern life. "There are women," she says, "who think that a 
cnild should be treated leniently and who consider it perfectly right 
give thek children all they want and ask for. There are 
ose who think it not wise to assume that attitude. Others 
. ^^^^ the best way of bringing up a child is by being very 
sttict. These arc the ones who believe in discipline and its good 
^ ects. I am with them. I am of the same belief. Not because I 
^^ider myself absolutely right and the others mistaken. Chil- 
intcir**^* °^ different types. So are the mothers. But while an 
to jj^'^^"*^ mother may be relied upon for her judgment with regard 
in htt ^^^^ ^^^^^ of her offspring, an ignorant mother usually fails 
heed y^^^^^P^ ^° her best. There are children who refuse to 
throu h ^^^^^^ °^ ^^^^'^ parents; some cannot be made to obey except 
taught h^"^^^" ^ ^^^^ while others can be 

^o.ikixxi^^^'^ '° what is right and wrong by peaceful means 

to do^jT°^^"'. ^ think," she continues, "always has something 
busy. % jf'^' ^^^^ wants is really something to keep her 
always A rightly belongs to her home and the home 

Philioij ^^ womanly care. I really see no necessity^in the 
before th h ^^^st— for the assertion that society should come 
who hold d-ff^^' saying that the other people 

tempers h opinions are necessarily wrong." Dona Aurora 

^ *^°*«a:vatism by being broad-minded; she never persists 

110 



FIRST LADY OF THE LAND 



in foisting her opinions on others. Thus it is with her religion. 
She is a pious Catholic, yet she keeps her religion on a strictly 

private basis. 

Intimate friends of Mrs. Quezon will tell you that she is one 
of those rare women who never speak ill of any person. She is 
prompt in discouraging malicious gossip of any sort. She has been 
known, on several occasions, to turn her back on some society 
dowagers who spoke ill of other people while in her presence. 
"What you hear in one house, never repeat in others," is one of the 
Spanish proverbs she is fond of telling her children. 

Besides collecting books, she is fond of keeping tropical fishes 
in glass containers all over the house. She personally feeds and takes 
care that the aquariums are wdl-balanccd. She has a collection 
of some three dozen dolls dressed up in the costumes of various 
nations in their country home in Mariquina, Rizal. This house is 
several miles away from Manila and the Quezons always stay there 
for a few days whenever they want to get .iway from the political 
and social activities of busy Manila. A few years ago, she started 
collecting Philippine orchids in her Mariquina retreat, and today she 
has the finest private collection of orchids in the Islands — a 
collection which even the famed DuPonts of Wilmington, Delaware, 
would be proud to own. 

Women of the Philippines are known for their business acumen, 
and though the man may be the titular head of the family, it is the 
wife who controls the purse strings. Mrs. Quezon is not an excep- 
tion. Her investments in the gold and chromitc mines have netted 
them a small fortune. President Quezon always listens to her 
advice, even in political matters. Scnor Quezon is known for his 
passing' outbursts of temper, characteristic of his impulsive, generous 
nature. Many a disgruntled big-wig has left his presence smarting 
from the tirade flung by el presidente, and woidd have become a sworn 
enemy had not Dona Aurora quietly smoothed his ruffled feelings 
prior to his departure. She is the perfect foil to the brilliant 
personality of her husband. 

When she is convinced that justice should be done, she does not 
hesitate to use the prestige of her position to secure the desired 

111 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 

result. Once, about a year ago, she learned of the case of a brilliant 
government scientist who had contracted a cancer in the throat. It 
was necessary for him to go to the United States for treatment, be- 
cause of inadequate medical facilities in the Islands. He could not, 
however, afford to make the trip as he was not rich. Without per- 
sonally knowing who that scientist was, Mrs. Quezon convinced 
her husband to take up his case. So great was el presidcnte's con- 
fidence in his wife's judgment that he moved heaven and earth to 
have that scientist sent to America, ostensibly to represent the 
Philippines in some sort of a conference but really to have his cancer 
cured. On another occasion, Mrs. Quezon learned that a prisoner 
was slowly dying of tuberculosis in Bilibid prison. She personally 
interested Governor General Frank Murphy and convinced liim that 
it was the humanitarian thing to have that prisoner paroled. Later, 
she arranged the sick man's transfer to the Santolan sanatorium at the 
outskirts of Manila, and paid all bills from her own pocketbook. 

It is things like these that have endeared her to those who know 
her. The masses respect and like her, for she is frank and democ- 
ratic. She is easily accessible to all, more so to the poor, the weak 
and the oppressed. Every day, scores of people visit their home in 
Pasay— a southern suburb of Manila — from early morning to late 
at night. And it is a tribute to Dona Aurora that she has nearly as 
great a number of visitors as her distinguished husband. The 
people in the humbler walks of life know that they can rely upon 
her to help them as much as it is in her power to do so. 

This November 15, she will move from her home in Pasay to 
become the mistress of Malacanan Palace for the next six years. 
For the first time in the history of the Philippines, a Filipino woman 
will occupy Malacanan — that historic century-old palace where 
proud Spanish governors once lived. But in spite of her being the 
first First Lady of the Philippines, Dona Aurora Aragon de Quezon 
will remain as charming and unspoiled as that little brown maiden 
who wrested a living from the soil to support her parents in a little 
obscure Philippine town three decades and a half ago. 

END 



112 



(9U«, JS fay 




ly*U.i,C^ 1^ •A'Si^ /uUjeJU ttlZte^ ^ccA^ 

cc^J iUTy ^^=ux^ l/~T3~'t^. A--^ 



4 



i 



^^^^^i^j^ ^tc^}/^^^ /72Zti^^^ ^^^^ 




0 

9^^t>i^ JTuX^ /^C^ 1-^- 

1^7^ f^J^ ^^ciJ^ t^A^ 




1 



I 



^. /^.. -.^ ^ 





President Quezon later Jedica.teJ this handwritten document 
to Carlos P. Romuio, publisher of the D-M-H-M newspapers, 
through whose courtesy this letter is being reproduced. Mr. Quezon 
wrote this statement in answer to a speech of former Resident Com- 
missioner Pedro Guevara advocating an American protectorate over 
the Philippines. As can be gathered from the many erasures and 
corrections, President Quezon took time to phrase his words; 
this document is his lirst formal statem.-nt of national importance. 
.-V transcription of the manuscript follows: 

By Manuel L. Quezon 
President-elect of the Philippines 
Once more 1 wish to s.n' nuisr cmph.itically chat I ;ini a^ninst VnuiKan 
protectorate. It is idle to talk about it because even if everybody in the Phil- 
ippines were for it, America would not consider it for a minute. I think I know 
as well as anybod\- rlu- attitude of the American people on this question. The\' 
are willing to let us ha\e either our own sovcrcii;nty and independence or remain 
under American sovereignty. 



» 



■ » 

f 



Wc chose the former and they gave it to us. But America under no circum- 
stance will ever aprcc to let us have our own sovereignty and independence and 
yet continue to assume tlic rcsponsihiiitv for our protection aaainst tin: world. 
There is an expression which the Americans use to express their attitude on this 
subject. "You cannot have your cake and eat it too." This is thtf American 
point ot view. 

Now, as to that of the Filipinos: 

We have accepted the McDuffie-Tydings law-for which I have worked -which 

provides (or af-'solutc and complete independence ten years after the inauguration 
of the Commonwealth. This independence is the main obiecrjvc of that law. 
The approval of our own Constitution, the es^abli^!ll!1e;u oi [he government 
of the Commonwealth are only preparatory steps toward independence— means 
to accomplish or to bring about this end. 

Everything we have done so far— the acceptance by the Legislature ot the 

Mcl")utlie-Tvdings l.iw : the calling of the constitutional convention; the drafting 
and approval of the Constitution bv the Constitutional .\ssembly and by the 
President of the United States; the acceptance of the Constitution thus approved 
by our people through a plebiscite; the elections of tlie constitutional oflicials 
of the Commonwealth, and the establishment of the government of the Common- 
wealth itself, — would all be a mockery, acts of bad faith on our part, unless wc 
sincerely want and mean to be an independent nation. 

The die is cast and tliere is onlv one serious, one decent, one honorable, 
one courageous thing for the Filipino people to do and that is to go ahead toward 
the establishment of the Philippine Republic without hesitation and without 
dismay, but with determination and valor 

That there are dangers in our path only the blind or the fool would deny. 
But wc shall overcome every obstacle. 

I am the President-elect of the Philippines. The responsibility to prepare 
the country for independence and to make sure that that independence will last 
rests mainlv upon my shoulders. If I did not consider myself equal to the task 
if I had anv doubt or hesitation, F should not have been acandidate and now that 
I have been elected 1 accept the responsibility. I am sure that with the loval 
support of the Filipino people I can lay the foundations, firm and permanent 
for an independent Philippine Republic. 

Let no one now vacillate. On the 15th of November next the Commonw ealth 
will be inaugurated. I shall be at the helm ol our ship of stateand I expect to 
find every Filipino — man, woman or child — at his or her post. We will sail 
toward one destination and one only — Independence. 

To Carlos Romulo — ^my loyal supporter. 
Manuel L. Quezon. 



I 



I 

\ 

I 



I, 

I 

I 

f 

1 

I 

I 

I 

I 



APPENDIX 



No finer speech has President Quezon delivered during his three 
decades of service to the Filipino public than that one of July 20, 
1935, when he accepted the Coalition party nomination for the 
presidency of the Commonwealth. A person very much in the public 
spotlight, Mr. Quezon has made numberless speeches — ^here as well 
as abroad — but this acceptance speech of his is considered his jfinest 
and most important talk as it embodies a summary of his political, 
economic and social views. He has given a great deal of thought 
and time in preparing the speech; in the ultimate analysis it is in the 
promises and statements included below that will serve as a yardstick 
of measurement when evaluating his achievements six years hence, 
when Manuel L. Quezon will have gone down in history as the first 
President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines. For these 
reasons, the acceptance speech of President Quezon is reprinted in 
full. 

Mr. Chairman, Gentlemea of the Committee, Fellow-Citizens: 

It is with a profound sense of gratitude that I receive in the presence of this vast 
multitude the formal notification of my nomination for the Presidency of the Com- 
monwealth. A party nomination for the highest office within the gift of the people 
is in itself a great distinction, but when the nomination comes under such auspicious 
circumstances as have attended that which is now proffered to me, I reg.-ird it as the 
greatest honor that can be accorded to any public man short alone of his actual elec- 
tion to the Presidency. 

Ever since the approval and acceptance of the Independence Act there has been 
growing among the people a feeling of deepest concctn over the difficult problems and 
impending responsibilities which will confront us upon the inauguration of the Coa- 
monwealth. While the Constitutional Convention was in session, partly fostered 
by the spirit of national solidarity exhibited by the members of that body, the anxiety 
to prepare the country adequately to meet these problems and responsibilities became 
articulate in an increasingly popular demand for national unity, that political parties 
give pause to partisan strife, that the leaders of the vital forces of the nation join in 
their efforts for the attainment of the. common goal, and that the entire country 
resolve to support loyally the man who may be entrusted with the national leadership 

113 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



so that through the government of the Commonwealth the foundations of the future 

Philippine Republic may be solidly and firmly established. 

Resolutions were passed by Municipal Councils as well as by civic and social 
organizations, including labor unions, demanding a coalition of the two great political 
parties as the most practical means of obtaining this unity of effort. Before the Con- 
stitntional Convention adjourned the cry of national unity was taken up by the League 
of Provincial Governors. Without regard to party afiiliation and voicing the pre- 
vailing sentiment in their respective provinces, these spokesmen of our local govern- 
ments unanimously joined in the general appeal for unity. 

Lastly, prominent Filipino businessmen, professionals and leaders in agriculture, 
industry and labor formally submitted to the directorate of the two political parties a 
concrete proposal that the two parties nominate jointly the candidates for President 
and Vice-President and thus insure the cooperation of all the vital forces of the nation 
during the first and trying years of the Commonwealth. When the two parties held 
their respective national conventions rhey readily responded to this popular clamor 
and forthwith agreed to form a coalition and to nominate the same candidates for 
President and Vice-President. 

Neither Senator Osmena nor I sought these nominations. We made no pre- 
Iif°^>,°"°" '^^'"P^'gn nor did we have any desire to secure them. We entered public 
^^c about the same time thirty years ago both pledged to the cause of independence. 

= vicissitudes which have been our lot during these years are not now to be re- 
wwnted, but as I look back upon our joint efforts in the attainment of the goal which 
e set out before us I feel happy that at the end of the long struggle we can face our 
tesLl on the same platform, our pledge fulfilled, our mutual friendship and 

" enhanced, and, still enjoying, I hope, their continued confidence and support. 

believed^'h °^ '^^e Independence Act and its acceptance by the country 

have been ^*°"'^"'^"'^^'^P"^'''^^"^'"™"''^ ^' last come to an end. We would 
ment. Bu ^ private citizens to lend our unstinted support to the new govcrn- 

our should " ^^^""^ fc'iow-citizens have once again chosen, to place upon 

the nationT "^^^ responsibility of organizing the Commonwealth and leading 
proffered to """^ ^"''^ "''"^'^^ °^ ''^ existence. The nomination that has been 
™ay evadc° "'^^'''^ f'le category of a call to duty which no public-spirited citizen 
thatlacccpt^V*^'^^^^'^'*' ^' therefore, Mr. Chairman, make public announcement 
ing it my bo a "°°''°'"ion for the Presidency which has been tendered to me, deem- 
responsibilit"°h ° *° ^° '^^^ ^ ^^^^ profound sense of the 

„ y that it entails and the deepest feeling of gratitude. 



^^^ing been 



afford to speak "°™'""ed under the circumstances I have mentioned, I can not 
clear statement 'f '""^=""0 terms. The need of the hour is for fixed orientation, 
of the present and a definition of the national purposes. In the course 

tions before I shall have opportunity to discuss all the important ques- 

« country. ^ present I have to limit myseljE' to aiew of them. 

114 



APPENDIX 



THE PLATFORM 

The Coalition phitform meets with my whole-hearted approval. I took part 
in the drafting of that document and I make my own every commitmeat contained 
therein. 

THE CONSTITUTION 

I look upon the Constitution of the Philippines as the expression of the sover- 
eignty and of the aggregate will of the Filipino People. I shall abide by its provisions. 
T shall uphold the democratic principle underlying the institutions that it esublishes. 
I am opposed to a dictatorship. I maintain that no man who believes in a dicutor. 
sliip can with safety be entrusted with the reins of executive power under our Consti- 
tution. Democracy can only survive if those at the helm of the government believe 
in the people's right to rule and have faith in their inherent capacity to decide rightly 
import-int public questions. 

I will hold inviolate and will defend to the utmost the individual rights and 
liberties. I shall safeguard free speech, the freedom of the press, and the equality of 
every man before the law however poor or ignorant. I shall insure for every cituten 
of the Philippines, from Luzon to Mindanao and Sulu, the right to worship God as his 
own conscience dictates. 

THE GOVERNMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH 
We arc entering a new era. We are on the threshold of free nationhood. The 
government of the Commonwealth that we shall establish derives its powers from a 
constitution approved by the people themselves. It may truly be said that it is a 
government of our creation to be administered for our own welfare. 

Except in a few specified cases, it will be free from American control in the con- 
duct of domestic affairs. Only in our foreign relations do we remain subject to Amer- 
ican supervision, and this because of the continuing responsibility of the United 
States to protect and defend the Islands from foreign aggression during the life of the 
Commonwealth. Hence, the government of the Commonwealth will be, in fact if 
not in name, an independent government under the protection of the United States. 

The immediate task before us is to set up the new government,— a task that will 
require all the foresight, the wisdom, and the courage of our people. Then we must 
adopt such measures as will insure the stability of our national economy, and provide 
for the honest and efficient administration of the affairs of government. Equ.ally 
important is to make adequate provision for the defense of our country against ex- 
ternal aggression or internal disorders. 

I favor a simple and economical government, one in keeping with the limited 
resources of our country but which is capable of ministering to the needs of the nation. 

I shall be unsparing in my efforts to carry out the mandate of the constitation 
regarding the civil service. Merit and character alone will be the qntlifiotdoo for 

115 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



office or promotion. For the highest responsible posts I shall call on the most cap- 
able, honest and patriotic citizens, regardless of political aflSJiation or religious 
belief. This is no time for placing party considerations above the common weal. 
In fact, one of the main purposes of the coalition is to secure the codperadon and help 
of the best available men to insure the (access of the Commonwealth. I shall tol- 
erate neither corruption nor inefficienqr in public office. 



HNANCIAL POLICY 
The financial stability of the government depends upon our ability to keep ex- 
penses within our income. At the time when other governments are resorting to 
loans in order to meet their obligations we can take pride in the fact that we have 
been able to maintain a balanced budget. Under onr Constitution the responsibility 
for maintaining a balanced budget falls mainly upon the executive. I pledge myself 
to maintain the credit of the government and at all times to balance the budget and 
laep onr finances in a sound condition. 

1 shall keep our present currency system in all its integrity and will allow no 
change that will affect its value. If new conditions should require such a change 
tt will be done only after the most careful study and consultation with competent 
experts. For the ptesent I can see no reason for any radical modification in our mon- 
etary system. 



TAXATION 

Irresponsible demagogues have tried to arouse in the hearts of our people the 
^ opc that under an independent Philippines there shall be no taxes except upon the 
^ • t IS my duty to warn the credulous against such misrepresentation. Govcrn- 
conttib"" through taxation. It is a primary duty of citizens to 

con M support of the government, but taxation that does not take into 

Dl te relative financial ability of the taxpayer is unjust. I favor a com- 

PCK revision of our system of taxation with the best technical advice available. I 
me^*^ J " burdens of the state be equitably distributed in proportion to the 
«8«lr T"'*'"'"''' taxpayer. We shaU make a general reduction of the 

▼aluc of real property in accordance with present prices. 



^ PUBLIC WORKS 

times or hute\ system, as known in the United States and as somc- 

*onds. ^iT- 'f Philippines, must definitely be discarded. It is a waste of public 
■with a cat'foll' °^ continuing the building of roads and schools, in accordance 
telativr ;J Vfepmi plan to be followed systematically, in the order of their 
' importance to the general public. 



116 



APPENDIX 



PUBLIC INSTRUCTION 

I stand by the educational policy enunciated in the Constitadon. The principle 
underlying this policy is the training for useful, well-disciplined, self-sacrificing 
citizenship that draws its breath of life from Filipino patriotism. Our system of 
education should be revised so as to accomplish that aim still more effectively. The 
State is in duty bound to maintain a complete and adequate system of public educa- 
tion, providing at least free public primary instruction and citizenship training to 
adult citizens. 

My attention will be especially devoted to making it possible for every child 

to go to school. Adult citizenship training will be carried out in accordance with a 
broad and systematic plan. To the end that poverty may not prevent gifted young 
men and women from developing their talent, the coveriinient should create the largest 
possible number of scholarships for them in all branches of learning. Our educational 
objective should fit in with our economic policy. I am for greater emphasis on voca- 
tional and agricultural training in the intermediate and high schools, but the in- 
struction should always be in keeping with the economic conditions of each region 
and of the coimtry as a whole. 

ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 

An independent judiciary administering justice without fear or favor promptly 
and impartially to rich and poor alike is the strongest bulwark of individual rights 
and the best guaranty against oppression and usurpation from any source. Equally 
important is the maintenance of the confidence of the people in the courts. I will 
appoint no man to the bench without having satisfied myself, after a thorough in- 
vestigation, of his character and ability. 

To strengthen the faith of the common people in our courts, it is necessary that 
the utmost care be exerted in the selection of Justices of the Peace. These courts are 
often the only tribunals accessible to the larger portion of our population and it is 
essential that they be maintained worthy of their confidence. If the disinherited can 
not obtain redress of their grievances or vindication of their rights in these courts, 
they have no further recourse, for the Courts of First Instance and the Supreme Court 
are often beyond their reach. By the impartiality and integrity of the Justices of the 
Peace, therefore, the judiciary of the Philippines is judged by the millions of our 
countrymen who live in the barrios and distant places. I pledge myself to do every- 
thing in my power to maintain these courts free from political or other extraneous 
influence and to appoint thereto only men of proven ability and integrity and of the 
broadest human sympathies. 

SOCIAL PROBLEMS 
The welfare of the people should be the concern of the government. The helpless 
and the needy, the jobless, as well as the workers in the factories and in the field have 
a claim upon the government to safeguard their health and well-^iieing. ma conten^ 

117 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



mcnt of the masses is the first insurance against social and political disorders. It is 
the duty of the government to protect the workingmcn against abuses and exploitation 
to secure to them fair wages and reasonable return for their labor. 

Let us beware of men v.ho deliberately, for political or selfish aims, stir up dis- 
content among the masses. They preach subversive doctrines, speak of evils and 
abuses that do not exist, or magnify those which often are inevitable in democracies. 
These men arc the worse enemies of society, more dangerous to thecommunity than 
ordinary criminals. They have no sympathy for the people, but arc mere self-seekers, 
intent only in securing cither pecuniary or political advantage for themselves. If .is a 
result of their preachings disorders occur, they cowardly disclaim all responsibility 
for that which none other than themselves had brought about. He who tries to curry 
favor with the masses by appealing to the passions of the people, stirring up their 
prej'idices, or capitalizing discontent or human suffering, is unworthy of public trust. 

LANDED ESTATES 
The ownership of big landed estates by corporations or absentee landlords have 
mvariablycaused discontent and unrest among the tenants or occupants of such estates. 
The discontent among the tenants of the Friar lands contributed to the causes which 
led to the rebellion against Spain. Those Friar lands have been acquired by the 
government and sold in small lots but there are still a few large haciendas particularly 
m Luzon that are the hotbeds of discontent and unrest among their tenants. Not 
only for the sake of these tenants, but also in the interest of peace, every effort should 
be made to acquire these haciendas, at a fair and just price to be sold in small lots to 
the tenants. 

There arc complaints in ceruin places that the tenants are the victims of unfair 
Kttd to his rightt "buses must be stopped and the tenant 



LABOR 

can-f ^""^^^'^ ^« '^^^e °o sharp cleavages between labor and 

Pitai. Strikes have been few and far-between, and they have never been long- 
awn out or general. That we have so far been spared the extremities of class war- 
IS no proof that we shall forever be exempt. Our good fortune should rather 
*c means to preserve the country against such conflicts by the only 
^j:thod which experience has shown to be effective, namely, by taking steps designed 
prevent the exploitation and oppression of the working-men and thus assure their 
iiappmess and contentment. 

^ Filipino laborers, compared to those of other Oriental countries, receive higher 
^*g« and are much better protected in their tights by legislation. We have enacted 
y laws protecting labor. In aU earnestness, however, I must say that we must go 

118 



APPENDIX 



farther in this direction. The experience of centuries shows that the one snrc way 
to protect society against class war is to secure to wagc-camcrs their due. 

I am against conununism. I am a firm believer in the institution of private prop- 
erty. I contend, however, that whenever property rights come in conflict with 
homan rights, the fwmer should yield to the latter. 

If wc would preserve the institution of private ptopetvy, we must hold fast to 
this principle, in the determination of conflicting rights between man and man. 
It is thus that wc may draw the line between the rights of labor and capital and Meet 
an economic structure based on the principle that human life is the measure of aU 
other values, that considerations of possession and profit must give way to the supre- 
macy of human existence. 

CAPITAL 

A change in the political status of a country always gives rise to fear and mis- 
givings. Not only among Americans and foreigners, but even among a few FiUpmos, 
the impending poUucal changes have caused anxiety as to the fnwre. 

There is no justification for these fears. I give assurance that peace, order law 
and justice will reign supreme under the Commonwealth, and that the rights Ot tor- 
cigners and nationals alike will be safeguarded. Existing investments, whether 
foreign or national, will receive every inducement to stay, and outs.de capital will 
be vvelcomed. Wc especially desire that new Americ«i capital should come and 
help in the development of the country. 

NATIONAL DEFENSE 

I believe in the efficacy of the instrumentalities of peace, such as the League of 
Nations or treaties of neutrality. In due time we should apply for admission to he 
League and urge the negotiation of a multilateral treaty for the neutrahzat.on of the 
Philippines. However, we cannot ignore present-day realities. We can not rely 
exclusively on these implements of peace for our national defense. 

I favor preparedness for national defense. We can not afford to have, nor do I 
approve of, a la^ge standing army or costiy military esublishments but we must have 
a'regular ^^.r^y of sufficient size for our requirements and a tramed ^---^^^nt 
drafted into service in any emergency. For the proper planning °f "^^"^"^^^ 
the organisation and training of our regular and citizen army I shaU secure the best 
expert advice. 

OUR RELATIONS WITH AMERICA 
It should be our constant endeavor to maintain die most friendly -'"i"- 
closest collaboration with the United States. We owe much to America ^^'^JIZ 
grateful to her. Our present economy is tied up witii the free Ameriam market. 

119 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



Many of our industries depend for their existeace <u our reciprocal free trade reiatibns 
with the United States, and we should try to maintain these trade relations if possible, 
even after independence. I shall spare no effort to obtain the elimination of the ex- 
port tax provided in the Indcpc.-.dcncc Lav.-. I shall v.ork for the repeal of the excise 
tax on coconut oil. I shall endeavor to take such action as may be required to place 
our trade relations with the United States on a truly reciprocal basis, so that diey 
may be continued after independence for the mntnal advantage of both countries. 



FOREIGN RELATIONS 
As already stated, our foreign relations will be under the control and supervision 

of the United States during the Commonwealth; but there is nothing in the Independ- 
ence Act which prevents the Commonwealth from beginning to lay the foundations 
for our future relations with foreign nations. Indeed, the period of transition having 
been provided to give to the Filipino people time to prepare themselves for the re- 
•ponsibilities of an independent government, it can be rightly assumed that the United 
States meant to give ns the opportunity, under the Commonwealth, of initiating both 
political as well as trade relations with other countries, subject to its supervision and 
control. 

We shall request the State Department at Washington to permit the Common- 
wealth to send men as attaches to American legations or embassies as well as to Amcr- 
'can consulates in order that these men may acquire the knowledge and experience 
"I the diplomatic service and provide our government with needed information con- 
•^^ing foreign trade. 

_ It will be necessary and to our advantage besides to win the good-will of, and 
mamtam friendly relations with, other nations. But to accomplish this aim, mere 
protestations of good purposes are not enough. We must deal fairly with all nations 
n respect their rights. We must secure to every foreigner who lives with us full 
protection of our laws. His life, his property, must be as safe among us as they are 
«» his own land. 

During the transition period we shall endeavor to find new markets for our pro- 
^cts so that if and when the market of the United States shall no longer be open to 
> except on a competitive basis, we may not be left without outlet for our products. 



PHILIPHNE INDEPENDENCE 
l^g^^'^ question of Philippine Independence has been settled. The Independence 
Hatio*^* independence and prescribes the process leading to its consum- 

lOn. We accepted the Independence Law, we have approved a Constitution 
jj^^^ ^° provisions, and the people by ratifying it with practical unanimity 
Ij tjjj^^'^ '° of independence under the terms sjnd conditions pfirescribcd 

' *-ongress. Independence, therefore, is no longer an issue either in the United 

120 



APPENDIX 



States or in the Philippines. laso&r as the terms and conditions of independence are 
concerned, we made it plain when we accepted the Independence Law that vre reserved 
the right to petition Congress for their modification with a view to making them less 
burdensome for our people and more adapted to the attainment of the purpose for 

which Congress intended them. 

We consider the economic provisions of the Independence Law not entirely fair 
to the Philippines. We regard legislation recently passed by Congress imposing 
greater restrictions on our free imports to the United States or ai!c!io!i;-.ing the collec- 
tion of cxhorbitant taxes on some of our products sold in that country, not only 
discriminatory, but a virtual violation of the solemn covenant betvveen the two coun- 
tries. We shall exert cvciy effort to secure the repeal of those discriminatory meas- 
ures and to obtain amendments to the Independence Law looking to a more equitable 
trade arrangement between the United States and the Philippines during the Com- 
monwcaltii. 

In relation to the transition period, the Congress of the United States fixed tlic 
term of ten years considering it necessary to allow the Philippines gr.iduaJly to 
adjust their national economy to the conditions which will obtain when independence 
should eventuate and to permit the Filipinos to prepare themselves adequately for the 
responsibilities of independent nationhood. It was, therefore, chiefly for the benefit 
of the Pliilippincs rather than of the United States that the intermediate period of ten 
years was fixed. While there may be differences of opinion .as to whether this period 
is too long or too short, all must agree that, if our trade relations with the United 
States during the Commonwealth should prove more injurious to our country than 
they would under complete independence, the Philippines would then do well to 
hasten the date of separation from America. This fact will not be revealed to us until 
after the first years of the CbmmonvTcalth and we have known the result of the econ- 
omic conference between representatives of the United States and the Philippines which, 
I trust, will be called by the President of the United States at an early date. 

Meanwhile, I consider it a most disturbing influence which will retard our work 
of economic readjustment and reconstruction, for .anyone to advocate now the shorten- 
ing of the transition period. What the country direly needs today is a period of 
stability and business confidence so that we may proceed unhampered in the task of 
erecting our new government and building up the national economy to increase the 
wealth of the nation, promote commerce, agriculture, and industry; improve the con- 
dition of our wage-earners, and create economic opportunities for all our citizens. 
We need to give capital reasonable certainty as to those conditions which affect in- 
vestment; we need to assure the industries that are dependent upon the free American 
market that no radical changes will take place which will bring about a sudden loss 
of the market on which they depend; we need above all to provide economic security 
for the masses of our people which can only be accomplished through the maintenance 
of stable business conditions. 



121 



QUEZON: MAN OF DESTINY 



I yield to no one in my fervent desire to see the Philippines independent as soon as 
possible, but I cannot close my eyes to the fact that a difference of a few years may 
mean a great deal to the wellbcing of our people and the permanence of our national 
liberty. Besides, we should not be deluded into believing that it is possible for any- 
one at this time to obtain from Congress the shortening of the transition period. All 
the pleas that may now be submitted in support of tliis .action had already been con- 
sidered and passed upon by that body. No new reason can be advanced that had not 
been already submitted. Therefore, making an issue of the shortening of the transi- 
tion period is unfair to our people and most injurious to their interests. 

I am anxioos to see our independence established at the earliest possible date. 
I look upon it as the most precious reward for the many years of ceaseless efforts that 
I have spent in its quest. I pledge myself anew resolutely to take all the necessary 
steps lead wg to the advent of independence, and to do everything in my power to 
make the Philippine Republic strong and enduring, and the blessings of liberty not 
only the cherished possession of this generation but the priceless heritage of the 
Filipino people for all time. 



122 



