



FAR 



May 4, 1945 

Vol. 2, No. 40 

By the men . . . for the 
men in the service 

5t 10 Centavos 
3d 1/10 Guilder 







% 







i 



The scaling of this peak on Iwo was revenge for the humiliation of Green Beach . 



By Sgt. BILL REED 
YANK Staff Correspondent 

W ith the 5th Marine Division on I wo Jim a 
— Anyone who landed there will tell you 
that naming the stretch of beach just 
north of Mount Suribachi “Green Beach"’ was 
inaccurate. “Coffee-Grounds Beach” would de- 
scribe the place better, for the iron-gray volcanic 
sand that covers the area resembles nothing so 
much .as the dregs in a coffee pot on Monday 
morning. Members of the 5th Marine Division 
who landed here became extremely intimate with 
these coffee grounds during the first 48 hours of 
the invasion. 

The sand got into their eyes and caked around 
their eyelashes. It became mixed in their hair 
like -gritty dandruff. It invaded small cans of 
K-ration ham and eggs as soon as they were 
opened. It crept over the tops of the men’s leg- 
gings and worked to the bottom of their shoes. 
The sand was both friend and enemy. It made 
^ foxhole digging 40 easy, but it- made fast move- 
. ment impossible for men and vehicles. 

For two days the men who landed on Green 
Beach were pinned to the ground. Murderous 
j machine-gun, sniper and mortar fire came from 

a line of pillboxes 300 yards away in the scrubby 
shrubbery at the foot of the volcano. No one on 
I the beach, whether he was a CP phone operator 

or a front-line rifleman,' was exempt. The sight 
of a head raised above a foxhole was the signal 
to dozens of Japs, safely hidden in concrete em- 
placements. to open up. Men lay on their sides 
to drink from canteens or to urinate. An errand 
•between foxholes became a life-and-death mis- 
sion for the, man who attempted it. 

» For two days the Marines stayed pinned to the 



beach in what seemed to many of them a hu- 
miliating stalemate. Hundreds of green-clad 
bodies hugged the coffee grounds, spread out 
helplessly in a scattered pattern, furnishing 
marksmanship practice for the Japs on the moun- 
tain with their telercopic gunsights. 

The Marines had been hopelessly cut up and 
disorganized when they hit the beach. Their ve- 
hicles bogged down in the sand when they were 
brought in. Their supplies were ruined. Many of 
their wounded still lay where they fell, in spite 
of the heroic efforts of the tireless medical corps- 
men. Bad weather and a choppy ocean prevented 
the landings of many small boats on the second 
day and held up the supply of new ammunition 
and equipment and the evacuation of the wound- 
ed. Though scores of dead marines lay every- 
where, few of our troops had seen. .a. single Jap, 
dead or alive. 

T owering over them was Mount Suribachi, a 
gray, unlovely hulk with enemy pillbox chan- 
cres in its sides. The marines on Green Beach 
grew to hate the mountain almost as much as 
they hated the Japs who were on it. Reaching the 
summit was almost as much of a challenge as 
destroying the men who defended it. 

The supporting air and naval Are did much. 
Hour after hour of surface and air bombardment 
couldn’t fail to wipe out many emplacements, 
imprison many 'Japs in their caves and slowly 
eat away the mountain fortress itself. But when 
it came to the specific four-foot-square machine- 
gun emplacements and the still-smaller snipers’ 
pillboxes, there was little the offshore and air 
bombardment could do except silence them for 
a few minutes. Everyone knew that in the end 
the foot troops would have to dig . them out. 



The foot troops made their drive on the third 
day. They were aided by a naval and air bom- 
bardment so terrific that the Tokyo radio an- 
nounced that the mountain itself was erupting. 
They were aided also by our own artillery and 
rocket guns, landed with superhuman effort the 
previous day in spite of a choppy ocean and the 
enemy’s guns. 

But the foot troops were aided most by the 
tanks that advanced with them and lobbed shells 
into the stone and concrete revetments that 
blocked the \fcay of the foot troops. The Japs 
were afraid of our tanks. They ducked low in 
their shelters and silenced their guns when they 
saw the tanks coming. They had planted hun- 
dreds of tank mines and had dug dozens of tank 
traps, but that is all they wanted to do. They 
didn’t dare challenge our tanks with their guns. 

As soon as the tanks had passed on or had 
been blown up by mines, the Japs came out of 
their holes and attacked our men from behind 
with machine guns and mortars. Between the 
foot of the volcano and Green Beach the enemy 
had hundreds of pillboxes and emplacements 
connected by a network of tunnels. When the 
Japs were driven trom one pillbox, they would 
disappear until the marines advanced to another, 
and a moment later they would appear at their 
old emplacement, lobbing grenades at our men 
who had just passed. 

B y early afternoon of D-plus-2 the Japs at the 
foot of Suribachi ‘had been silenced. How- 
ever, everyone knew there were still Japs around. 
There were Japs in the tunnels between the caves 
and there were Japs in the “spiderwebs” — the 
one-man sniper pillboxes — who would lift the 
camouflaged lids of their shelters and take pot 



i 

J 






I 



> 



With other members of the 5th Division waiting behind them, marines wriggle through the iron-gray sand toward Mount Suribachi, which is hidden by smoke. 






Among the first to fall after the landings on Iwo Jima were these two After taking him away from the frontlines where he was wounded by Jap mortar fire, 

marines who lie dead where they were going forward against the Japs. four marines gently lower CpI. W. H. Porter into a hollow in the volcanic sand. 



shots at marines trying to reorganize their outfits. 

There were also many Japs who were dead. 
There were dead Japs in every conceivable con- 
tortion of men who meet death violently. Their 
arms and legs were wrenched about their bodies 
and their fists were clenched and frozen. Those 
who had been killed by flame throwers were 
burned to a black darker than the ashes of Suri- 
bachi or scorched to a brilliant yellow. Their 
clothes had been burned off, and the heat had 
Vulcanized their buttocks together with ugly 
black strips. It was good to see these sights after 
having been pinned down to Green Beach for 
^ two terrible days. 

There were dead marines too. Some platoons 
had been entirely '-stripped of their officers and 
noncoms. Some had lost more than three-fourths 
of their men since jnorning. # 

B ut the worst of. the battle for Suribachi was 
over. Our men had fought their way in under 
the guns higher up on the mountain. Many of 
these guns had been knocked out by our tanks 
and artillery, afnd our naval and air bombard- 
ment. Many others couldn’t be depressed far 
enough to menace our new positions. 

There was still much to be done -at the foot 
of the volcano. There were still many emplace- 



ments to be cleaned out with flame throwers and 
tanks, and there were still snipers sneaking 
through the subterranean tunnels. The third 
afternoon a detachment of marines fought around 
one side of the mountain and another detachment 
fought around the other. Then they dug in for 
the night. At 0100 hours the Japs counterattacked. 
They kept coming until daybreak, but the ma- 
rines held them back. And all day the Americans 
were busy cleaning out the tunnels, caves and 
concrete emplacements at the mountain’s base. 

On the fourth night S/Sgt. Ernest R. Thomas 
of Tallahassee, Fla., led a platoon whose officer 
had been killed; it was accompanied by the com- 
pany’s executive officer, 1st Lt. Harold G. Shrier 
of Richmond, Mo. They dug in for the night at 
the base of a tortuous path leading to the top 
of the mountain. It was a bad night. Rain stream- 
ed down the mountain in small rivulets that 
trickled under" their clothes and washed the cof- 
.fee grounds across their bodies. The cold 'wind 
made them shiver. They huddled in foxholes, 
keeping their weapons dry with their ponchos. 

At 0800 hours the following morning they 
began the ascent. The volcanic sand on the steep 
path offered poor footing. Stubby plants broke 
off in the men’s hands or pulled out by their 
roots. But the only resistance encountered was 



the occasional ping of a sniper’s bullet. As the 
men reached the summit they found a few more 
emplacements that were manned by live Japs. 
These were Cleaned out with flame throwers, 
BARs and satchel charges. 

A t 1131 hours the Marines were in undisputed 
{ control of the top of the volcano. Sgt. Henry 
O. Hanson of Somerville, Mass., looked around 
for a pole and found a lead pipe on the ground. 
At 1137 hours he with Lt. Schrier and other 5th 
Division Marines raised the American flag on the 
topmost mound of Suribachi. 

Far below, Green Beach was rapidly taking on 
the appearance of any other beachhead. The vol- 
canic sand was littered with abandoned equip- 
ment, and the shores were lined with boats de- 
livering more supplies and evacuating the 
wounded. Far to the north other marines were 
fighting the battle for Motoyama Airfield No. 2. 

Iwo Jima was far from being secured. But the 
Marines were on the summit of Mount Suribachi, 
the fortress that had made them wallow in coffee 
grounds for two days. Not far from where the flag 
flew, a communications man shouted, ‘This is 
easy,” into his field phone. 

The Marines intended to stay. The humiliation 
of Green Beach had been avenged. 



Knowing that some supposedly dead Japs may be playing possum, ready to 
pull a grenade, these marines use a sling to remove a body from a dugout. 



During the fighting for Mount Suribachi two marines pour on the heat, cleaning 
out Jap emplacements with flame throwers and blasting a path for the advance. 





YANK The Army Weekly • MAY 4, 1945 



have a strongpoint there. So be ready to lay some 
in if we need help.” 

“You let me know when you want it, and I’ll 
plaster hell out of them,” Kuiken assured him, 
then added: “Well, I guess I better shove. It's 10 
of. Take it easy, you guys, and good luck.” 

He turned to the lieutenant and put out his 
hand. “Good luck, Johnny — I mean lieutenant. 
Hell, I keep forgetting you're an officer now.” 
“Don't let it bother you,” the lieutenant said. 
“Good luck, Ed. See you over there.” 

They shook hands firmly, like two men who 
enjoyed knowing each other. It was a token of 
mutual respect that knew no rank — respect that 
came from fighting together and each one know- 
ing just what the other could do in a tight spot. 

Kuiken and the lieutenant were old K company 
men. They joined it together back in 1941, as 
privates at Fort Jackson, S. C. Both were platoon 
sergeants when the 8th Division came to France. 
Johnny got a battlefield commission for leader- 
ship at Brest, when his platoon leader was injured 
and he had to take over. He also got wounds 
there that hospitalized him for four months. He 
had rejoined the company two weeks ago, and 
tonight would be his first action as an officer. 

It was 0055. The lieutenant said, “Let's hit it.” 
The platoon moved out on the moonlit main street 
and fell in with the 1st and 3d Platoons. 

“Take it easy with the grenades on those 
Jerry cellars,” Doc Marone said. “That's where 
they keep the cognac.” 

Another voice in the darkness said, “I'd like a 
three-day pass starting immediately.” 

“Okay, you got it,” the lieutenant said. “Only 
it's made out to Dueren.” 

“If the Jerries knew what I know,” a man in 
the front rank said, “they’d be heading back to 
Berlin right now.” 

“Yeah,” the guy behind him said, “and maybe 
if you knew what the Jerries know you'd be 
heading back to Indiana.” 

As they moved off in single file on each side 
of the rubble-heaped street, one optimist said, 
“Hell, the war might be all over tomorrow.” 
“Yeah,” somebody added. “All over Dueren.” 

T he artillery began at 0245. Four battalions of 
it, two lights and two mediums, delivered 
thousands of shell-encased notices to the defenders 
of Dueren. They fell first on the east bank of the 
river, then on the waterfront buildings, then 
eastward toward the center of the city, so that 
all of Dueren would know that the mortgage on 
this part of Hitler’s Reich was being foreclosed. 

When the artillery lifted at 0330, the infantry 
shoved off the west bank to enforce Dueren’s 
eviction notice. Rubber assault boats, powered by 
50-horsepower outboard motors, w r ere supposed 
to carry the infantry across the treacherous cur- 
rent. The motors were to have been ’warmed up 
while the artillery covered their noise, until the 
very minute before departure. But most of the 
motors failed to start. So the infantrymen, who 



were supposed to be passengers on this trip, 
finished by working their own way, as usual — 
this time by paddling instead of walking. 

German mortar and artillery fire raked the 
bank where the 13th Infantry was making ready 
to cross the swirling river. The second lieutenant 
of K Company, who was going into action as an 
officer for the first time, never even got into his 
boat. A mortar burst that landed five feet from 
him knocked him out and temporarily deafened 
his platoon sergeant, Demeduk. The lieutenant 
was returned to the hospital, this time suffering 
from concussion and possible internal injuries. 
Demeduk was able to stay with the platoon, but 
because of his temporary disability, S/Sgt. Harry 
B. Laws Jr. of Syracuse, N. Y., took over as 
platoon sergeant for the assault. 

Meanwhile 1st Lt. Morton S. Mock of Batavia, 
N. Y., had landed his Company K assault team on 
the enemy-held bank. Less than 50 yards away, a 
Jerry machine gun was spraying the other assault 
boats coming across, all of which had great 
difficulty staying afloat in the rushing current. 

Sgt. Bertram West of Meadville, Pa., crawled up 
the bank, then into the Jerry trenches and made 
his way around behind the MG nest. He threw a 
grenade into the hole, routing the three-man 
crew. Two tried to make a break for it. West 
killed one with his tommy gun, and a BARman, 
Pfc. Ray Adamson of King Hill, Idaho, killed the 
second. The third Jerry surrendered. 

Pfc. Anthony Woody was in another K Com- 
pany boat. Just as the boat beached, the swirling 
waters caught it and carried it away. Seven men 
managed to jump clear, but Woody and another 
soldier were swept helplessly downstream with 
it. A German machine gun sprayed them relent- 
lessly, and Woody's companion was killed. 

. By grabbing the branches of an overhanging 
tree, Woody finally got free of the boat and 
ashore, only to find that his haven was directly 
in front of another enemy machine-gun crew. 
He was captured by the gun crew. As the 
American troops gradually forced the Germans 
to retreat, his captors moved Woody from one 
house to another. Late next afternoon they 
ordered him to load a wounded German soldier 
on a wagon, preparatory to evacuating that part 
of town. Just then a platoon of the 104th Division 
attacked, the area. They shot the horse and the 
driver of the wagon and liberated Woody. 

Woody, who ran a barber shop in Afton, Okla., 
before the Army made him a rifleman, has only 
a skinned ear to show for his experience — where 
an MG bqllet grazed him while he was in the 
boat. His buddies claim it’s one for the books when 
a barber gets an ear-clipping job himself. 

The treacherous current of the swollen Roer 
almost proved disastrous to the crossing. Boats 
were swept downstream and crashed into the 
pilings of a knocked-out bridge that once con- 
nected Dueren with the west bank, and many of 
the occupants were drowned. Of those who 
escaped, some were wounded by enemy fire or 



suffered from exhaustion so they couldn’t return 
to duty immediately despite the critical need of 
infantrymen to hold the small bridgehead which 
had been established by I and K Companies. 

Meanwhile the Germans, profiting from their 
well-prepared positions, hung a curtain of mortar, 
artillery and MG fire on the river. At daylight, 
the intense concentration of fire made it all but 
impossible to get more troops across. Two flying 
ferries — assault boats tied to trees on our side 
and manipulated so that the current carried them 
across — were knocked out in less than an hour*, 
and a footbridge suffered the same fate. 

In the city of Dueren, I and K Companies 
fought savagely against overwhelming odds. 
Forced to carry the load of what was to have 
been an entire regiment’s attack, these two 
companies held out against repeated German 
counterattacks and continued to advance slowly 
in the city. After 14 hours of fighting practically 
on their own, the two units finally got aid at 2200, 
when the other companies got across on two 
newly established flying ferries. Next morning a 
bridge was built on the pilings of Dueren s 
original structure and reinforcements poured in 
in to help I and K Companies clear the city. 

D ueren, the queen city of the Roer, is nothing 
more than a heap of rubble today. Only four 
civilian residents of the city’s peacetime popula- 
tion of 30,000 are here to see the powdered monu- 
ment to Germany’s dream of conquest. 

Oddly enough, one of the few relatively intact 
structures in the pulverized city is the 25-foot 
monument to Bismarck, Germany’s empire 
builder of former days. He stands in the middle 
of a square whose surrounding buildings have 
been reduced to rubble. In his left hand is his 
sword, symbol of the power he wielded over Ger- 
many’s neighbors. In his right is a scroll bearing 
the inscription: “Versailles, 18 January. 1871.” 
That was the date of the restoration of the Ger- 
man Empire at the expense of France. 

But the Americans made two modifications in 
the statue of Bismarck, neither of which would 
have been appreciated by the sculptor or the 
people of Dueren who, as the tablet says, “caused 
it to be erected in memory of the eminent Reich 
Chancellor.” Draped over his - left shoulder and 
resting between the thumb and forefinger with 
which he is grasping ^his sword is a U. S. Army 
Signal Corps telephone wire, strung up by an 
unawed GI who used the statue as a telephone 
pole in the otherwise flattened area. 

The other modification is a shell hole, about the 
size of a silver dollar, piercing the scroll in his 
right hand and cutting off the top of “V” * in 
Versailles. The American modification of Ger- 
many’s 19th Century empire builder doesn’t stop 
there. With true poetic justice, the shell continued 
on through the tail of his knee-length military 
coat and lodged in the very spot where many of 
the subject people of his empire would often 
have liked to ram it. 



l»t l*. Morton S. Mock (left) talks with Pfc. Tony Woody, T/Sgt. John Demeduk, platoon sergeant of K Com- An engineer lies where he was hit and killed 

who was a prisoner for 15 hours after crossing the Roer. pony's 2d Platoon, speaks into his walkie-talkie. by mortar fire as he was crossing the Roer. 








&T (VIC WFISlUfl IVUIIU 

neither Japs nor monkeys in the 
Mindanao landing but they did 
unearth a lot of other things 

By Cp!. JOHN McLEOD 
YANK Staff Correspondent 

W ITH THE 41st DIVISION ON MINDANAO 
— About all most GIs in the 41st Infantry 
Division knew about Zamboanga was the 
song: ‘The monkeys have no tails in Zam- 
boanga.” Now that they are here they agree 
there are no monkey tails in Zamboanga. They 
can’t even find any monkeys. # 

Pretty authentic reports had it also that there 
were 8,000 Japs here, including a thousand or so 
6-foot marines like the ones scattered in assorted 
Pacific islands. They weren’t here either when 
we landed. 

We bombed and shelled and rocketed hell out 
of the place but ail the 41st could find on the 
beach was one dead cow, one dead horse, one 
dead mother mongoose and one dead hen. Fran- 
tic chicks were running around, peeping their 
hearts out. Two baby mongooses were rescued, 
and the rescuers intend to raise them on a medi- 
cine dropper. The 41st Signal Company found a 
puppy on the beach and named it J Day (that’s 
what D Day w r as called on this operation). The 
only monkey to be seen was with a man in the 
162d Service Company. He brought it along. 

This in general was the beachhead picture 
when the 41st landed near Zamboanga on the 
tip of the left tentacle of Mindanao, which is 
shaped something like an octopus. 

But the landing was not entirely unopposed. 
There were enough Jap shells and machine-gun 
bullets around to make things interesting. 

A landing isn’t a landing these days unless 
the Japs trot out a gun that slides out of a cave 
on* railway tracks, fires, then rolls back into, the 
cave wdiere it is protected by sliding steel doors. 
Since all such guns are given names this one 
was called the “Zombie of Zamboanga.” It blew 
up our largest gasoline dump and a nearby stack 
of ammunition and raised a ruckus in general. 
In the eyes of the dogfaces, though, the gun’s 
worst crime was killing two GIs w T ho were to 
have gone home on rotation after this show. 

We mortared the Zombie, gunned it, howitz- 
ered it, high-altitude bombed it, dive-bombed it 
and strafed it. We turned naval guns on it All 
that didn’t do any good. So a couple of squads 
of infantry in a night attack put the Zombie 
out of action. 

On J plus 1 the 41st pushed into what was left 
of Zamboanga, more familiarly known as Zambo. 
As far as they could tell there hadn’t been more 
than a few dozen Japs in Zambo town since last 
September when we began bombing the place. 
It’s a fact that practically all the damage done 
to the city, once known as the Pearl of the Far 
East, has been done by our bombers. Not that 
if wre hadn’t bombed it, the Japs wouldn’t have 
set fire to it anyway. But that’s the way it is. 

In a lot of ways Zambo — which was a sizeable 
town when the Spanish settled there in 1635 — 
was overrated. In guide books the population is 
given as more than 100,000. What guide books 
didn’t say was that the city in square miles is 
larger than Los Angeles and includes a hundred 
villages separated from each other by almost 
impenetrable jungles. The town of Zamboanga 
proper never had more than 20,000 souls at the 
most. 

The business and theater district has been 
pretty well wrecked, the Japs ran all the city’s 
buses into the harbor, and the bakeries, ice and 
ice cream factories and soda pop factories have 
been ruined. But there are still attractions and 
for the jungle-steeped 41st, Zambo isn’t a bad 
deal. 

There's a wide white beach w T ith w T ater as 
clean as that in any south sea island movie. The 
Mohammedan Moros of the district and the tribes- 
men, speaking a dozen different Mindanao dia- 
lects, are eager to trade their curious w r oven 
basket hats, their bolos and krisses for pesos, 
food or chewing gum. Most of the young w r omen 
are still in the hills, but reliable reports are that 
they are w r ell Americanized and even more ami- 



able than the mestizos* of Manila. YANK photo- 
grapher Sgt. Art Weithas reported that a beauti- 
ful 18-year-old asked him for his autograph and 
beamed her appreciation when he gave it. 

Zambo bananas and pineapples are supposed to 
be much tastier than any fruit obtained on Luzon. 
Folks here say that Basiian, an island 15 miles 
south of Zambo, has oranges, lemons, avocados 
and other such things that have to be tasted to 
be believed. 

Basiian, when we get around to taking it, will 
be our first reconquest of rubber-producing lands 
of much consequence. The plantation owned by 
a famous Akron firm can produce enough rubber 
to equip several divisions with tires, not to men- 
tion certain other vital items. 

Womenfolk and a Shrine 

T HERE is gray-walled, weather-stained, 
moss-covered Fort Pilar, built by the Span- 
iards in 1635 as defense against the Moro 
pirates who infested the blue waters off Zam- 
boanga. There isn’t much time for sight-seeing 
just yet — opposition is getting bitter in the hills 
and the service troops are building up Uic 
Zambo beachhead and laying the airstrips which 
soon will dominate the rich Dutch East Indies. 
But GIs get around. In the battlement at Fort 
Pilar is an ancient cannon, still emblazoned with 
the crest of the King of Spain. 

On one side of the fort is a shrine almost as 



famous in the Far East as the Grotto of Lourdes 
in France. It is the Shrine of Nuestra Senora 
del Pilar (Our Lady of Pilar). Many cures and 
visions are attributed to the Senora of the Shrine. 
The Japs tried to stop women from worship- 
ping there because it w T as a military installation. 
But the women ignored them and each Saturday 
afternoon ^burned hundreds of candles to their 
Saint. 

When the women of Zamboanga come back 
they will throng there on Saturday afternoon 
and in thanks for their deliverance from Jap 
occupation will burn many more candles than 
ever before for their Senora del Pilar. 

That’s a sight most ,GIs would like to see but 
don’t expect to. Not that they’d be prohibited, 
but they realize that Saturday afternoon at the 
Shrine is strictly private business between the 
Senora and the w r omenfolk of Zamboanga. On 
Saturday night, however, there surely will be 
a dance. The Senora will smile on that, too. 

Flag Prizes 

D IGGING Japs out of caves and tunnels is 
always a grim business. But there is one 
compensation — you never know what you’ll 
find inside. Sometimes it’s like the prize in a 
crackerjack box. 

The boys made the usual saki discovery here 
— this time 150 cases of prime stuff which tasted 
something like a fine old sherry. In another 



PAGE 8 



YANK The Army Weekly • MAY 4, 1945 



cave, in the middle of a pile of four dead Japs, 
was a 35-mm motion picture camera in a case 
stamped “Nippon Newsreels” In still another 
cave, stacked high with Jap signal equipment, 
were two portable 35-nun projectors with com- 
plete sound equipment and 50 reels of film. 
Technicians of the 41st Signal Company said our 
own Army's movie service could well study it. 

But the big find of the campaign, so far as 
patriotic satisfaction is concerned, was in 
another cave littered with dead Japs. It was a 
pile of five American flags which some Japs had 
been using for bedding. The flags will be pro- 
cessed by a QM laundry and the general idea is 
that they will again fly over Zamboanga’s Petit 
Barracks, where the Japs got them. 

The Hidden City 

T HE lights' were low, the music beat haunting- 
ly sweet and slow and some 30 GIs were 
dancing on a smooth mahogany floor with 
the slickest little chicks you ever saw. 

One elongated character with a hooked nose 
looked down into the smiling features of a 
fascinating girl. 

Another, outside at a big banquet table, 
feeding his face with chicken, goose, roast pig 
and barbecued beef, belched behind his hand. 

The funny thing about all this is that when 
we started toward this place from the Zam- 
boanga beachhead we thought we were headed 
on a really rough, tough and dirty mission. We 
were ail in green herringbones, few of which 
had been washed later than a week previously. 
We were some 40 miles behind Jap lines. 

The mission was to clear the winding road 
that led from Zamboanga City back over the 
mountains to the guerrilla headquarters and 
to bring back from that hidden city, which the* 
residents called “Free Zamboanga,” the provin- 
cial resistance government. 

We had one 6 by 6 truck loaded with captured 
Jap rice and soya paste, Yank C rations and 
Aussie bully beef, .30 ammunition, grenades, uni- 
forms and shoes. We were to drop them off at 
a resistance battalion headquarters along the 
way. 

We also had three jeeps, all of them like the 



LeCouvre had burned the bridge to keep Jap 
tanks from crossing. So we had to ford it. The 
jeeps got across OK, then the 0 by 0 and after 
a struggle up the far bank the first recon car. 
The second M8 bogged down. Before we finally 
got it out, all the other vehicles were rigged one 
after another towing it and about 40 Filipinos 
pried from behind with coconut logs. 

On our way again in “Free” territory we 
passed outpost after outpost until we finally 
wound into the valley where nestled the head- 
quarters city built by LeCouvre and his guer- 
rilla army. 

There and round-about had gathered some- 
thing like 80 percent of the former population 
of Zamboanga City. Just as LeCouvre’s regiment 
was organized to the last detail, even to its own 
MP force, so was the life of the hidden city 
organized. It had its own salt- and soap-manu- 
facturing plants, it’s grist mills and ricc-winc 
brewing establishments.* In the center of the 
community was a drill ground with an American 
flag waving over it. 

Capt. LeCouvre directed the convoy right 
qp to his own quarters and made it clear that 
we were all — all of us, from the USAFbE colonel, 
who came along as an observer, down to the pfc. 
assistant drivers— his personal guests. Some of 
us were given shakedowns on piles of old para- 
chutes in his personal house. Others were quar- 
tered in another home nearby. 

Presently Capt. LeCouvre’s bodyguard-butler- 
handynian, Arelio del Prado, who used to box in 
the States under the ring name of McCarthy, 
came out with brimming bowls of fresh tuba 
and a concoction of rice wine, orange powder 
and brown sugar which he called a Curuan cock- 
tail. It didn’t have the smooth flavor of a Top- 
of-the-Mark old-fashioned but it had three 
times the kick. The sunset that night was beauti- 
ful but the dawn was sort of smeary. 

The recon troopers were especially happy 
that night. It w T as possibly the first night in the 
platoon’s history that none of them had to pull 
guard. LeCouvre’s guerrillas took over that 
chore. Accordingly there were sounds of revel 
until something like 0400. 

Late next morning a racket of saws and ham- 
mers and the movement of many people on the 
road roused some of us. The racket was made 



from the Philippine infantrymen, for krisses and 
barongs from the Moros. 

Some of the GIs did a little tuba drinking with 
Haiuon Mandi, datu (chief) of all the Moros in 
the district. American-educated and wearing 
Amcri cab-style clothes, the datu claimed that the 
Moslem Moros hated the Japs, if possible, even 
more than Christian Filipinos hate Japs. The 
Japs, he said, tried to interfere with long revered 
customs. They even tried to stop the Moro 
women from blackening their teeth, the datu 
said, which was a very uncouth thing for the 
Japs to try to do. • ' ~ 

But even the Moros chieftain wasn’t as fascin- 
ating to the GIs as the brown girls with the 
flashing teeth and sparkling eyes who wandered 
around hand in hand as the “Free Zamboanga” 
band gave forth with a concert from the market 
bandstand. 

Only about 100 people were invited to the 
dinner-dance but there must have been a couple 
of thousand^ gathered around outside the win- 
dows. It got so congested LeCouvre finally had 
to stick his head out the window and tell spec- 
tators to scatter. 

There were orchid, palm and fern decorations, 
colored lights and an 11 -piece band, the High- 
Hatters, who left Jap-occupied Zamboanga to 
go to the hills carrying everything with them 
except the bass drum and the piano. They even 
brought along their dancer, Paloma. She did a 
one-gal lloor show for us. 

The dance was scheduled to last until dawn 
as, I understand, all hill dances do in Mindanao. 
It’s an old Spanish custom and everybody stays 
for breakfast. Most GIs though, stole out and 
hit their sacks somewhere after midnight. When 
they got up at eight or so next morning, many 
of the Filipino guests were still there. 

Next day we visited around and left early the 
following morning. Going back in the truck 
were the governor of Free Zamboanga, his assis- 
tants and several specialists, including some 
pretty fair looking teachers and stenographers. 
Since we had left, one of LeCouvrc’s battalions, 
using the ammunition we had left them, had 
cleared out the road blocks. 

We bowled along toward the ruined city, and 
we felt suddenly as if we had been watching 
one of those movie travelogs. 




truck armed with machine guns, and an escort 
of two armored recon cars from the 41st Divi- 
sion’s Reconnaissance Troop. There were 
known Jap roadblocks along the way. 

Heading the procession was the guy who was 
the cause of the whole thing, Donald J. LeCouvre, 
before Dec. 7, 1941 a pfc mechanic with the 19th 
Bomb Group at Clark Field, and now officially 
commanding officer of the 121st USPIF Infantry 
Regiment and a captain in the l T . S. Army. Un- 
officially LeCouvre, a blond, steel blue-eyed 
former resident of Bulger, Pa., is known in some 
quarters as the “Sultan of Zamboanga.” Except 
for the few square miles which it took the 
Japs 8,000 troops to hold, LeCouvre was the ac- 
knowledged absolute master of the region. 

LeCouvre, who had joined our forces on the 
beach on J Day, led the procession in one of 
the jeeps. We roared out of town past dozens 
of barrios without seeing a single American 
soldier. At the town of Mercedes, a sort of no 
man’s land patrolled by Japs by night and Le- 
Couvre’s Philippine infantry by day, we dumped 
the rations, ammunition and uniforms. 

Finally after going cross-country several 
times over dry rice paddies to avoid Jap road 
blocks, we reached a river which has to be 
nameless. Once across it, we w r *uid be in Le- 
Couvre’s territory. Since he and about 30 of his 
men wiped out a Jap raiding party of 200 there 
last May, they hadn’t seen a Jap across the river. 

But the crossing was easier said than done. 



by the ladies of the Women’s Auxiliary Service 
fixing up the ground floor of LeCouvre’s house 
for a dance that was to be given" that night in 
our honor. 

We learned about the dance when Miss Bea 
Spintusanto, LeCouvre’s secretary and- a big- 
shot in the WAS,, passed around little slips of 
paper which read: “You are cordially invited 

to a dinner and dance to be held at the CO 
Quarters in honor of visiting representatives of 
the liberating forces of Zamboanga this evening 
at 7 P. M. — signed, The Committee.” 

The people passing by. on the road were all 
going to the market, held only on Sundays. Quite 
a market. Chinese rice-wine bars, tuba bars, 
restaurants which the proprietors called “cafe- 
teria,” stalls piled high with candy, cigars, 
cigarettes and shredded and leaf tobacco, native 
coffee, wooden shoes. • 

Through it all milled a multitude of people, 
with LeCouvre’s MPs trying to keep some sem- 
blance of order. There were hill Moros with 
shaved heads and either basket hats (which look 
like lampshades) or fezzes, LeCouvre’s infantry- 
men with overseas caps of wildcat fur, old Fili- 
pinos smoking cigars, middle-aged ones nursing 
babies, young ones smiling coyly at the recon 
troopers. The crowd was three times as big as 
usual. Everybody wanted to sec the Yanks. 

Besides some traffic in the regular items of 
merchandise, troopers did some high-powered 
swapping for fur caps and home-made pistols 




Missionary Mrs. David Lund asked for 
soap and bread when troops found her 
on Mindanao after 3 years in hiding. 






HOME TOWNS IN WARTIME 



Pa. 



PITTSBURGH, 






The smog that shrouds the city 
these days is a symbol of war 
production in plants and mills • 

By Sgt. AL HINE 
YANK Staff Writer 

P ittsburgh, Pa.— The story used to be that the 
girls in Pittsburgh had such shapely legs 
because they had to walk up and down so 
many of the city’s hills and the exercise devel- 
oped their muscles in the right places. Well, the 
hills are still there and the girls are still there 
and their legs are just as pretty, but there’s far - 
fewer than the usual complement of males to ad- 
mire them. The hills, we mean. 

It takes awhile for you to realize, though, that 
there has been even that much change in the life 
of Pittsburgh. It is busier than ever, with the 
mills along the river flashing a bright backdrop 
by night to the now-scanty traffic along the 
Boulevard of the Allies. But the town has been 
busy before, and to a returning GI the things 
that are still the same are easier to spot than the 
changes. 

In the winter the snow turns gray just as 
quickly as ever in most sections and the familiar 
slush achieves -a. new tone of black with the help 
of increased industrial soot. When there isn’t 
snow, this same soot scuts up from the pave- 
ments in little black clouds as your shoes strike 
the ground. You can rest assured that the Smoky 
City of bad radio jokes is as smoky as ever. 

The Pittsburgh that never gets into the jokes 
is the same, too. South Park and North Park 
are both lovely in the snow for steak fries by 
characters who can snare enough ration points, 
and they’re still swell for winter sports. Last 
spring and summer both parks played host to 
the usual picnic throngs, which were only a little 
reduced by the difficulty in getting about on ra- 
tioned gas. Since Kennywood can be reached by 
trolley, the amusement park has enjoyed a boom, 



with furloughing GIs subtracting a note of color 
from the crowds. 

You don’t see as many soldiers in town as you 
might expect. Camp Reynolds at Greenville, Pa., 
is the only camp situated near enough to Pitts- 
burgh for GIs stationed there to take advantage 
of overnight passes to visit the city. There are a 
few MPs around, of course, and even some SPs. 
There are some Ordnance guys lucky enough to 
be stationed in the town itself, checking and 
doing the paper work on the district’s war pro- 
duction, and there are GIs at Pitt and Tech. 

But because the ASTP was 'curtailed last year, 
there are fewer men in uniform taking courses 
at the colleges. The GIs are almost the only male 
students the colleges have. The few civilian co- 
legians are either exceedingly 4-F or painfully 
young and downy. But the co-ed population has 
increased during the war. There are girls, girls, 
girls on all the campuses. 

The OD students get worked reasonably hard 
to balance the luck of being stationed in the 
United States. For a while Pitt GIs lived cosily 
in the fraternity houses along Forbes Street, but 
that was too good to last, and the Army has 
bundled them off to the Cathedral, where they 
sleep in disciplined rows in the dcafty Gothic sky- , 
scraper and have reveille, retreat and so on. 

Most of the GIs you see on the streets during 
the day or in the night spots in the evenings are 
lucky guys on pre-embarkation or just-back- 
from-overseas furloughs. There aren’t enough of 
them to give Pittsburgh even the illusion of be- 
ing a military town, but just as a gesture of 
something or other the local Provost Marshal 
has hung his off-limits sign on a couple of bars. 

Diamond Street is still the home of the low- 
price double-header shot, and the Casino is still 
one of the nation’s last stands of old-fashioned 
burlesque. The Nixon has had good theatrical 
seasons, getting a lot of road companies playing 
New York* hits. It caters to fewer try-outs, 
though, since in these times of uncertain trans- 
portation most untested' shows hesitate to make 
the long trek from Broadway. The Playhouse 



on Craft Avenue still puts on the most pol- 
ished and popular semipro theatricals in the 
city, and the % little lounge is still jammed at 
night and on Sundays. 

There are still the same one-man clubs de- 
signed to outwit the early-closing laws for bars, 
and they still have incredible names like the 
Benjamin Harrison Literary Association and the 
St. Cecilia Society. The Continental Bar of the 
William Penn, the Nixon Cafe, A1 Mecur’s Music 
Bar on Graeme Street and the Gay Nineties 
Room of the Hotel Henry continue to pack in 
customers of an evening and it is at places like 
these, after nightfall, that you begin to notice 
the manpower shortage, nonindustrial. There are 
tables with three or four girls and only one guy, 
and tables with just three or four girls. And when 
you see a girl with a date she usually is so self- 
satisfied that you can’t get a good look at her face 
for the glow on it. The Henry Bar has a sign on . 
the mirror which reads: “unescorted ladies will 

NOT BE SERVED IN THIS ROOM AFTER 6 P.M.” 

Y ou’ll be able to find practically any land- 
mark you look for. The stone eagles where 
the boulevard hits Grant Street, across from 
the Post-Gazette building, are dirtier than ever, 
but columnist Charley Danver has given up his 
crusade to have them cleaned. He figures that 
the smoke that sullies them is proud evidence of 
war production and cleaning can wait on peace. 

Cold industrial statistics prove Charley’s point 
as convincingly as the smog on the eagles. Late 
last year Army Ordnance officials revealed that 
over ( one-half of all the 8-inch artillery shells 
produced in the United States came out of the 
Pittsburgh Ordnance District. And 8-inch shells 
are only part of the production story. 

The steel mills are probably % the district’s big- 
gest contributors of war materiel, and they have 
been going full blast since before Pearl Harbor. 
Though the winter’s fuel shortage hampered 
some of them, they hit their highest production 
record to date in the week of Feb. 28 — an esti- 
mated 39,860 tons or 92 percent of capacity. 




PAGi 10 








1 




Alaska 



Sweats 



It Out 



S,NCE KISKA. AUGUST ,5. ,943. THE BIGGEST BATTLE FOR THE NORTHERN "SNOWFEET" HAS BEEN AGAINST WEATHER LIKE THIS BLIZZARD NEAR FAIRBANKS 



Dogfaces on the mainland and in 
the Aleutian Chain watch the 
war go by 'on other fronts 9 stare 
out toward the Kuriles and won- 
der if there's anything cooking . 

By Cpl. JOHN M. HAVERST1CK 
YANK Staff Correspondent 

A laska and the Aleutians — A corporal said 
L this about the scarcity of combat in Alas- 
^ ka: “We are closeted here in Alaska and 
the Aleutians like a woman in confinement un- 
til the war is over, or else we may become the 
mother of another offensive. And we all wish 
we knew which.” 

The radio stations in Alaska and the Aleutians 
still sign on and off with slogans like “Broad- 
casting to you from the northern highway to 
victory.” The foxholes dug during the battle are 
still on Attu but they are just in the way during 
practice alerts. The Infantry and Engineers and 
AAF stumble into the snow-covered holes they 
forgot were there. 

The Aleutians have gone GI to a point where 
the men stand regular Saturday hut inspections 
and you no longer turn your back to the wind 
and use any place on the ground for a latrine. 
The only reason any soldier on Attu' has worn a 
helmet since July 1943 is a standing rule of the 
mess halls — “No helmet, no chow.” 

Just after Kiska, a year and a half ago, most 
of the war was detoured from this shortest route 
to Tokyo, and nobody knew then, and nobody 
knows yet, whether it will ever come through 
a^ain. So the war in Alaska is mostly against 
doubt as to whether this theater still matters. 

“Look at the maps we use now,” says Cpl. Paul 
C. Legette of San Francisco, Calif. ‘"They aren’t 
even global. There isn’t room on them for the 
Aleutians to be near Japan where they belong, 
so they are stuck in a box by themselves down in 
the lower right-hand corner near Seattle. 

Not that the men here wouldn’t prefer a base 
near Seattle or that the combat crewmen really 



want any more combat than they have right now. 
Bin what they would all like to know is where 
they stand in importance. 

Actually, of course, Alaska and the Aleutians 
have been important since Kiska. The ground in 
the Aleutians is so soft it trembles every time 
heavy construction equipment passes over it, and 
the huts on the soft muskeg have trembled ever 
since Kiska. During all that time the Engineers 
have been building up bases with airstrips and 
docks and warehouses for any kind of war that 
might come: 

During the construction period Japan has not 
been able to return to the islands because of 
Aleutian-based Army and Navy bombers and 
Navy task forces that have been crossing 600- 
odd miles of the North Pacific to raid the Jap- 
anese Kuriles. The Kuriles have been hit as reg- 
ularly as the crews could make it through the 
fog and wind. 

T he Aleutian Chain is the place most soldiers 
in Alaska want to stay away from. There are 
very few who like the islands. One of these rare 
birds is T-4 Dashiell Hammett, 50-year-old au- 
thor of “The Thin Man” and “The Maltese Fal- 
con.” “Why do I like it here?” Hammett some- 
times asks. “I don’t know — maybe it’s the hu- 
midity. It slows you up and irritates you, and 
maybe I like that.” When Hammett shows visitors 
around, he asks how they like his mountains. 

T-5 Erwin Spitzer, on the other hand, is tired 
of the mountains. “The scenery here,” he says, 
“is something I’ve grown very cold about.” 

Fog covers the Aleutians and the wind has 
blown down many of the buildings put up by the 
Engineers. Except for the new Army posts, the 
islands are barren, and there is nothing queer 
about a man who has not troubled himself in a 
year to hitchhike outside his own company area 
for a look around. All the scenery any man 
really wants to see is outside Alaska and the 
Aleutians. They tell about a deckhand on a small 
power barge who hatched a scheme for escaping 
from the Chain on his small interisland ship. The 
place he hoped to Teach was Siberia. 

On chances for rotation some soldiers quote 
the king-size ravens that live off the islands^ 
What the ravens say, of course, is “Nevermore.” 



There are towns near the camps on the Alaska 
mainland, but on the Chain our men have had 
to build* up islands where there are no towns and 
no women. A major in the Medics made a survey 
of his island to find out what happened to these 
men after a year and a half. The major decided 
that nothing very serious happened except to the 
men who would have tripped on the street curbs 
of their own home towns. He decided that the 
Aleutians are, strangely enough, a healthier— and 
safer — place than most overseas theaters. 

Rusty Annabel, a war* correspondent for 
United Press and a pre-war resident of Alaska, 
has never wanted to transfer out pf the theater, 
even though he could be rotated. The reason is 
that he still thinks he can sweat out Tokyo 
through the Chain. 

Tokyo Rose of Radio Tokyo is still interested 
in Alaska and the Aleutians, and the theater is 
humorously important for that reason if for no 
other. Rose’s stories furnish free entertainment 
to the island-isolated GIs. There is one yarn about 
the general who flew to the mainland on TD. 
This general’s house caught fire shortly after he 
left and his plane picked up a radio report de- 
scribing the fire and telling him he’d better get 
back. The report, of course, came from Tokyo 
Rose. According to another of Rose’s fables a 
Jap sub took pictures of one island over a period 
of days; then the crew came ashore to the island 
one night and printed their pictures in the air- 
base photo lab. 

T he boys go on listening to Rose for the laughs 
and wait. The air crews get action now and 
again, photographing the Kuriles and bombing 
them. The AAF has hit the Kuriles as far south as 
Shimushiru, less than 1,000 miles north of Tokyo. 
And twice in 1944, Matsuwa, 1,100 miles north of 
the Jap capital, was shelled by a Navy surface 
force of the Aleutian-based North Pacific fleet. 

Except for these air and water excursions, 
it’s still a campaign of boredom in the North, but 
every soldier knows that in one way or another 
Alaska does fit into the over -all Pacific picture. 
Where it fits, though, they don’t know. That 
makes the boredom harder to sweat out — that 
and the fact that Alaska doesn’t have the proper 
climate to go with sweating. 



✓ 



PAG £ 5 



DUEREN on the Roer 




One of the few things left standing In flattened Dueren was this 25-foot statue of Bismarck, which is now strung with U. S. Army Signal Corps telephone wire 



In the bdttle to cross the last 
water barrier before the Rhine , 
two Infantry companies carried 
the main burden of the assault. 

4 

By Sgt. ED CUNNINGHAM 
YANK Staff Correspondent 

D ueren, Germany— This is the city that lived 
on borrowed time for three months. Its 
first brush with doom came last November 
when American troops drove to the west bank of 
the Roer, just 40 yards across from the city. 
Already shattered by Allied air attacks, Dueren — 
the key city in a road network leading to the 
Cologne plain — looked like a comparative push- 
over for the hard-driving First Army forces. 

That 40-yard gap was a slim lease on life but 
it was sufficient for the time being, thanks to the 
dam system which regulated the flow of water. 
The dams controlled 160,000,000 cubic feet of 
water, and the Germans controlled the dams. By 
blowing two main dams, Schwammenauel and 
Urfttalsperre, they could inundate the river valley 
and trap any Allied troops attempting a crossing. 
Dueren could not be taken until the dams were 
captured or neutralized. So the First Army units 
attacked toward the town of Schmidt, the key 
to the dam defenses. The threat of flood held up 
our advances and saved Dueren. 

Dueren’s second reprieve came in mid- 
December when Von Runstedt’s forces crashed 
through the Ardennes. That automatically 



stymied the Allied thrust toward Schmidt. It was 
not until late in January; when the German 
counteroffensive had been rolled back beyond 
the Belgian border, that we could resume our 
push toward the dam sites. 

U. S. First Army troops took Schmidt on Feb- 
ruary 8 and moved on toward Schwammenauel, 
the largest of the four dams. But two days later, 
before we could Secure the dam, the Germans 
opened the flood gates and blew the control gates. 
The roaring waters rushed west toward Dueren, 
raising the river level eight feet, flooding the 
lowlands and doubling the speed of the current. 
An assault crossing under such conditions was 
all but impossible, so our First and Ninth Armies 
had to sit back and wait for the flood to subside. 

But Dueren couldn’t hold out forever. Its bluff 
was called on February 23 when the First Army’s 
8th and 104th Divisions launched a joint assault. 
Dueren was captured. Here is how it happened: 

C ompany K of the 13th Infantry, 8th Division, 
had chow at midnight — steak, potatoes, bread, 
butter, coffee and doughnuts. Some of the men 
ate it standing around in the mud and rubble 
of the skeletonized village of Guerzenich. Others 
carried it back to their billets in the cellars, 
where they could eat in comparative comfort. 
There was still an hour before we were to start 
for the battalion-assembly area on the west, bank 
of the Roer, opposite Dueren. 

“That was a pretty good meal,” one K comparty 
man remarked as he came back for seconds on 
coffee. “It ought to be,” somebody in the mess 
line said. “If those motors break down tonight, 



we’ll have to paddle across that damned river and 
you’ll need plenty of energy. The Army’s got that 
angle figured out. What else do you think they 
are feeding you steak for?” 

Some members of the assault teams gave the 
cooks some last-minute advice when they got 
their chow. “Don’t make the coffee too sweet 
tomorrow morning,” one said. “And let’s have 
some sunny-side-ups for a change,” another sug- 
gested. “Sto beating hell out of the eggs and 
serve ’em up the way the hen lays ’em.” 

“You guys will be lucky if those Krauts give 
you time enough to eat D rations, let alone hot 
food,” one of the cooks replied. 

A couple of rounds of Jerry artillery landed on 
the other side of the village, rattling the already 
teetering walls of its shattered houses. “The 
Jerries must be getting nervous,” somebody said. 

Inside one of the shattered houses the 2d 
Platoon of K Company was waiting for 0100. 
T/Sgt. John Demeduk, the platoon sergeant from 
Ramsey, N. J., and the platoon leader, a second 
lieutenant, were testing the release valves on 
their life belts. Pvt. Francis (Doc) Marone, the 
platoon medic from the Bronx, N. Y., was 
stretched out on a Jerry mattress on the floor 
whistling “I’ll Walk Alone.” Several others were 
sitting around smoking. 

T/Sgt. Edward Kuiken of Fair Lawn, N. J., the 
mortar-platoory sergeant, came in. “Ready, willing 
and able?” he asked. 

“Able, anyhow,” someone answered. 

“Say, Ed,” the lieutenant said to Kuiken, “I 
believe we are going to run into trouble at 'the 
corner of that Sportpalast. The Jerries probably 



PAG* 6 








In many of the mills you’ll find young girls 
and women doing men’s jobs — running donkey 
engines in the plants, loading cars and such like. 
Many are trying to fill the place of an absent 
GI husband or honey. Others have gone into war 
plants simply because they are needed or because 
they like the cash. But most of them seem to have 
no ambition to hang onto their industrial jobs 
come the peace. At Jones and Laughlin’s South 
Side works the plant manager could think of only 
one girl who wanted to carry on after the war — 
her husband had been killed overseas. 

In plants like Pittsburgh Equitable Meter and 
other manufacturers of finished products where 
some girls worked even in peacetime, the femi- 
nine increase has been tremendous. At the West- 
inghouse Company’s East Pittsburgh works, 
women employees have been known to break 
into she-wolf whistles at the sight of a service- 
man — all in the spirit of good clean fun. 

Aluminum is booming and Pittsburgh, with 
New Kensington up the river, is still the center 
of aluminum production in spite of the vast ex- 
pansion of the industry elsewhere. Special alloy 
steels, machine tools, coal, electrical equipment, 
glass and manufactured items of almost every 
kind are high on the list of Pittsburgh products 
in the war. On Neville Island, the Dravo Corpo- 
ration turns out PT boats and various other craft 
for the Navy. They go down the Ohio to the 
Mississippi and thence to sea and action. The 
three rivers are crowded with the traffic that 
keeps Pittsburgh a leading inland port. 

P ittsburgh has no new wrinkles to add to the 
food and cigarette shortages found in all cities. 
Shopping housewives queue up early in the 
mornings at Donahue’s and other food stores to 
get first grabs at products rumored to be due for 
rationing. Cigar stojres along Liberty, at the 
worst of the tobacco famine, offered Longfellows 
— those 10-cent dictator-size banquet smokes — 
as their only available cigarettes. In drug stores 
you can still get Tast-T-Lemmon and Lem-N- 
Blend, the fruit juice drinks native to western 
Pennsylvania. 

The migration of Pittsburghers to the suburbs 
— Mt. Lebanon, South Hills and the like — con- 
tinues. There hasn’t been much new building 
since the war, but the Nprth Side and the East 
End are becoming business districts and shopping 
centers. Squirrel Hill around Forbes and Murray 
is turning into a little East Liberty, and East 
Liberty is increasingly like “downtown.” 

The housing shortage in Pittsburgh — as in 
every other large American city — is acute. The 
population has increased, with the influx of in- 
dustrial workers from outside more than bal- 
ancing the drain of the Army. The Army itself 
has run into the housing problem and has taken 
over the old Municipal Hospital on Bedford 
Street as an MP -barracks. 

Footloose MPs and their freedom-loving pris* 
oners used to escape through the back windows 
of the hospital, but this hole has been plugged. 



Arlington Heights on the South Side is the only 
recent substantial housing development. 

McKeesport is as overcrowded as Pittsburgh 
since U. S. Steel moved its Elwood City plant 
there. Homestead has been half torn down to 
make room for a new steel plant. The area razed 
included most of the old red-light district that 
radiated from Third and Dixon. 

Along Fifth Avenue beyond Oakland you’ll 
notice that the old show-place homes are either 
demolished or dilapidated. Taxes and the love of 
fresh air have driven most of the wealthy out 
of town to Sewickly or Fox Chapel. The big, 
gently sloping lawns and the elaborate gardens 
are turning into weed patches. Here and there 
a garage left standing has been rented as a house. 
The migration to the country would probably 
have been even faster if the gas shortage hadn’t 
strangled transfiortation to and from town. 

There are more of the new streamlined red 
streetcars than before, and fewer taxis. There 
haven’t been any new taxis since the war and 
the old ones are developing creaks. Up on Wylie, 
in the Hill District, they still have, free-lance, 
non-licensed taxis driven by local boys for music 
lovers who have stayed up till curfew listening 
to Honey Boy pound on the /Irums. 

Pittsburgh is full of talk about expansion and 
improvement schemes for post-war days when 
construction limitations will be lifted. Last fall 
City Works Director Frank M. Roessing sub- 
mitted to the Federal Works Administration a 
report proposing an expenditure of almost $36,- 
000,000 for the first six years of peace. 

These projects embrace everything from 50 
miles of armored curbing to 36 pew public build- 
ings — mostly police stations and fire houses. 
Some of the improvements can be begun as soon 
as Federal authorities give a green light — things 
like the repaving of Barbeau, Kirkpatrick, Small- 
man and South 27th Streets and construction of 
new sewers on Penn, Lemington and North Ave- 
nues. Other improvements, still in the blueprint 
stage, are the repaving of the Bloomfield and 
Manchester bridges and the widening of the 
south approach to the latter. Still ideas, not yet 
even on paper, are 36 public buildings and six 
stations for the City Highway Department. 

Roessing’s report doesn’t include major long- 
term projects like the proposed $25,000,000 Pitt 
Parkway, the $15,000,000 restoration plan which 
will turn Fort Pitt into a park and the $6,000,000 
Crosstown Boulevard. Most such big-time oper- 
ations will be financed jointly by national, county 
and state governments. 

Meanwhile the new streetcars and the old au- 
tomobiles — and the absence of any cars at all 
in the dealers’ windows — are the changes that 
you’d most likely spot right off. The sight of sol- 
diers drilling on the Pitt Campus would proba- 
bly catch your eye, and you’d be struck by the 
number of slacks if you drifted into any indus- 
trial plant. But mostly Pittsburgh is the same. 
Just a little bigger and busier and dirtier. 

The girls* legs are the same as ever. 




Kahn's Bar & Grill on Murray Avenue carries on 
with proprietor Lew Kahn still behind the bar. 










On Rixol Avenue T-4 Grace Costa (left), Sgt. Iva McDonald ond Pfc, 
Beryle Pruden hop bicycle taxis. Girl-like, they're on a shopping tour. 



Two YANK photographers take 
pictures of Gls # Wacs and civilians 
busy about a number of things 



2F£tocmr 














YANK ^ 

FAR JiSfc EAST ^ ^ V i 






YANK Far East Is published weekly c>y 
the enlisted men of the U. S. Army In- 
formation e«d Education Section, USAFFi 
and is for sale only to those in the armed 
services. Entire contents copyrighted l?*B 
and any use of it without express per 
mission will be the sufcecf of proceeci 
ings. All material reviewed »bv *miiitar> 
censors. 

EDITORIAL STAFF 
YANK Far Eas^-AFO ?27 

Managing Editor, Sgt. LaFayette Locke 
Asst. Managing Editor, Sgt. Chock Rathe-; 
Ar 1 Director So*. Douglas Borgstedt. 

EDITORIAL; "Sgt. Bill Alcme. Sgt. 
Marvin Fasig, Sgt. Dice Hanley Cpl- 
John F. McLeod Sgr. Carles D. Pear- 
on Sgt. Czrie St. 3ec*ge, Cp'. Joe 
f'jfanelli, Cpi. Roger Wrenn, SgY Bill 
1 . ung, Cpi. /rank J. 8eck, Sgt. Roger 
•V. Cowan, Sg*. Jaci F. Cr> we : Sgt. 
Dale Kramer, Sgt. Robert MacMillan, 
Sgt. Lionel Walthall. 

Business and Circulation Manager, Sgt. 
Dor. Harrison: Assistant Business Man- 
,ioer, Cpi. James J. Keeney. 

CIRCULATION: Sgt. Dcraid E. B-ewer, 
S'y. Joseph H. Michaels, Sgr. Carlos 
f .-‘e Cpi. Irvin J. Seniia, CpJ. Tom 
' V'aJsh. Officer in Cha^e, Lt. Col. 
Harold B. Hawley; Executive Officer, 
Capt. Lewis W. Gilienson. 

NEW YORK MAIN OFFICE 
Managing _ Editor, Sgt. J:<e McCarthy; 
Art Director. Sgt. Arthur Weithas; Assist- 
ant Managing Editor, Sgt. Justus ScHotz- 
hauer; Assistant Art Director, Sgt. Ralph 
Stein; Pictures, Sgt. Lee Hofei ter; Fea- 
ures. Sgt. Marion Hargrove; Spcr-s, Sgt. 
C'i Polier; Overseas Editor, Sgt. Al 
U. S. Editor, Sgt. Hilary H. Lyons; 
are Editors, Sgt. John Hay, Cpi. 
Davis, WAC, Cpi. Max Novack, 
Cpi. Tom Shehan. WASHINGTON: Sgt. 
Burgess Scott, Sgt. Barrett McGcrn. 
NAVY. Donald Nugent Sic. Commanding 
Officer: Col. Franklin S. Fcrsberg. 
OVERSEAS BUREAUS 
FRANCE: Sgt. Merle Miller. Sgt. 

Charles Brand, Sgt. Mack Morriss, Sgt. 
Ed Cunningham, Sgt. Howard Brodle, Sgt. 
Saul Levitt, Sgt. AMarj Bcker, Sgt. Reg 
Kenny. Sgt. Robert McBrine, Pfc. Pat 
Coffey, Pfc. Howard Katcander. F:c. 
Dav;d Whitcomb, Pvt. David Berger. 

BRITAIN: Sgt. Durbin L. Horner, Sgt. 
Sanderson Vanderbilt, Sgt. John Scott, 
Sgt. Earl Anderson, Sgt. Francis Burke, 
Cpi. Jack Coggins, Cp»L Ednruad 
Ar.T-obus, Pfc. Tom Flannery. 

CENTRAL PACIFIC: Sgt. Larry 

McManus, Pfc. George Berra, Pfc. Jean 
O. Armstrong, Sgt. Bill Reed : Cpi. Jares 
Goble, Sgt. H. N. Olipbarr, Meson E. 
Pawlak CphoM, USNR, Cpi. Lon Wilson. 

MARIANAS: Cp!. Tom C 3rien, Sgt. 
Dil Ferris, Sgt. Jack Ruge, Pfc. Jusrin 
Gray. 

ITALY: Sgt. Harry ^ions, Sgt. August 
loeb. Cpi. George Barrett, Pfc. Carl 
Schwind, Pvt. Dave Shaw. 

INDIA-BURMA and CHINA: Sgt. PaJ 
Johnston, Sgt/ George J. Corbellinl, Sgt. 
Dave Richardson, Sgt. Lou Stcumert, Sgr. 
Walter Peters, Cpi. Jud Cock. 

ALASKA: Sgt. Rary Runcan, Cpi. Jchn 
M. Haverstick. IRAN-IRAQ: Sgt. Burtt 
Evans. PANAMA: Cpi. Richard Dougless. 
PUERTO RICO: Sgt. Don Cooke. Pfc. 
James loric. MIDDLE EAST: Sgt. Riche'd 
Paul. BRAZIL: Pfc. Nat Bos an. BER- 
MUDA: Cpi. William Pens de 3ois. ICE- 
LAND: Sgt. John Moran. 




This Week's Cover 

A T a forward obsarvatier post ca 
I wo Jima, a marine calls out rang* 
instructions to be relayed te arKi’ery 
and mortar units. He and the two other 
spotters have located the exact posftice 
of an enemy machine gun nest. 

PHOTO CREDITS: Cover— U SMC. 2— PA. 
3 — INP. 4— Lower left, Pfc. A. .. Far- ur, 
MC; others. PA. 5 — Ladd Field Photo 

Section. 6 — Sgt. Reg Kern y. 7 — Left 

3t center. Kenny; righ i . INP. 8 & $— 
Sgt. Art Weitha®. 10 & II— Sgt. Bes 
Schriall. 12— -Upper left 4 lower right, 
Sgt. Dick Hanley; others, Cpi. Roger 
Wrenn. 13 — Lower right, Wrenn; others, 
Hanlev. 15— Corrde Nast Publication; 
Inc. 17— -Upper, Signal Corps; left, OWIr 
lower right. Acme. 18— Universal. 20— 
Wrenn. 23 — Upper, Acme; Tower, RIv? 
dale Children's Association. 




An Officer Complains 

Dear YANK: ' 

pnm * ' We officers of line companies, 
company co *nmanders and platoon 

without ^ hti P B ^ war over here, 
of insignia of rank 
without title, being called by 

ri1S?d S fn? lC t kn rf mes ’ miae b8ing t0 ° 
nbald for tender ears. We' take as 

many hardships and chances thl 
S? 1 - f®* always be out In front, 
for, unless we are, the men are reti- 
cent about being aggressive. We are 
merely another rifleman but with re- 
sensibility. Yet what is our recog- 

th l aid men ’ we are taken 
for granted and when any benefits of 
a pecuniary nature or postwar oppor- 
tunity are offered, we are overlooked. 

In most cases the junior officers are 
unnamed, and- most noncoms of 
mantal status make more money than 
The base pay of a first lieuten- 
ant is $166.67, and for foreign service 
he gets 10 percent of that base pay. 
He is allowed about $75 for quarters - 
an allowance which he never sees but 
which we figure we are paying for a 
foxhole or pillbox sans hot and cold 
running water. He is allowed $21 a 
month for meals, and we pay at the 
rate of 25 cents a meal (about $23.30 
a month.) and many times the meal 
consists of C or K ration. We all have 
the Combat Infantry Badge, but that 
does not entitle an officer to the $10 
each month which goes with this 
award. 

Now the enlisted man. All his 
worries and cares, outside of the phy- 
sical hardships and mental dilemmas, 
are taken care of by officers of the 
various branches. Besides his base 
pay he collects 20 percent for foreign 
service, $10 for the Combat Infantry 
Award, and he has access to the Sol- 
diers Deposit which gives 4 percent 
interest. Then the enlisted man gets 
monetary recognition for certain 
medals he earns. Warrant officers get 
29-percent foreign-service pay and 
reap many of the advantages given 
the GI. But the officer is always for- 
gotten. . . . 

But here’s the payoff. I refer you 
to the educational facilities offered to 
servicemen and women after the war; 
specifically, to the pamphlet put out 
by the University of Minnesota, Gen- 
eral Extension Division, Correspon- 
dence Study Department, Schedule D 
for U. S. Armed Forces Institute : “ . 
The Government will pay one-half the 
total (not to exceed $20 for any one 
course) for officers and enlisted per- 
sonnel in the Navy, Marines, Coast 
Guard and Waves, and for enlisted 
personnel in the Army and WAC . . ” 

I cannot understand why the dis- 
tinction or the ignoring of Army 
officers. ... I am the last one in the 
world to look for favors or money 
advantages, but we officers are plenty 
sore and wonder what is the score. 
Most of us have risen from the ranks 
The disciimination certainly does not 
rest lightly with us. 

I. — Lt. F. p. O’FLAHERTY 

Jap- Americans 

Dear YANK: 

Last night I saw a newsreel of the 
Japanese- American GIs who are fight- 
ing over in Italy. During the show I 
noticed and heard guys make remarks 
about them. If there is hard feeling 
Towards them here, there is probably 
that same feeling everywhere, and I 
think it’s a damn shame. They are 
fighting for the same things that we 
are, and many of them have died, too. 
I’m wondering now, after the war will 
They get the same breaks as we do, 
such as jobs, education, etc. If they 
don’t, then what we are fighting for 
will have been all in vain. Just be- 
cause they are Japanese doesn’t mean 
that they are all sneaky. 

There are plenty of Germans in this 
Army too and there isn’t that feeling 
towards them. You fellows in that 
Japanese- American outfit deserve all 
P^ise you get and I 
nope that this hard feeling towards you 
wont be after the war. Lots of luck. 

N. £ I. —Pfc. L TARTAKOWSKY 



The Recurrent Case 

Dear YANK: 

Here’s a problem. After a man is 
discharged from the Army, he goes 
home and back to his old job— or ,a 
different one. He gets along swell, 
then comes the old fever. He has to 
take time off from his work which is 
most likely all right the first couple 
of times. But malaria repeats itself, 
and finally he loses his job. What 
then? Does the government have that 
figured out? 

Philippines —Pfc. WILLIAM L MINOR 

O Any ex-serviceman is entitled to medical 
Treatment after he is discharged from the 
service at any of the Veterans’ Hospitals 
(AR 615-361 chg I.). This is available if 
he desires to accept it. The AG adds 
that fate of a job due to a recurrent ill- 
ness will have to be ironed out at the 
time with the rehabilitation committee. 




Pallas Athena 

Dear YANK: 

As a former Greek student at the 
citadel of classicism, Brooklyn Boys’ 
High School, I really must set you 
straight on Pallas Athena, whose sym- 
bol is worn by the WAC. You stated, 
quite correctly, that she was the god- 
dess of (a) War and (b) Wisdom. How- 
ever you failed to mention that she 
was even more famous as the goddess 
□f ( c ) Virginity. Perhaps virginity, in 
wartime at least, should be given a 
higher rating than (c). Don’t forget 
that when the Athenians built a temple 
for her, it was called the Parthenon 
—from the Greek word parthenos 
meaning “virgin.” 

I leave to you, or to some other 
modern Aristotle, the philosophical 
task of shewing the relationship of 
( a). War and (b) Wisdom; (a) War 
/ c / Virginity; and (b) Wisdom 
and (c) Virginity. 

— Viaj. FRANKLIN F. RUSSELL 
Arlington, Va. 



Pearson's Cooler 

Dear YANK: 

_ Th , e lte m entitled “Cooler” by Set 
S. Yanks at in 

the Far East brought this reaction 
from the fe^ws in this outfit who read 
• • Whaddya mean, ‘The only 

?& p pSJ"SJ 3?,.“ oto “ *» S? 

coming over!»^,'the a miie m wh:^ S an I lce 
cube would have seemed the height of 
luxury. But the Yankee ingenuity of 
some of our men conceived our ice- 
machine. it was completed atom 
eight months ago and the beer cooleJ 
has propelled Itself with us to all the 

A a /Lp at a lf ,cM ' we ,' ve be «n stationed 
^ we are properly nicknamed The 

m the Pacific - a lot 

Like the cooler of the outfit m.. 
fioned, our ice-machine is conTtrS 
entirely of salvaged parts. The box is 
made of scrap lumber, sawdust and 
corrugated roofing (flattened by a 
steam roller). The heat pyLiLJLL a 
a 40-mm shell casing. Th e comoresso^ 
is salvaged Australian equipment 
electric motor 4 that powers it is f mm 
a salvaged photo print dryer. The lines 
are tubing from a salvaged B-25 Anri 
salvaged Ethylene Glycol (drained 



brim. P "“"“W the 

On the day S/Sgt. Harris is reno.t„^ 
to have smacked his lips over ht^tw 
canteen cup of ice water we 
probably had iced lemonade ^in 
mess hall at noon and ice-cold choeo 
late milk at supper. Before his cooie; 
had turned out its first ice cube o, « 
had manufactured many tons of w 
(125 pounds every eight hours). 

And tell Sgt. Pearson he writes in 
terestingly and well, but as a statLs 
tician — well, since the issue which 
carried the obnoxious item appeared 
on Groundhog Day, we suggest he 
emulate that sensible animal and crawl 
back into his hole. awl 

— Sgt. GILBERT FRANKHUIZEN* 

Philippines 

* Also signed by three others. 

• Even i! his shadow falls across a beer 
cooler 7 



War Worker Bonus 

Dear YANK: 

Hie bill proposed by Lt. Gen. Somer- 
vell to pay the war workers a bonus 
for their cooperation in the war effort 
stinks. What about the poor service- 
man who has returned to the States 
physically unfit to earn a living and 
then given a pension that wouldn't 
pay a dog’s food bill? 

I have been in the Army close on 
two years and I gave up plentv to do 
a little more. I worked in a defense 
plant as a thread grinder working from 
six in the evening to six in the morn- 
ing. Had to take a couple of weeks off 
on the advice of the doctor, who said 
I was heading for a nervous break- 
down. Never accepted a deferment to 
which I was entitled, because of the 
importance of that kind of work. Put 
at least one half of my earnings into 
war bonds and went back to the same 
job even though I got to hate it. 

I would work for $50 a month in any' 
defense plant if they would send me 
back to the States. Instead of figuring 
out how to keep the civilians happy, 
they ought to be making plans for the 
homecoming servicemen. 

N. E. I. —Pfc. WILLIAM McEVERY 

... We just read that Lt. Gen. 
Somervell has proposed a bill that war 
workers be paid a bonus after the' war. 

We admit that they are doing a 
great job, but they are making twice 
the money we are in the armed forces. 
They have a better chance of saving 
more money and we are only getting 
$300 after the war. I’m quite sure there 
are thousands of other fellows in the 
armed forces who will agree with us. 
Now Guinea —Pvt. JOHN / J. GUY* 

Also signed by three others. 

Luzon Vets of 1942 

Dear YANK: 

c 3 e foUowing letter to S. E. Halton 
oMJc is from my mother-in-law, Mrs. 
xioicomb. It is an answer to Halton ’s 
request that anyone having informa- 
tion about the 20th Pursuit Squadron 
to contact him through YANK. THe 
had a brother, Charles J. Halton, 

a!uu at thafc time in th e l ? th and 
th€ l 20Jh Pursuit Squadron at Clark 
and Nichols Field in the Philippines, 
andjyas classified as “Killed in Action” 
and men as “Missing in Action.”— 
Ed.J Upon their liberation it is possible 
thi y*i lews °* your brother, Charles 
and^Mrs. Holcomb’s son, Marvin Hol- 
comb, will be received from them via 
Jap post cards. I am sure, if Halton 
will drojr my mother-in-law a l!ne, she 
will appreciate it very much and I 
pray good news will be received by 
both. Someone, somewhere, will hear 
from these lads that we are all so 
proud of. 

N. E.I. . — T/Sgt. E. O. WALKER 

My Dear Mr. Halton: 

My son-in-law, T/Sgt. E. O. Walker, 
stationed in New Guinea, sent us the 
clipping in YANK of your request for 
information about the veterans of the 
20th Pursuit Squadron. My son Marvin 
C. Holcomb (Walker’s brother-in-law') 
was a mechanic in the 20th Pursuit 
Squadron at Nichols and Clark Fields. 
From Wendwer, Wo., and the country 
nearby, seven boys including our son 
Marvin, enlisted in September 1940. 
From Hamilton Field, Calif., these 
boys were sent to the Philippine Is- 
lands and landed in Manila on Nov. 
23, 1940, and were at Nichols Field 
until August 1941. Then four boys 
including our son were sent to Clark 






Bull Session On 

0 

Replacements 



They should be taught that most fighting is only scouting and patrolling on a large scale. 



Training tor combat, according 
to veterans in Italy, should be a 
hell at a lot more realistic and 
a hell of a lot more thorough. 

By CpI. WILLIAM REGAN 
YANK Field Correspondent 

W ith the 88th Division in Italy — “They 
oughta learn them guys” is the favorite 
beef you hear from combat veterans 
when they talk about replacements who have 
just joined their outfits. 

Some, like T/Sgt. Vicenzo Marino, a rifle- 
platoon sergeant in the 350th Regiment, feel that 
replacements should get more training in night 
operations. “I know they get night problems,” 
Marino said, “but they don’t get enough. They 
ought to be made to see that almost everything 
they do over here will be done at night. 

‘They should know how to move up on reliefs 
in the line and how to go into new positions, and 
' they should get more training on night patrols 
and how to see and listen on outpost when it’s 
pitch black. They should know how to do at night 
every damn thing they do in daytime.” 

T/Sgt. Roman J. Klein of Buffalo, N. Y.,arifle~ 
platoon sergeant in Marino’s company, added that 
while most replacements have had enough scout- 
ing and patrolling, they should be taught that 
most fighting— even in big offensives— is only 
scouting and patrolling on a large scale. ‘"That,” 
he said, “would help them, not just on patrols, 
but every minute they’re at the front, because 



they would automatically take advantage of all 
cover and concealment: they’d always be alert 
and watch where they’re going.” 

Somebody pointed out that a' scouting and pa- 
trolling problem was usually a favorite time for 
a trainee to pick out a nice /quiet spot for a couple 
of hours’ break. “I’d take care_of that,” snapped 
Klein. “I’d have the problems last two or three 
days and make the patrols scrounge for their food 
and water. I’d give them maps and make them 
reach certain pointy where rations and water 
would be waiting.” . 

A nother thing Klein mentioned -was that the 
i average replacement doesn’t know enough 
about the weapons an infantryman uses. “He 
usually knows enough about one or two weapons,” 
Klein said, “but he should know them all. He may 
know how to use and take care of the Ml or car- 
bine, but if you need a BARman or machine-gun- 
ner quick you’re up a creek.” 

William J. Cashman of Portland, Conn., chief 
of a small-arms unit, agreed that most replace- 
ments don’t know enough about their weapons — 
how to use them and how to take care of them. 
“When the small arms come in for repairs,” Cash- 
man said, “all that most of my men can find 
wrong is that they need cleaning and oiling. Ev- 
ery replacement ought to know how to fire, clean 
and field-strip every small arm.” One recent re- 
placement asked Cashman how to load his Ml, 
“and he was on his way up to the line.” 

“A lot of replacements are trained with the ’03 
and never see the Ml until they hit a line outfit 
in combat,” put in T-5 George Brooks of Phila- 
delphia, Pa., a member of the small-arms section. 
“And the GIs aren’t the only ones who don’t 



know their weapons. I remember the look on one 
lieutenant’s face when he came back from patrol . 
and found out that the tommy gun he was carry- 
ing was missing a firing pin!” 

Combat veterans should be returned to the 
States to train replacements, in the opinion of 
S/Sgt. Albert Waidelich Jr. of St. Johns, Mich., 
a rifle-company supply sergeant “And guys on 
cadre should be shipped overseas to do some of 
the fighting,” he added. “I’m not saying that to 
get home myself, because it will be some time 
before I’m eligible. But I know what I’m talking 
about. I was a cadreman three years in the States. 

“For instance, very few of the men training 
replacements at Camp Roberts had been in com- 
bat. The only ones I remember were a couple of 
fellows who had been at Anzio for five days 
before being wounded and sent home, and two 
others who came back from fighting Japs in 
the Pacific. GIs sent home on rotation would be a 
lot more valuable as cadremen, with all they’ve 
learned, than if they were sent back to fight.” 

P fc. Vernon Martin of Northern, Ky., a 60-mm 
mortarman with the 349th Regiment during the 
push from the Garigliano River, took a crack at 
the “by the numbers” systems of training em- 
ployed in replacement-training centers. ‘They 
taught us to drop a shell in with the right hand 
from the right side of the mortar,” he drawled, 
“and that was the only way they’d let us do it. 
When I joined the 88th last March, I found the 
best way for me to feed was by the left hand 
from the right side of the piece.” 

Martin’s criticism is an oft-heard one. Like 
other combat men, the Kentucky redhead feels 
that “dry runs” are overworked and that in some 
cases they hinder operations because some men 
cannot quickly adapt themselves to “field ex- 
pedients.” 

Pfc. Walter C. Roehrkasse of Independence, 
Iowa, who drives an ambulance and weapons 
carrier for the 313th Medical Battalion, com- 
plained about inadequate battle orientation. He 
joined the 88th as a replacement just after the 
May 11 offensive opened and served as a litter- 
bearer in the push to Rome. “When I came over 
I thought all of Italy was a battleground,” he 
said. “I figured it was dangerous everywhere all 
the time, not just in areas very close to the front.” 
Roehrkasse put another twist on the need for 
more night training. He pointed out that the 
Medics, like the Infantry, operate chiefly at night. 
“In training,” he said, “medics should practice 
more night evacuation of wounded and especially 
blackout driving over poor roads.” 

Sgt. Roger P. Milot of Watertown, Conn., a 
rifle-company communications sergeant, sug- 
gested that all infantrymen should know some- 
thing about communications. “That’s one of the 
most important things in running a company,” 
he said, “but the T/E doesn’t allow enough equip- 
ment and you can’t find enough men who know 
anything about running a radio or telephone. I 
have to train my own men, but when something 
happens to your communications man you play 
hell getting another one.” 

Pvt. George Measer Jr., a 19-year-old former 
machine-gunner from Williamsville, N. Y., would 
have more first-aid training and instruction for 
conduct under shellfire. “The company mqdic 
can’t be everywhere when the stuff starts flying,” 
he said, “and if everyone knew more about first 
aid some lives and a lot of arms and legs might 
be saved. 

“And there should be some way to give re- 
placements a preview of what it’s like under shell- 
fire — a few big ones sailing over their heads and 
hitting in a nearby impact area might do it. I 
remember my first time up. I couldn’t tell an 
incoming shell from one going 'out, and I didn’t 
know whether to stand still, hit the dirt or run. 
Of course, I soon learned — but a lot of guys get 
hit before they have that chance.” 

S omebody remarked that since the time for 
training replacements is limited .to 17 to 21 
weeks, the period might have to be lengthened, 
to include all these suggestions. But that was 
solved quickly. 

“Give them less garrison training and more 

practical work under field conditions,” Marino 

suggested. “If you cut some of the close-order 

drill, manual of arms, sex-morality lectures, 

military courtesy. Articles of War and a lot more 

stuff that doesn’t help in combat there’d be 

plenty of time left to give replacements training 

in things that might some day be the difference 

between life and death.” 

« 



FAGi 5 




By Sgt. OZZIE St. GEORGE 
YANK Stoff Correspondent 

M ANILA — Manila was a city with two faces. 
North of the 200-foot brick-banked Pasig 
River, its business district Escolta was a 
gutted graveyard ‘of crumbling fire-tortured 
buildings and cratered rubble-filled streets. In 
its Tondo, Sampaloc, Santa Cfuz and Quiapo 
districts Japanese artillery fire and prepared 
demolitions destroyed isolated blocks, left them 
tumbled scars of fallen stones and broken 
bricks and shattered walls and twisted black- 
ened corrugated tin roofing. 

There was a soldier, half dazed by shellfire, 
w T ho entered the main lobby of Santo Tomas Uni- 
versity with a bundle of something w r rapped up 
in a sheet. He asked what he should do with it. 
and they asked him what it was, laundry? He 
said no and lifted the sheet and it w r as the upper 
half of his best friend's body. 

There w'as a cold storage plant near Santa 
Cruz Bridge, that the Japs threw' open when they 
left, and many hungry men and women and 
children stormed its doors for food. The plant 
was mined, the Japanese blew T it, and the pun- 
gent stench of burned flesh hung in the air near 
Santa Cruz Bridge. 

North of the Pasig Manila was wounded. But 
still a living city. 

Rizal Avenue, a street of small shops and the 
PAGE 6 



extension of Highway 3, became its business 
district. MPs and civilian police stood side by 
side at its dusty intersections directing trucks, 
ducks, tanks, jeeps, halftracks, bulldozers, prime 
movers, pushcarts, caramattas, bicycles and 
sw T arming civilians. And up and down Rizal en- 
terprising Filamericans displayed sundry wares 
on rickety tables on the sidewalk. 

There w'ere watches and fountain pens and 
rice cakes aftd* fresh clams and wooden shoes for 
sale on Rizal. And there were barber shops and 
shoe-shine boys; and in the narrow alleys tight 
little clusters of Filipinos, gathered on their 
haunches, played beto-beto the Philippines' 
craps. There were eggs at 50 centavos each; 
tuba at 10 a glass; American cigarettes, two 
(cigarettes) for 15; Jap cigarettes at 40 centavos 
a pack.- 

And there were cafes — the Victory, the 
American, the Mabuhay, Uncle Sam's, Sloppy 
Joe’s, all hole-in-the-wall places — selling coffee 
at 15 centavos (20 with sugar), egg sandwiches 
at a peso-fifty and liquor at a peso a shot. While 
GIs surged through their doors, the owners 
hammered and pounded and saw r ed enlarging 
their establishments. 

There were flies and beggars and garbage and 
50 pushcarts to the block on Rizal. In front of 
PCAU 20 civilians argued, pushed and jampacked 
the width of the 20-foot sidewalk. There were 
GIs on Rizal, in green or khaki, with helmets 
and arms as per the XIV Corps directive, look- 



ing, haggling, drinking, buying gin or rum or 
alleged whisky on the street corners at 20 or 30 
pesos a bottle or six cans of C. 

There w f ere no lights and there was no water, 
north of the Pasig. But civilians — old men, old 
women, children, tiny brown tots, scarcely 
larger than the tin cans they carried — formed 
in motley lines blocks long at every water point. 
And they fought for w'ater and MPs stood in 
the mud and dust of the streets and tried to 
maintain a semblance of order. 

There were smoky flickering wicks dipped in 
coconut oil behind the close-drawn curtains and 
shutters of the homes north of the Pasig. And 
in those homes GI guests and their hosts drank 
hoarded rum or whisky, ate tropical chocolate 
or beef-and-gravy mixed with rice, and sang and 
talked; and there were lights an‘d people, food 
and drink, and it w T as almost gay. 

But alw r ays overhead there was the roar and 
whisper of artillery shells, pounding the Japs 
south of the Pasig. And when the shells w r his- 
pered the parties were stilled and the war came 
into dimly lighted rooms. There were phrases 
— "across the river," “south of the river," “the. 
other side” — that brought the w r ar into those 
rooms. 

South of the Pasig Manila w r as a city of death 
and of horror. 



South of the Pasig 20,000 Japanese, under the 
command of Rear Adml. Iwabuchi, were com- 
mitted to a suicidal defense of— and the destruc- 




YANK The Army Weekly • APR. 11, 1945 



lion ol— the city of Manila. They were good 
soldiers; they tried to complete their mission. 
Fewer than 300 were captured, over 12,000 bodies 
■ were found, thousands more lie buried in 
cellars or under smashed tons of masonry, 
burned to a crisp or crushed to a pulp. Japanese 
defending other places — Buna, Biak, Pelelieu, 
Saipan — have fought as stubbornly and as bit- 
terly as did the Japanese in Manila; other Japs, 
on the atolls of the central Pacific, have had 
equal fire power. But the defense of Manila was 
suicidal and Manila was a city; and every city 
is a potential fortress without improvements. 
And the 20,000 had improved their fortress. 

They were an odd conglomeration, those 
20,000. There were Imperial marines, naval 
landing parties, stranded sailors, a smattering of 
Regular Army troops who escaped across the 
Pasig to the south bank after their unsuccessful 
but destructive delaying action north of the 
river. There were demolition squads, armed 
service troops, armed clerks, Koreans, Formo- 
sans, and Japanese civilian employees armed and 
fighting that last month. Naval petty officers 
commanded army units, naval lieutenants showed 
the civilians how to die. Army officers command- 
ed Koreans, Formosans or their own troops. 
They were an odd 20,000, but they had one thing 
in common. They were committed to die. . 

And they died, but they killed, too, and in 
their killing they were irrational and illogical 
and sometimes they were stupid. But more often 
they were not stupid, only brutal and ingenious, 
and sometimes, it seemed, insane. But they 
were not insane, either. The defense of Manila 
was a planned defense; they were under orders, 
and because they were Japanese they obeyed 
those orders, as at Nanking and at Hong Kong. 

They did things that* we cannot understand 
because we are not Japanese and those things 
were Bushido. They hurled men. against tanks, 
and the men carried lunge mines — five-pound 
funnel-shaped chunks of explosive on the end 



of a 10-foot pole — and they slammed the funnel 
against our tanks and the force of their lunge 
exploded the charge and the blast killed the men. 

There were other mines and booby traps and 
demolitions everywhere. Standard tank and per- 
sonnel mines, planted in ones and twos and 
dozens and in fields covered the principal streets; 
and they were easy because the engineers and 
the bomb-disposal squads knew them and ex- 
pected them, and detecting and clearing them 
was only dangerous because each was covered 
by crossfire from machine guns and mortars and 
snipers. Men died in the crossfire, but the tank 
and personnel mines were cleared. 

T HERE were other mines and booby traps and 
demolitions that were not expected, and they 
might have been called makeshift, but they 
killed men. They were buried depth charges and 
boat mines and above them “ceramic mines” 
filled with picric acid. Our mine detectors did 
not pick up the ceramics, but 22 pounds of pres- 
sure exploded them, and they in turn detonated 
the depth charge. 

There were bomb& — 1/3 Kg parqfrags to 250 
Kgs— ^buried nose up and armed. And some of 
them had a sliver of bamboo instead of a seer- 
wire and two pounds of pressure would explode 
them. There were 36-inch “yardstick mines” 
buried with three igniters along their length. 
And there were crude wooden boxes, full of 
picric acid that our mine detectors did not pick 
up, and some of them were not armed and were 
certainly a makeshift thing. But they killed. 

There were booby traps — discarded gunny 
sacks full of TNT and set with push or pull 
igniters, and they killed men and smashed 
trucks, and then the men knew them and the 
gunny sacks were no longer useful. There were 
No. 2 cans, filled with TNT, with U. S. dill pickle 
or pear or peach labels on them; and they killed 
some men and then they were no longer useful. 
There were blasting caps jammed in bamboo 



sticks and wrapped in condoms. There were 
tiny woven figures on the shelves of shops, and 
when they were picked up they killed a man; 
and some of them were of a religious nature 
and were found in churches. 

There were grenades of all kinds, and some 
of them were new and some of them were crude 
and makeshift — three-inch pieces of two-inch 
iron pipe, sealed with a .22 cap as a fuse and a 
five-second safety fuse. But they killed. 

These grenades, and the mines and the booby 
traps and the demolitions, were found every- 
where — in cemeteries and in churches, in con- 
vents and schools and shops and smashed 
factories, in homes and abandoned automobiles, 
under the bodies of Japanese dead and under 
the bodies, of our own dead, too, when we lost 
ground and had to leave our dead. 

Beyond the mines and the traps were the guns 
— rifles, light and heavy machine guns, knee and 
60-nim and Qft-mra and 15-cm mortars, 20- and 
90-mm dual purpose guns, field pieces and 105s 
and 155s, and three- and five-inch naval guns. 
Many of the guns were in churches or convents 
•or public buildings and some of the naval guns 
were in a hospital, but always the guns were 
behind concrete and often it was reinforced 
concrete and sometimes the concrete had been 
.built to withstand earthquakes. 

There were pillboxes in the street and in the 
buildings and in the halhvays inside the build- 
ings, and they were of concrete, too. Sometimes 
their firing slits were smaller than a bazooka 
projectile, but the Japanese inside knew their 
fire lanes and could fire without looking. One 
pillbox covered another and sometimes two 
covered one and they were impervious to all buJ. 
artillery fire, or sometimes, bazookas. 

Beneath the pillboxes and in the cellars and 
under the cellars of the buildings were tunnels 
and caves. The Japanese hid in these places 
while artillery hammered their positions. When 
the artillery lifted they came out of the tunnels 
and the cellars and back into their pillboxes 
and the buildings, and they were alive and they 
were armed and the infantry had to kill them. 

The Japanese mortars had fire areas, too, and 
the city was like a checker board and the Japs 
could fire on any square or street or intersection 
or any building. So their mortar fire accounted 
for many of our casualties. There were snipers 
in the buildings, in spider holes, hidden in the 
rubble, and they covered the streets and the 
intersections and the pillboxes. One of them 
in a forenoon in 30 minutes killed five officers. 
The officers were in jeeps and they were shot* 
through the forehead or the back of the neck. 
The sniper was never seen alive except by the 
soldier who killed him. 

Thus the 20,000 clung to their holes and their 
pillboxes and the buildings and the cellars, and 
they clung to the rubble, too, and they were not 
seen until they were dead or dying. In that, 
the city was like the jungle. But the fighting 
was worse, but for the rest areas north of the 
Pasig where there were houses and people and 
sometimes something to drink. 

T HE infantry fighting in the city had not been 
relieved during the 27 days of the push south 
from Lingayen. During the month-long battle 
within the city they were relieved and returned 
to these rest areas for two or three days, and 
when they went back to the line they were rest- 
ed and fresh, which is not true of the jungles. 
“An Air Corps war,” the infantry called it. 

In the city the infantry could see more; they 
could see each other and sometimes they could 
see the MIOs and the M7s and the tanks that 
were giving them direct fire- support. They 
did not feel alone and that was better than the 
jungle. In the city at night they defended a 
line instead of a circular perimeter. They 
could pump 60-mm flares over No Man's Land 
and the flares kept the Japs in their holes. 

But the fighting was bloodier and harder and 
more continuous and much filthier. When they 
were on the line the infantry lived in the rubble, 
or in the ashes and debris of burned-out houses, 
or behind captured pillboxes. There were bodies 
in the rubble and the sun was hot and unceas- 
ing. The bodies swelled and burst and maggots 
wriggled in the wounds and blue-bottle flies 
crawled over the bodies, and the flies crawled 
" over the infantry too, and their rations, and then 
there was dysentery. Always, there was the 




"North of the Posig there were people and food and drink ... ft was almost gay. 



PAGE 7 






"Mines, planted in ones, twos and dozens 
and in fields, covered the streets/' 




WARNING 
AREA MINED 
mm oh 

mm my 



stench of scorched and rotting flesh, and sweat 
But those things are a part of battle and the 
infantry took them in their stride. And know- 
ing the Japanese, they could take the other 
things they found — the bodies of women with 
the breasts sliced off, the bodies of teen-age 
boys and girls bayoneted to death, the sprawled 
piled bodies machine-gunned in the vacant lots; 
the rooms and the air raid shelters, drenched 
with blood, where the people had taken refuge 
and been killed with grenades, and the still liv- 
ing, after the grenades, shot or clubbed or stab- 
bed or burned to death; the blackened buildings 
where people had been herded and then drench- 
ed with gasoline and burned, and inside those 
buildings the piled, charred flesh; the naked 
bodies of babies with dented shapeless heads 
crushed by rifle butts. 

The infantry saw the living — people without 
hands or with an arm severed at the elbow, 
people without ears, people who had watched 
their families slaughtered and were not quite 
sane. And those things added a new horror to 
the battle, but the infantry was hardened and 
used to horror and they were not much affected 
by it, except that they fought and killed with a 
greater hate and savagery. 

.They fought against prepared positions but 
with superior fire power. The Japanese artil- 
lery was hell for five days, but there were 
spotter Cubs always over the city, and artillery 
observers with each line company, and in the 
end counter-battery fire silenced the Japanese 
guns and the infantry was thankful for that, too. 

Then the artillery pounded the city and the 
streets and the buildings, trading property for 
lives. Sometimes that fire and the fires it start- 
ed leveled whole blocks, and the infantry was 
thankful for that, too.~‘ There were tanks and 
SPMs and they smashed pillboxes and shelled 
strong points and supported the infantry with 
direct fire, but in the end, as always, the infantry 
went in with their basic weapons and closed 
with the Japs. They traded lives for ground, 
or sometimes only a building, and sometimes 
only a room. 

The infantry of the 37th, the 1st Cavalry and 
the 11th Airborne Divisions went in day after 
day for 31 days and fought their way westward 
toward the bay and northward toward the 
Pasig, street by street and house by house. The 
37th bore the brunt of the push. 

They sent a platoon against a block and the 
platoon worked through the block because the 
streets always were covered. If the blocks 
were flattened, the infantry worked through 
the rubble and the ruins and the ashes, and when 
they could go no farther they dug in and the 
artillery laced the city ahead of them. If the 
blocks were not destroyed it took longer. 

I N the bigger buildings — Paco Station, the 
city hall, the ice plant, the post office, the 
Manila Hotel — the infantry fought * hand to 
hand, and often they held one floor and the Japs 
held the next, and sometimes they held 6ne room 
and the Japs held the next. Sometimes they 
held the ground floor and the Japs held the 
second and the basement. The infantry learned 
that they could not hold a building at night un- 
less they held all of it because the Japs knew 
the building and could smash holes in the ceil- 
ings and drop grenades on them, or come oiit of 
the cellar and through the tunnels leading to the 
pillboxes around the building until they out- 
numbered the infantry and could attack them. 

The infantry swore by their bazookas in this 
fighting because against the concrete and brick 
walls the projectiles exploded with maximum 
effect, and without the bazookas it would have 
taken more time and more lives. And they swore 
by their flamethrowers because a flamethrower 
will clean a pillbox with one long burst. 

As they fought through the buildings and the 
ruins, the infantry learned other things. They 
learned that the hallways w r ere deathtraps, like 
the streets, because the Japs had. pillboxes at 
either end and could sweep the hall. The infan- 
try could send bazookas against the pillboxes 
but the Japs in the boxes left the hall then and 
hid in the rooms on both sides until the infan- 
try tried to advance. Then they came back to 
their boxes and sometimes their guns were in- 
tact and the infantry had to fall back again. 
Sometimes they took a floor by sheer assault, 
led and supported by BAR fire, but the Japs 



held the advantage of position and protection and 
the floors were slippery with broken glass, so 
sometimes the infantry withdrew and the artil- 
lery hammered the building and then the infan- 
try went in again. And thus the 15 or 50 or 100 
or 300 Japs in the building were killed and the 
infantry secured the building. 

Sometimes in the buildings when the Japs 
were below them, the infantry smashed holes 
in the floor and used flamethrowers, and once, 
that way, they burned 40 Japs. Then they were 
stopped there and they lived with the cadavers 
for three days, and replacements, seeing the 
room, had seen the worst of battle. Sometimes, 
in the buildings, when the Japs were in the 
cellar, the infantry used dynamite or TNT and 
blew the ground floor into the cellar and poured 
gasoline over the rubble and lit it with flame- 
throwers. They could hear the Japs below 
them, killing themselves, with hand grenades. 

T HERE was a battalion surgeon who was 
knocked out by mortar concussion and 
wouldn’t quit though he had blacked out at 
intervals for two days. And a week later he 
crawled through sniper fire to operate on a 
soldier with a phosphorous bomb the size of two 
fists in his back. The surgeon removed it by 
slashing the man’s back, then tying assault wire 
to the bomb, crawling 20 feet away behind the 
corner of a building and pulling the bomb out of 
the man’s back. The surgeon crawled back then 
and tied the soldier’s arteries with assault wire 
and the soldier lived. But both the surgeon and 
the soldier got minor burns from the phos- 
phorous. 

There were many who did like things and 
they may never be known, and there were hun- 
dreds of little battles wherein men killed and 
died, and they may never be known either, indi- 
vidually. But with each little battle the lines 
advanced — 10 feet, 20 feet, <a block, the width 
of a street — through Paco and Ermita and Malate 
and Pasay and the port districts, until the Japs 
were isolated in Intramuros (the Walled City) 
and a handful of buildings south and cast of 
Intramuros and the line companies were down 
to half or 40 percent of strength. 

Then direct fire support weapons and medium 
artillery were brought through the streets until 
they fired over, open sights at the Walled City 
and at the buildings, and one by one the build- 
ings fell to assault until only three — the Legis- 
lative, Finance and Agricultural — were left. 
Then more guns were brought up and trained 
on the east and north walls of the old city at 
pointblank range. Batteries were assigned 
single buildings or a‘ sector of wall, and they 
were aided by Long Toms to the rear and fire 
support weapons lined mount to mount ahead 
of them. The guns fired for two hours and 
breached the wall and smashed the city, and 
when the barrage lifted the infantry made the 
assault from the east and from across the Pasig 
River to the north. They took the city and held 
it, and they found Japs and some were stunned 
and some were not stunned, and the infantry 
killed them in either case. They found slaughter 
— 1,000 bodies burned in a single building — and 
they found mines and demolitions and booby 
traps. In the days that followed, though the 
city was “secured,” they found more Japs in the 
dungeohs and sewers under the city disguised 
as civilians, or .lurking in the rubble among 
their own dead, waiting for a chance to kill. And. 
they killed, but they died too, and some of the 
infantry died. But the city was taken. 

Then the guns were turned on the three build- 
ings, and one day the Agricultural building was 
hammered and assaulted and taken room by 
room and on the next day the Finance building 
was taken room by room. The Legislative build- 
ing held out for three more days while the in- 
fantry dug scattered Japs out of the pillboxes 
•around it and flushed lone snipers out of the 
ruins throughout the city while the artillery 
pounded the building with direct 105 and 155 
fire. The Legislative building crumbled under 
the massed fire and was half destroyed, as if 
by an earthquake, and the infantry went into the 
half that was not destroyed and cleaned it out 
and held it. 

Then the guns were turned on the sunken 
hulks clogging the harbor and a company of 
infantry went out into the harbor in LCMs and 
killed the last of the 20,000. 





